Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, Vol. 1 (American Society for Psychical Research, 1889)
==========================================================
The first volume of the American SPR Proceedings (1885-89); Hodgson's and James's early American investigations. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofame18589amer).

<#


site


PROCEEDINGS


OP   TSB


or  m


li.


Volume   I.


{CONTAINING      NOS.      1  —  4.)


1885-89.


BOSTON :

DAMRELL      AND      UP HAM,
Corner   Washington  and  School  Streets.


^^


s>^


Ntfi*


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Officers  for  the  year  1884-85 1

Formation  of  the  Society 1

Circular  No.  1.     Issued  by  the  Council      .  .         .         .         «■        .         .  2

Circular  No.  2.     Issued  by  the  Committee  on  Work    ....  5

Circular  No.  3.     Issued  by  the  Council                          *         ,         .         .  6

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference     ...  6

Appendix  A.  —  Circular  No.  4.     Issued  by  the   Committee  on

Thought-Transference 10

Appendix  B.  —  Discussion  of  the  Returns  in  Response  to  Circular

No.  4.    By  Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce  and  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering        .  17

Appendix  C.  —  Possibility  of  Errors  in  Scientific  Researches,  due

to  Thought-Transference.     By  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering     .         .  35

Appendix  D.  —  Thought-Transference  by  Means  of  Pictures.     By

W.  H.  Pickering 44

Circular  No.  5.     Issued  by  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  .  45

Extracts  from  the  Records  of  the  Society  Meetings      ....  49

Constitution 50

List  of  Members 52

List  of  Associates 53

Constitution .55

List  of  Officers 57

List  of  Members 58

List  of  Associate  Members 59

Meetings  of  the  Society 61

Address  of  the  President .63

Number-Habit.     (Presented  as  an  Appendix  to  the  First  Report  of

Thought-Transference  Committee,  p.  10) 86

Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism 95

Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena        ....  102

Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference 106

Experiments  on  Thought-Transference 113

On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense ;         .116

A  Research  on  the  Reality  of  Reichenbach's  Flames     ....  127
Preliminary  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted

Houses 128

Circular  No.  6.     Issued  by  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted

Houses 129

Meetings  of  the  Society 133

On  the  Supernatural  among  the  Omaha  Tribe  of  Indians.     By  Alice

C.  Fletcher 135


iv  Contents.

PAGE

Criticism  on  ••  Phantasms  of  the  Living.1'    By  Prof.  C.  S.  Peirce        .  150

Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.     By  Edmund  Gurney        .         .  157

Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.     By  Prof .  C.  S.  Peirce 180

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.     By  Prof.  H.  P.

Bowditch         .'                . 215

First  Report  of  the  Committee   on  Experimental   Psychology.     By

Prof.  C.  S.  Minot          .         .         . 218

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses.    By

Prof.  J.  Royce 223

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.     By  Dr.  W.  N.

Billiard 230

Deductions  Suggested  by  the  Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.    By  C.

B.  Cory  .                  236

Reaction-Time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance.     By  Prof.  W.  James      .         .  246

The  Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.     By  Prof.  W.  James      .         .        .  249

Circular  and  Blanks 259

Constitution <  275

List  of  Members  and  Associates 278

Meetings  of  the  Society 285

Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  By  Edmund  Gurney  .  .  .  286
Postscript  to  Mr.  Gurney 's  Reply  to  Professor  Peirce.    By  Frederic

W.  H.  Myers          .  * 300

Second    Report  on    Experimental  Psychology :   Upon  the  Diagram

Tests.     By  Prof.  C.  S.  Minot         .         .         .     '   .        .         .         .302

Note  to  the  foregoing  Report.  By  Prof.  W.  James  .  .  .  .  317
Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.     By  Dr.  J.  W.

Warren 320

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.     By  Mr.  and  Mrs.  John

F.  Brown 322

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.     By  Prof.

J.  Royce 350

Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments    .         .         .  429

Comments  on  the  Cases  in  Appendix.     By  Prof.  J.  Royce  .         .         .  516

Addenda  to  Cases  24,  28,  36,  56 527

On   Some    Objections    to    the    Theory   of   Telepathy.     By    Richard

Hodgson,  LL.D 528

Open  Letter  concerning  Telepathy.     By  Prof.  C.  S.  Minot  .         .         .  547

Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  By  Prof.  W.  James  ....  548
Note  on  Two  Recently  Reported  Cases  of  Pathological  and   other

Pseudo-Presentiments.     By  Prof.  J.  Royce 565

Constitution 568

List  of  Members  and  Associates 571


AMERICAN  30GIETY  for  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


officers  i^o^  less.

yrcsfticnt.


Professor  s.  P.  LANGLEY,


Washington.


lTice=Prc0itientg.


Professor  HENRY  P.  BOWDITCH,  M.D.,

Harvard  Medical  School.

Professor  GEORGE  S.  FULLERTON,

University  of  Pennsylvania.


Professor  EDWAED  C.  PICKERING,

Harvard  College  Observatory,


Professor  JOSIAH  EOYCE,


Cambridge.


Council.


Dr.   W.   S    BIGELOW,

Boston.
Prof.  HENRY    P.   BOWDITCH,

Boston.
Mr.   C.  B.  CORY,

Boston.
Prof    T.   M.  DROWN,

Boston.
Prof.  G.  S.   FULLERTON,

Philadelphia.
Dr.   E.  G.  GARDINER,

Boston.
Mr.   C.   C.  JACKSON,

Boston.
Prof.  WILLIAM    JAMES,

Cambridge.
Dr.  JOSEPH  JASTROW,

Baltimore.
Prof.  S.   P.   LANGLEY,

Washington.


Prof.  CHARLES   S.  MINOT,

Boston.
Prof.  SIMON    NEWCOMB,

Washington.
Prof.   E.  C.  PICKERING,

Cambridge.
Mr.  W.   H.   PICKERING,

Cambridge.

Dr.    MORTON    PRINCE,

Boston.
Prof.  JOSIAH    ROYCE,

Cambridge.
Rev.   M.  J.   SAVAGE,

Boston.
Mr.   S.   H.   SCUDDER,

Cambridge.

Prof.   COLEMAN    SELLERS,

Philadelphia.
Mr.   R.   PEARSALL    SMITH,

Philadelphia.


Prof.   WILLIAM    WATSON,
Boston.


Mr.  C.   C.  JACKSON,         -        24  Congress  Street,  Boston.


Secretary  anb  Assistant  (Treasurer.

RICHARD    HODGSON,       -        5   Boylston   Place,   Boston


MEMBERS    ELECTED    IN    1888.

JOHN"    ]••.  BROWN,  Fitehtwrg,  Mass.  |        Prof.  E.  W.  CLAYPOLB,  Akron,  Ohio.

Col.  J.  S.  LOCKWOOD,  82  Equitable  Building,  Boston.


ASSOCIATE   MEMBERS   ELECTED    IN    1888.


edward  cummings,

29  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mi:s.   BRUEN,

7d  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  r.oston.

Miss   PERKINS,

7U  Mt,  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

Mits.  JAMES    M.  BARNARD,

Milton,  Mass.

WILLIAM    WHEELER,

Concord,  Nfass.

Mi;s.  C.   II.   DORK,

18  Commonwealth  Ave.,  Boston.

DAVID   L.   WEBSTER,

332  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  COLA    LINN    DANIELS,

Grand  Central  Hotel,  N.  V.  City.

Dr.  WM.   NO  YES,

Bloomingdale  Asylum,  X.  Y.

Miss   EMMA    RODMAN,

174  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

EMORY    ADAMS    HARTWELX,,

:'>ii  Chestnut  St.,  Fitchhurg,  Mass.

Mrs.  G.  s.  MILLER,

Geneva,  X.  Y.

Miss  LUCY    ELLIS,

114  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  o.  zabriskie  GRAY,

Cambridge,  Mass.
Dr.  J.  T.  BO  WEN,

Hotel  Victoria,  Boston.


EDWARD   STETSON    GRIFFING,

11    Stoughton,    Harvard   College,   Cam-
bridge, VJass.

Mrs.  LOUISA  B.  HOPKINS,

9  Newbury  St.,  Boston.

:»ss   ELLEN    F.  MASON,

1  Walnut  St.,  Boston.
Miss  IDA    MASON,

1   Walnut  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  M.  LONGFELLOW  MORRIS,

28  School  St.,  Boston.

JAMES  G.  MEM  FORD,

14  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

GEORGE    PELLEW,

;>l  Chestnut  St  ,  Boston.

Mrs.  J.  B.  TURNER,

111    Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  II.   H.   BROWN,

26U  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

JOHN   M.  FORBES,

Milton,  Mass.

F.  II.  MANNING,

138  Federal  St.,  Boston.

Miss  ELIZABETH    RERKINS,

Hotel  Hamilton,  220  Clarendon  St.,  Boston.

Rev.  Dr.  S.  RIOBEL,

Valcartier  Village.  Quebec  Co.,  Can.

Mrs.   NATHANIEL  WILSON,

912  Fairagut  Sq.,  Washington,  1).  C.


COMMITTEE  ON  EXPERIMENTAL  PSYCHOLOGY.


SPECIAL    1TOTICE.


Members  are  urged  to  obtain  as  many  replies  as  possible  to
the  questions  in  Blank  G  (see  this  number  of  Proceedings,  p.  270).
Some  of  the  returns  have  been  received  already,  and,  if  the  mem-
bers respond  vigorously  in  the  way  of  individual  effort  towards
obtaining  replies,  the  chief  purpose  of  the  Blank  will  be  fulfilled.
Members  are  earnestly  requested  to  return  their  copies  of  Blank
G,   whether  entirely  filled  out  or  not,   at  the  end  of  March.

%  A  new  circular.  Blank  H,  will  be  issued  by  this  Committee

about  the  middle  of  March.

C.   S.   MINOT,
February  2,  1888.  Chairman.


PROCEEDINGS

OF   THE


ielj  for  Psychical  R


Vol.  I.


JULY.  1885.


No.  1.


OFFICERS   FOR   THE   YEAR   1884-85.

President.

Professor  SIMON"  NEWCOMB,  Washington,  D.C.

Vice-Presidents.


Professor  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Johns

Hopkins  University.
Professor    George    S.    Fullerton,

University  of  Pennsylvania.


Professor  Edward  C.  Pickering,  Har-
vard College  Observatory.

Dr.  Henry  P.  Bowditch,  Harvard
Medical  School.


Dr.  Charles  S.  Minot,  Harvard  Medical  School.

Treasurer.

Professor  William  Watson,  Boston.

Secretary.

N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  19  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.


FORMATION   OF   THE   SOCIETY.

At  a  meeting  held  in  Boston,  Sept.  23,  1884,  to  consider  the  advis-
ability of  the  formation  of  a  society  for  psychical  research  in  Amer-
ica, the  whole  matter  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  committee  of  nine,
consisting  of  Dr.  G.  Stanley  Hall  of  Johns  Hopkins  University ;
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  director  of  the  Harvard  College  Observa-
tory;  Dr.  H.  P.  Bowditch  and  Dr.  C.  S.  Minot,  of  the  Harvard
Medical  School :  Mr.  S.  H.  Scudder,  president,  and  Professor  Alpheus
Hyatt,  curator,  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History  ;  Professor
William  James  of  Harvard  College  ;  Professor  William  Watson  of
Boston ;  and  Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges  of  Cambridge.  This  committee
held  a  number  of  meetings  during  the  months  of  October  and  Novem-
ber, and  issued  an  invitation  to  a  number  of  scientific  men  through-
out the  country  to  join  in  a  society  under  a  constitution  upon  which
the  committee  had  decided.  To  this  invitation  there  were  favorable
replies  from  about  eighty.

Note.  —  Branch  societies  have  been  formed  in  New  York  and  Philadelphia.


2  Formation  of  the  Society.

The  first  meeting  of  the  society  was  held  in  Boston  on  the  18th  of
December,  at  which  much  of  the  necessary  work  of  organization  was
accomplished  ;  and  at  an  adjourned  meeting,  held  in  Boston  Jan.  8,
1885,  the  organization  of  the  society  was  completed.

The  Committee  on  Work,  or  suggestions  as  to  possible  work,  sent
out  circulars  to  the  members  of  the  society,  calling  for  volunteers  as
members  of  the  investigating  committees,  and  received  a  number  of
answers,  the  most  of  which  were  from  those  specially  interested  in
thought-transference  ;  and  the  committee  recommended  the  appoint-
ment of  a  sub-committee  on  that  subject.  They  also  suggested  that
a  circular  should  be  issued  by  the  society,  describing  the  methods  of
making  experiments  in  thought-transference,  and  pointing  out  the
precautions  to  be  taken.  Such  a  committee  was  appointed  by  the
Council,  and  issued  a  circular  (No.  4).

It  is  the  first  report  of  this  committee  on  thought-transference,
which  makes  up  the  larger  part  of  this  the  first  number  of  the  pro-
ceedings. The  report  was  presented  at  the  third  meeting  of  the
society,  held  in  Boston,  June  4,  1885.  With  this  report  are  also
published  the  various  circulars  which  have  been  issued  by  the  society,
as  showing  what  methods  have  been  employed  to  accomplish  the
objects  of  the  society.

CIRCULAR  No.  1.

Issued  by  the  Council.

At  a  meeting  held  in  Boston,  Sept.  23,  for  the  purpose  of  consid-
ering the  advisability  of  forming  a  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in
America,  a  committee  with  full  powers  was  appointed  ;  and  under  its
auspices  The  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  been
organized,  and  is  now  in  a  position  to  invite  the  adhesion  of  members.
The  aims  of  the  English  society  of  similar  name  can  be  best  under-
stood from  the  following  extracts  from  its  printed  proceedings  :  —

"  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  was  formed  in  the  beginning  of  1882,
for  the  purpose  of  making  an  organized  and  systematic  attempt  to  investigate
that  large  group  of  debatable  phenomena  designated  by  such  terms  as  'mes-
meric,' 'psychical,'  and  'spiritualistic'  From  the  recorded  testimony  of  many
competent  witnesses,  past  and  present,  including  observations  recently  made  by
scientific  men  of  eminence  in  various  countries,  there  appears  to  be,  amidst
much  illusion  and  deception,  an  important  body  of  remarkable  phenomena,
which  are  prima  facie  inexplicable  on  any  generally  recognized  hypothesis,  and
which,  if  incontestably  established,  would  be  of  the  highest  possible  value.  The
task  of  examining  such  residual  phenomena  has  often  been  undertaken  by  indi-
vidual effort,  but  never  hitherto  by  a  scientific  society  organized  on  a  sufficiently
broad  basis.


Circular  No.  1,  issued  by  the   Council.  3

"The  aim  of  the  Society  is  to  approach  these  various  problems  without
prejudice  or  prepossession  of  any  kind,  and  in  the  same  spirit  of  exact  and  un-
impassioned  inquiry  which  has  enabled  science  to  solve  so  many  problems,  once
not  less  obscure  nor  less  hotly  debated.  The  founders  of  this  Society  fully  rec-
ognize the  exceptional  difficulties  which  surround  this  branch  of  research;  but
they  nevertheless  hope  that,  by  patient  and  systematic  effort,  some  results  of
permanent  value  may  be  attained."

The  following  are  among  the  subjects  which  have  been  intrusted
to  special  committees  :  —

"  1.  An  examination  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  any  influence  which  may
be  exerted  by  one  mind  upon  another,  apart  from  any  generally  recognized  mode
of  perception.

"2.  The  study  of  hypnotism,  and  the  forms  of  so-called  mesmeric  trance
(with  its  alleged  insensibility  to  pain),  clairvoyance,  and  other  allied  phenomena.

"3.  A  critical  revision  of  Keichenbach's  researches  with  certain  organiza-
tions called  '  sensitive,'  and  an  inquiry  whether  such  organizations  possess  any
power  of  perception  beyond  a  highly  exalted  sensibility  of  the  recognized  sensory
organs."

The  following  are  the  officers  of  the  English  society :  President,
Professor  Henry  Siclgwick  ;  Vice-Presidents,  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  John  R.
Holland,  M.P.,  Richard  H.  Hutton,  the  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses,
the  Hon.  Roden  Noel,  Professor  Lord  Rayleigh,  Professor  Balfour
Stewart,  and  Hensleigh  Wedgwood.

Professor  Barrett,  who  was  present  at  the  preliminary  meeting  in
Boston,  after  reading  the  brief  outline  of  the  objects  of  the  English
societ}7,  as  given  above,  made  the  following  statement  of  the  results
already  obtained  :  —

"Once  the  Society's  work  begun,  a  stream  of  testimony  set  in,  and  offers  of
evidence  were  many.  Every  possibility  of  error  suggested  by  experience  and
ingenuity  was  eliminated.  The  experiments  made  in  the  last  two  years  by
members  of  the  Society  will  carry  conviction,  I  think,  to  every  candid  mind.
Many  tests  were  made  in  which  the  subject  reproduced  a  diagram  or  drawing  of
which  some  other  person  thought.  .  .  .  The  other  committees  of  the  Society
have  studied  the  subjects  assigned  to  them  with  great  assiduity,  and  have  ob-
tained a  vast  amount  of  information  and  data.  .  .  .  The  work  of  sifting  out  of
the  mass  of  errors,  misconceptions,  and  ignorance,  which  usually  surround  such
stories,  the  data  which  may  serve  for  scientific  purposes,  is  an  intensely  interest-
ing one.  Of  course  persons  who  take  up  the  matter  must  expect  no  little  ridi-
cule, and  perhaps  some  abuse.  But  out  of  alchemy  came  chemistry ;  and  out  of
astrology,  astronomy.  There  may  be  much  in  these  extraordinary  accounts
of  second-sight,  thought-reading,  apparitions,  and  so  forth,  fit  only  to  ridicule;
but  if  there  are  any  facts  at  the  bottom,  we  want  to  find  them."

The  Council  of  the  American  society  feel  that  the  evidence  pub-
lished by  the  English  society  is  of  a  nature  not  to  be  ignored  by  sci-


4  Circular  No.  1,  issued  hy  the   Council.

entific  men,  especially  where  the  alleged  facts  would,  if  real,  permit
verification,  and  the  conditions  allow  control.

In  other  branches  of  human  experience,  the  publication  of  observa-
tions, made  with  as  much  apparent  care,  and  under  such  distinguished
auspices,  immediately  invites  many  careful  students  to  the  work  of
corroboration  or  disproof.  The  personal  ability  and  character  of  the
English  investigators,  and  the  accuracy  of  their  methods,  if  they  do
not  compel  the  doubter  forthwith  to  believe  their  conclusions,  seem
at  least  to  make  it  impossible  for  him  dogmatically  to  deny  them,
without  support  from  something  more  solid  than  general  presump-
tions about  the  order  of  nature,  and  the  fallibility  of  human  testi-
mony.

The  Council  of  the  American  society  therefore  feels  that  the  duty
can  be  no  longer  postponed  of  systematically  repeating  observations
similar  to  those  made  in  England,  with  a  view  to  confirming  them  if
true,  to  definitely  pointing  out  the  sources  of  error  in  them  if  false.
If  true,  they  are  of  value,  and  the  tracing  of  their  limits  becomes  a
scientific  duty.  If  false,  no  time  should  be  lost  in  publishing  their
refutation  ;  for,  if  allowed  long  to  stand  uncontradicted,  their  only
effect  will  be  to  re-enforce  powerfully  the  popular  drift  toward  super-
stition.

The  Council  therefore  begs  all  persons  to  whom  this  circular  is
sent,  who  agree  with  these  practical  conclusions,  and  who  believe  that
the  exact  study  of  this  border-land  of  human  experience  is  an  urgent
scientific  need,  to  send  in  their  names  to  the  secretary  of  the  society.

COUNCIL  OF  THE  SOCIETY.

To  hold  office  till  October,  1885.

Prof.  G.  F.  Barker,  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Moorfield  Storey,  Boston.

Rev.  C.  C.  Everett,  Cambridge.  Prof.  John  Trowbridge,  Cambridge.
Mr.  Samuel  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge.        (Resigned.)

Mr.  Coleman  Sellers,  Philadelphia.  Prof.  William  Watson,  Boston.

To  hold  office  till  October,  1886.

Dr.  Henry  P.  Bowditch,  Boston.  Dr.  Charles  S.  Minot,  Boston.

Mr.  C.  C.  Jackson,  Boston.  Prof.  Simon  Newcomb,  Washington.

Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  Cambridge.  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering,  Boston.
Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  Cambridge.

To  hold  office  till  October,  1887.

Prof.  G.  S.  Fullerton,  Philadelphia.  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering,  Cambridge.

Prof.  William  James,  Cambridge.  Mr.  R.  Pearsall  Smith,  Philadelphia.

Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Baltimore.  Major  A.  A.  Woodhull,  New  York.
Prof.  James  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge.


Circular  No.  2,  issued  by  the   Committee  on   Work.  5

CIRCULAR  No.   2.
Issued  by  the  Committee  on  Work.

Cambridge,  Mass.,  Dec.  19,  1884.

Dear  Sir,  —  The  first  stated  meeting  of  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Research  was  held  yesterday,  and  a  Council  partly
elected.  This  practically  completes  the  formal  part  of  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Society.  The  Council,  anxious  to  proceed  without  loss
of  time  to  the  accomplishment  of  material  results,  desires  to  gain
such  information  from  members  and  associates  as  will  assist  it  in
deciding  what  lines  of  investigation  had  better  immediately  be  entered
upon,  and  of  what  persons  the  respective  committees  may  most  ad-
vantageously be  composed.  This  circular  is  therefore  addressed  to
you  as  one  of  the  Society,  with  the  request  that  you  fill  out  the
appended  sheet  of  questions  as  fully  as  lies  in  your  power,  and  mail
it  promptly  to  the  address  given.

The  English  society  has  established  permanent  committees,  as
follows  :  —

Committee  on  Thought-Transference.
a         u    Hypnotism  (Mesmerism).
"         "    Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses.
"         "    Physical  Phenomena  (Spiritualism).
"         "    Reichenbach's  Experiments
Literary  Committee

Temporary  committees  have  also  been  formed  to  report  on  special
subjects,  such  as  the  divining-rod.  Under  these  titles,  those  of  our
Society  who  desire  to  share  in  the  labor  of  research  may  conveniently
express  their  preference  for  one  direction  of  inquiry  rather  than
another ;  but  if  any  member  or  associate  have  inclination  or  oppor-
tunity for  work  in  a  direction  not  embraced  under  any  of  these  heads,
or  if  he  care  particularly  to  study  some  one  phenomenon  of  one  of  the
classes,  it  is  hoped  he  will  make  as  definite  a  statement  as  possible  to
that  effect.

It  is  earnestly  hoped  that  volunteers  enough  will  be  forthcoming  to
form  committees  whose  personal  composition  will  be  a  guaranty  of
the  character  of  the  investigation  performed  by  them.  Without  such
volunteers,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research  may  fail  to  justify  its  foundation.
We  remain  very  respectfully  yours,

WILLIAM  JAMES,
HENRY  P.   BOWDITCH,

Committee  on  Work.


Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.

1.  Are  you  personally  able  to  devote  any  time  to  investigation,

alone  or  with  others?  If  so,  please  state  roughly  how  many
hours  a  week  you  might  possibly  give.

2.  What  subject  or  subjects  should  you  prefer  to  study?

3.  Will  you  furnish  us  with  the  names  and  addresses  of  any  other

competent  persons  who  might  be  willing  to  engage  in  such
labor  ?

4.  Will  you  give  us  the  names  and  addresses  of  any  remarkable

mediums,  mind-readers,  clairvoyants,  mesmeric  subjects,  etc.,
of  whom  you  may  have  knowledge,  and  who  would  be  willing
to  have  their  powers  subjected  to  examination?  Private  (that
is,  unpaid)  subjects  are  preferred,  but  references  to  profes-
sionals are  also  desired.


CIRCULAR  No.   3.

Issued  by  the  Council..

By  vote  of  the  Council,  all  members  and  associates  are  entitled,  on
payment  of  their  assessments,  to  Nos.  VI.  and  VII.  of  the  Proceed-
ings of  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  to  any  other
numbers  which  may  be  issued  this  year,  and  may  have  the  back  num-
bers of  the  Proceedings  at  the  rate  of  forty  cents  each  (two  dol-
lars for  Nos.  I.-V.).  But  the  Proceedings  will  be  sent  only  to  those
who  may  so  request.

N.    D.    C.   HODGES,  Secretary.
19  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.


REPORT    OF    THE    COMMITTEE    ON    THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE.

Presented  to  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  June  4,  1885.

The  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  has  the  honor  to
present  the  following  report  of  the  work  which  has  been  accom-
plished since  its  organization.

In  order  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  as  many  persons  as
possible  in  investigating  the  subject  of  thought-transference,
the  committee  prepared  and  issued  Circular  No.  4,  a  copy  of
which  is  appended  to  this  report  (Appendix  A).  In  this  cir-
cular, of  which  about  eight  hundred  copies  were  distributed,


Report  of  Thought-Transference   Committee.  7

assistance  was  asked  in  two  distinct  lines  of  research.  In  the
first  place,  members  of  the  society  and  others  were  requested  to
forward  to  us  the  names  and  addresses  of  any  persons  who  were
supposed  to  be  particularly  sensitive  to  thought-transference,
and  who  would  be  available  for  experiments  on  mind-reading,
which  we  desired  to  institute  in  accordance  with  the  same  gen-
eral plan  as  that  adopted  by  the  English  Society  for  Psychical
Research.  To  this  request  no  satisfactory  answers  have  been
received.  Since  the  circular  containing  the  request  was  quite
extensively  noticed  by  the  daily  papers,  this  failure  to  elicit  a
reply  would  seem  to  indicate  that  in  this  community  those  who
profess  to  believe  in  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  of
"  mind-reading  "  are  not  at  present  disposed  to  subject  their
convictions  to  the  test  of  scientific  experiment.

Circular  No.  4  also  asked  for  assistance  in  the  collection  of
observations  made  in  accordance  with  the  plan  recently  sug-
gested by  Professor  Charles  Richet  of  Paris,  by  means  of  which
the  relative  number  of  right  and  wrong  guesses  of  a  series  of
independent  events  is  used  as  evidence  for  or  against  the  exist-
ence of  thought-transference  between  an  agent  knowing  and
a  percipient  guessing  the  events.  Three  different  modes  of
experimenting  were  suggested :  first,  with  cards ;  second,  with
dice ;  and  third,  with  numbers :  and  full  directions  for  making
the  experiments  were  given  in  the  appendix  to  the  circular.
These  forms  of  experiment  may  conveniently  be  designated  as
the  color-test,  the  die-test,  and  the  digit-test.  The  experi-
ments with  the  die  test  which  have  been  reported  are  so  few  in
number  that  a  discussion  of  their  results  would  be  useless.  On
the  other  hand,  we  have  received  a  very  considerable  number
of  returns  from  persons  who  have  experimented  with  the  color
and  the  digit  tests,  or  who  have  tried  other  similar  experiments
of  their  own  invention.  To  the  following  ladies  and  gentlemen
who  have  favored  us  with  such  contributions,  we  beg  to  express
our  most  grateful  acknowledgments :  Mr.  Charles  H.  Blanch-
ard,  Miss  Grace  Blan chard,  Professor  Pliny  E.  Chase,  Miss
Harriet  K.  Chase,  Mr.  Glendower  Evans,  Mr.  P.  Norman  Evans,
Mr.  T.  W.  Faires,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Persifor  Frazer  and  Master
Persifor  Frazer,  jun.,  Mr.  Henry  Gibbons,  Professor  G.  K.  Gil-
bert, Miss  Alice  Gray,  Misses  Constance  and  Laura  L.  Hallett,


\


8  Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.

Professor  William  James,  Mr.  A.  E.  Lehman,  Mr.  H.  R.  Mar-
shall, Admiral  E.  Y.  McCauley,  U.S.N.,  Mr.  W.  J.  McGee,  Mr.
H.  H.  Mott,  Mr.  G.  W.  Nowell,  Dr.  C.  A.  Oliver,  Professor
and  Mrs.  Edw.  C.  Pickering,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  H.  Pickering,
Mrs.  C.  Pickering,  Mr.  W.  P.  Preble,  jun.,  Mr.  Benjamin  Sharp,
Mr.  W.  E.  Sparks,  Miss  Florence  Taber,  Professor  and  Mrs.
John  Trowbridge,  Mr.  G.  C.  Wetmore,  Miss  Helen  Williston,
Mrs.  Helen  M.  C.  Wright,  Mr.  M.  St.  C.  Wright.

These  returns  have  been  subjected  to  a  careful  mathematical
analysis  by  Professors  Peirce  and  Pickering.  A  study  of  their
special  report  on  this  subject  (Appendix  B)  shows  that  the
general  result  of  these  experiments  is,  at  present,  unfavorable
to  thought-transference  as  a  power  belonging  to  mankind  in
general.  The  number  of  the  experiments  is,  moreover,  suffi-
cient to  cover  pretty  satisfactorily  the  particular  line  of  inquiry
which  suggested  them ;  and  it  seems,  therefore,  that  investiga-
tion on  this  subject  can  now  be  more  usefully  directed  in  a  dif-
ferent channel.

A  further  ingenious  application  of  the  statistical  method  to
the  solution  of  this  problem  has  been  made  by  Professor  Picker-
ing, who  has  discussed  the  recorded  observations  on  magnitudes
of  stars  so  as  to  test  the  existence  of  thought-transference
between  the  recorder  and  the  observer.  A  special  report  on
this  subject  by  Professor  Pickering  (Appendix  C)  shows  that
thought-transference,  if  it  exists,  may  cause  a  serious  error  in
many  scientific  investigations.  It  also  indicates  that  a  vast
number  of  observations  already  exist  in  which  the  presence  of
thought-transference  may  be  readily  tested.  The  complexity
of  the  phenomenon,  and  the  danger  of  drawing  hasty  conclu-
sions in  regard  to  its  existence,  are  also  well  illustrated.  A
deviation  is  found  which  at  first  sight  appears  to  be  almost
conclusive  evidence  of  thought-transference,  but  which  is  after-
wards shown  to  be  mainly,  if  not  entirely,  due  to  a  source  of
error  which  might  have  been  overlooked.  While  these  obser-
vations indicate  that  thought-transference  is  not  a  general  phe-
nomenon, they  are  far  from  showing  that  it  may  not  exist  in
special  cases  ;  and  it  is  greatly  to  be  hoped  that  similar  tests
may  be  applied  to  the  observations  made  by  astronomers  at
other  observatories.


Report  of  Thought-Transfer ence   Committee.  9

The  committee  has  also  to  report  the  result  of  some  experi-
ments made  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering  on  thought-transference
by  means  of  pictures,  as  practised  by  the  English  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  In  these  experiments  (Appendix  D)  the
agent  fixed  his  mind  on  a  figure  which  he  had  drawn,  while  the
percipient  endeavored  to  reproduce  the 'figure  thus  thought  of.
The  success  which  attended  these  experiments  was  limited.  At
the  same  time  the  resemblance  between  some  of  the  originals
and  the  reproductions  was  sufficient  to  afford  encouragement
for  persevering  in  this  method  of  experimenting.

Although  the  results  thus  far  reached  are  chiefly  negative,
they  can  by  no  means  be  regarded  as  proving  that  thoughts
may  not,  under  favorable  circumstances,  be  transferred  to  an-
other mind  without  the  use  of  the  senses.  Strictly  speaking,
they  show  only  that  thoughts,  such  as  have  been  made  the  sub-
ject of  our  experiments,  are  not  likely  to  be  transferred  between
two  individuals  taken  at  random.  If  thought-transference
really  exists,  it  is  not  unlikely  to  take  place  more  readily  in,
relation  to  some  kinds  of  subject-matter  than  to  other.  It  may,
for  example,  be  weak  in  relation  to  conceptions  of  color  or
of  number,  but  much  more  active  in  relation  to  conceptions  of
geometric  form  or  arrangement.  In  fact,  some  observations
recently  reported  by  A.  Eubule-Evans  to  the  English  Society
for  Psychical  Research  seem  to  indicate  that  a  difference  of  this
sort  really  exists.

We  have  now  under  consideration  some  forms  of  experiment
founded  on  this  hypothesis,  and  at  the  same  time  capable  of
bringing  the  question  to  exact  numerical  tests.  We  believe
that,  by  experimenting  in  this  direction,  and  by  taking  advan-
tage of  every  opportunity  of  investigating  the  power  of  mind-
reading  in  persons  supposed  to  be  specially  gifted  in  it,  we  shall
place  ourselves  in  the  most  favorable  conditions  for  obtaining
positive  evidence  of  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  thought-
transference.

(Signed.)

IT.  P.  BOWDITCH,  Chairman.  EDWARD  C.  PICKERING.

C.  C.  JACKSON.  WM.  WATSON.

CHARLES  SEDGWICK  MINOT.  N.  D.  C.  HODGES.
J.  M.  PEIRCE.


APPENDIX  A.


CIRCULAR   No.  4.
Issued  by  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.


In  requesting  the  co-operation  of  all  persons  interested  in  investi-
gating the  subject  of  thought-transference,  —  that  is,  in  ascertaining
whether  ' '  a  vivid  impression  or  a  distinct  idea  in  one  mind  can  be
communicated  to  another  mind  without  the  intervening  help  of  the
recognized  organs  of  sensation,' ' — the  committee  desires  to  explain
the  manner  in  which  such  co-operation  may  be  made  most  effective.

It  is  the  intention  of  the  committee  to  make  experiments,  under
their  own  personal  supervision,  upon  persons  supposed  to  have  the
faculty  of  "  mind-reading. "  Your  assistance  is  therefore  asked  in
putting  the  committee  in  communication  with  such  persons  as  are
believed  to  be  specially  sensitive  to  thought-transference.  The
names  and  addresses  of  any  suitable  persons  available  for  experi-
ments will  be  gladly  received.  At  the  same  time  additional  informa-
tion, based  upon  personal  knowledge  of  the  supposed  "  mind-reader ,"
will  enable  the  committee  to  proceed  more  intelligently  in  their  work.

If  persons  are  found  who  can  really  reproduce  the  thoughts  of
others  without  communication  by  the  ordinary  channels,  the  committee
will  endeavor,  first,  to  verify  the  fact  under  rigid  experimental  con-
ditions, such  as  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  conscious  or  unconscious
collusion  ;  next  to  ascertain  the  conditions  which  impede  or  facilitate
the  transference,  to  discover  whether  the  consciousness  of  the  percip-
ient is  a  factor  in  thought-transference,  to  test  the  influence  of  dis-
tance, of  various  obstacles  and  physical  surroundings,  of  the  number
of  persons  having  the  same  mental  image  at  once,  and  of  such  other
circumstances  as  may  appear  desirable.

The  committee  also  desires  to  collect  statistics  as  to  experiments  of
uniform  character,  but  made  by  a  large  number  of  observers.

It  has  been  asserted  by  Professor  Charles  Richet  of  Paris  that  ex-
periments similar  to  those  proposed  below  indicate  the  actuality  of
thought-transference  by  showing,  that,  when  one  person  guesses  in
10


Appendix  A.  11

the  presence  of  another  person  who  knows  what  is  to  be  guessed,  then
the  guesses  are  more  often  right  than  when  neither  of  the  two  know
what  is  to  be  guessed.  Now  if,  as  has  been  maintained,  there  are
persons  who  have  the  faculty  of  mind-reading  to  a  high  degree,  then
probably  there  are  many  persons  who  possess  it  to  a  slight  degree.
The  committee  desires  to  test  this  by  gathering  a  large  number  of
experimental  statistics.  Your  assistance  is  therefore  asked  in  making
experiments,  the  results  of  which  shall  be  communicated  to  the  com-
mittee.

These  experiments  may  be  made  in  various  ways.  The  committee
has  selected  the  three  following  forms  of  experiment  as  the  most
convenient  or  satisfactory.     Two  persons  are  sufficient  in  each  case.

1.  With  cards.  One  person  holds  the  pack,  faces  down,  and  turns
up  the  cards  one  at  a  time  ;  the  other  person  guesses  the  color ;  and
the  number  of  correct  guesses,  and  also  the  whole  number  of  guesses,
are  recorded.  Two  series  of  guesses  are  to  be  made,  —  one  in  which
the  person  holding  the  pack  knows  the  color  before  each  guess,  and
one  in  which  he  does  not  know  the  color.  If  thought-transference
takes  place,  then  the  number  of  correct  guesses  will  be  greater  in  the
first  series  than  in  the  second.

2.  With  dice.  The  dice  are  thrown  and  the  number  guessed,  and
two  series  of  observations  made,  just  as  with  the  cards.

3.  With  numbers.  Numbers  are  written  down  in  arbitrary  succes-
sion on  blanks  furnished  by  the  committee,  and  the  guesses  recorded
on  corresponding  blanks.

Precise  directions  for  making  each  series  of  experiments  are  ap-
pended to  this  circular :  they  must  be  exactly  followed  to  render  the
statistics  of  any  value.  It  must  be  specially  remembered  that  selected
statistics  are  worthless  for  the  purposes  of  the  committee.  All  the
observations  (both  successful  and  unsuccessful)  made  in  any  series
should  be  sent  in.  The  percipient  should  in  no  case  be  told,  during
the  progress  of  an  experiment,  whether  his  guesses  are  right  or  wrong.
The  agent  and  percipient  should  both  sign  the  record,  and  give  their
addresses,  as  a  pledge  of  their  good  faith.

Full  acknowledgment  will  be  made  of  all  assistance  rendered.  The
statistics  will  be  published  as  soon  as  a  sufficient  number  have  been
collated.

In  entering  on  this  inquiry,  the  committee  wish  to  be  understood
as  expressing  no  opinion,  on  one  side  or  the  other,  in  regard  to  the
reality  of  the  supposed  thought-transference.  They  simply  seek  to
institute  a  thorough  and  entirely  unbiassed  investigation  of  the  class
of  phenomena  known  under  the  name  of  "  mind-reading/ '  in  the


12  Report  of  Thought- Transference  Committee.

hope  of  taking  at  least  a  distinct  step  towards  the  true  explanation
of  those  phenomena,  whatever  that  explanation  may  be.

All  inquiries  and  communications  should  be  addressed  to  the  secre-
tary, Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  19  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

(Signed)

H.   P.    BOWDITCH,  Chairman.     E.    C.   PICKERING.

C.   C.  JACKSON.  WILLIAM  WATSON.

C.    S.    MINOT.  N.   D.    C.   HODGES,  Secretary.

J.   M.  PEIRCE.


DIRECTIONS  FOR  MAKING  EXPERIMENTS.

First,  with  Cards.  —  The  object  is  to  guess  the  color  only,  —  black
or  red.  All  the  observations  must  be  recorded.  Only  two  persons
should  be  engaged  in  the  experiment ;  and  they  should  remain  quiet
and  undisturbed,  for  concentrated  attention  is  considered  necessary.
The  one  who  guesses  is  called  the  subject,  or  percipient ;  the  other,
the  agent.  When  the  subject  is  fatigued  by  the  effort  of  attention,
the  experiment  should  be  discontinued.

The  agent  holds  a  pack  of  cards  from  which  two  cards,  one  black
and  one  red,  have  been  removed,  making  a  pack  of  fifty ;  it  being
desirable,  for  convenience  in  reckoning,  to  record  the  guesses  by
fifties.  The  pack  is  placed  so  tbat  the  subject  cannot  see  it.  The
color  of  each  card  is  then  guessed  in  the  order  in  which  it  comes.
After  the  card  is  guessed,  it  is  laid  in  one  of  two  piles,  according  as
the  guess  was  right  or  wrong.  After  the  pack  has  been  gone  through,
each  pile  is  divided  into  red  and  black,  so  that  there  are  then  four
piles, — one  of  red  cards  that  have  been  rightly  guessed  ;  a  second,
reds  wrong  ;  a  third,  blacks  right ;  a  fourth,  blacks  wrong.

The  subject  must  on  no  account  see  the  piles,  or  receive  any  intima-
tion of  any  kind,  whether  he  has  been  right  or  wrong,  until  the  whole
fifty  cards  have  been  gone  through  with.  There  should  be  no  contact
between  agent  and  percipient.  Independent  experiments,  in  which
there  is  joining  of  hands,  or  other  contact,  will  also  be  acceptable  to
the  committee  ;  but  the  contact  should  be  carefully  noted  and  defined.

Two  sets  of  guesses  should  be  made.  First,  the  agent  looks  at  each
card,  fastens  his  attention  upon  the  color,  and  says,  "Now!"     The


Appendix  A.


13


percipient  then  endeavors  to  guess.  When  he  has  stated  what  color
he  thinks  it  is,  the  card  is  put  in  the  proper  pile,  as  the  guess  is  right
or  wrong.

Second,  the  color  is  guessed,  but  before  the  agent  looks  at  the
card.     In  this  set  the  agent  acts  solely  as  recorder.

The  percipient  must  never,  while  the  experiment  is  going  on,  know
whether  the  agent  has  looked  at  the  card  to  be  guessed,  or  not.  The
pack  should  be  thoroughly  shuffled  immediately  before  each  set  of
guesses.  Whenever  possible,  two  sets,  one  of  each  kind,  should  be
made  at  the  same  sitting,  with  the  same  number  of  guesses  in  each
set.  The  results  of  each  sitting  should  be  recorded  on  a  separate
blank  (A) ,  which  may  be  obtained  from  the  secretary.

Experiments  giving  either  positive  or  negative  results  will  be  equally  ac-
ceptable to  the  committee,  because  the  object  is  to  ascertain  whether  thought-
transference  occurs  with  many  persons,  and,  if  so,  to  what  degree  and  in  what
proportion.  To  insure  important  results,  it  is  desirable  that  from  one  to  two
thousand  guesses  be  recorded  for  each  agent  and  percipient ;  the  blanks,  when
filled  in,  to  be  sent  to  the  secretary  of  the  committee.

Second,  ivith  Dice.  — A  single  die  should  be  used,  and  thrown  from
a  dice-box  in  the  ordinary  manner.  Two  sets  of  experiments  should  be
made,  in  one  of  which  the  agent  should,  and  in  the  other  should  not,
look  at  the  die  thrown,  before  asking  the  percipient  to  guess.  A  sep-
arate record  should  be  kept  of  the  number
of  throws  and  of  the  correct  answers  in
each  set.  All  the  precautions  indicated  in
the  directions  for  experiments  with  cards
should  be  employed  in  the  experiments
with  dice.

The   labor  of   keeping  a  correct  record
may  be  much  lessened   by  the  use  of   an


automatic  tally-keeper,  a  pressure  upon
which,  every  time  the  die  is  thrown,  causes
a  movement  of  the  recording-machinery,
which  enables  the  experimenter  at  any  time
to  read  off  on  the  face  of  the  instrument
the  total  number  of  throws  which  have  been
made.  If  desired,  the  work  may  be  still
further  facilitated  by  connecting  the  tally-
keeper  with  an  apparatus  such  as  is  repre-
sented in  the  accompanying  sketch,  by  means  of  which  the  same
movement  which  throws  the  die  also  makes  the  pressure  on  the  tally-


Combined  Die-Thrower   and
Tally-Keeper.


1  To  be  obtained  of  "Wright  &  Ditson,  580  Washington  Street,  at  the  price  of  $2.50.


14  Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.


Blank  A.

EXPERIMENTS  ON  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Guessing  the  Color  of  Cards.

Agent's  Name  and  Address


Percipient's  Name  and  Address


Place,


Date.


Right.


Red.       Black.    Totals.


Wrong.


Red.       Black.    Totals


Total
Answers


Agent  know-
ing Card.
Yes  or  No.


Appendix  A.  15

keeper,  thus  insuring  an  absolutely  correct  record.  It  will  of  course
be  necessary  to  make  a  separate  record  of  the  number  of  correct
guesses.  If  a  number  of  persons  desire  to  use  an  instrument  of  this
sort,  the  committee  will  have  them  made,  and  furnish  them  at  cost
price,  which,  including  the  tally-keeper,  will  not  exceed  three  dollars.
Third,  with  Numbers.  — In  making  experiments  on  thought-trans-
ference, it  is  essential  that  all  the  results  should  be  reported,  whether
they  are  successful  or  not.  Blank  B  furnishes  a  convenient  form  of
record.  It  may  be  used  in  a  variety  of  ways.  For  example :  let
one  person,  who  may  be  designated  as  the  agent,  enter  in  the  first
column  of  one  of  the  ruled  squares  the  ten  digits  in  any  order  taken
at  random.  Let  him  then  concentrate  his  attention  on  the  first  of
these  numbers  ;  and  let  a  second  person,  the  percipient,  who  has  been
so  placed  that  he  could  not  see  the  figures,  attempt  to  guess  this  num-
ber. The  agent  enters  the  figure  guessed  at  the  top  of  the  second
column,  and  then  concentrates  his  attention  on  the  second  figure  of
the  first  column :  this,  in  turn,  is  guessed  and  recorded.  After  re-
peating this  with  the  ten  figures,  they  are  again  tried  in  inverse
order,  the  agent  always  thinking  of  the  figures  in  the  first  column,
but  passing  alternately  down  and  up.  When  the  square  is  filled,  one
hundred  trials  will  have  been  made  and  recorded.  If  the  thought-
transference  had  been  complete,  all  the  figures  on  each  line  should  be
the  same  as  those  in  the  first  column.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is
no  thought-transference,  the  chance  in  any  given  case  is  only  one  out
of  ten,  and  in  only  ten  cases  should  a  figure  of  the  first  column  be
repeated  in  the  remainder  of  the  table.  If,  then,  we  find  only  a  few
coincidences,  we  may  infer  that  there  is  no  transference ;  but  if  the
number  is  large,  as  twenty  or  over,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  interest
to  repeat  the  experiment,  varying  the  conditions  as  much  as  possible.
The  date  and  time  of  beginning  and  ending  each  experiment  should
also  be  recorded.  If  thought-transference  is  indicated,  a  witness
should  be  asked  to  watch  that  the  figures  recorded  are  identical  with
those  guessed.  It  may  prove  best  for  the  witness  to  make  the  record.
The  effect  of  taking  hands,  looking  in  each  other's  eyes,  or  imitating
the  processes  of  the  professional  mind-readers,  may  also  be  tried.
All  deviations  from  the  form  prescribed  above  should  be  fully  ex-
plained in  the  notes.  Another  modification  would  be  for  the  agent
and  percipient  each  to  fill  a  square  with  numbers  in  a  specified  order,
and  afterwards  to  compare  the  results.  If  the  percipient  is  notified
when  he  is  right,  the  probable  number  of  coincidences  is  increased ;
but  he  may  be  aided  in  detecting  the  proper  frame  of  mind  in  which
he  should  place  himself  to  guess  correctly.


16  Report  of  Thought- Transference  Committee.


Blank  B.

EXPERIMENTS    ON    THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.
Guessing  the  Digits.

AgenVs  Name  and  Address

Percipient's  Name  and  Address


Place,


m


APPENDIX  P.

Discussion  of  the  Returns  in  Response  to  Circular  No.  4.


We  present  in  this  appendix  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  experimen-
tal results  which  have  been  sent  to  us  in  response  to  Circular  No.  4.
In  this  discussion,  we  have  thought  it  advisable  to  use  great  fulness
of  statement  and  explanation,  in  order  to  impart  to  all  who  are  in-
terested in  the  objects  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  as  com-
plete a  knowledge  as  possible  of  the  evidence  which  we  ourselves  have
before  us,  and  to  enable  persons  who  are  unfamiliar  with  the  princi-
ples of  mathematical  probability  to  form  their  own  independent  judg-
ment of  the  soundness  and  the  just  application  of  our  methods,  and
of  the  fairness  of  our  conclusions.  The  original  papers  sent  in  to  us
are  preserved,  and  can  be  seen  by  any  member  or  associate  of  the
society,  on  application  to  the  Secretary.

Thirty-six  experimenters  have  taken  part  in  the  experiments  which
we  call  the  color-test  and  the  digit-test.  We  designate  each  experi-
menter by  a  Roman  numeral ;  the  same  numeral  being  everywhere
used  for  the  same  experimenter.

THE   COLOR-TEST.

The  description  of  this  experiment  (the  experiment  with  cards)  is
given  in  Appendix  A,  and  need  not  be  repeated.  The  percipient  is
required  to  name  the  color  of  a  card  drawn  from  a  pack,  on  an  even
chance  of  its  being  red  or  black.  Fifty  such  judgments  compose  a  set.
In  the  first  form  of  the  experiment,  which  we  here  call  Form  A,  the
agent  knows  the  color  before  it  is  named  by  the  percipient.  In  the  sec-
ond form,  which  we  call  Form  B,  the  agent  does  not  know  the  color
before  it  is  named  by  the  percipient,  and  thought-transference  cannot
exist.

Of  Form  A,  we  have  received  110  sets  of  trials  (besides  two  per-
formed under  conditions  slightly  varied  from  those  given  in  the  cir-
cular), comprising  5,500  separate  judgments;  of  Form  B,  we  have
received  103  sets,  comprising  5,150  judgments.  These  trials  have
been  made  by  twenty  pairs  of  experimenters,  comprising  twenty-two
different  individuals.

17


18


Report  of  Thought-Transference   Committee.


Table  I.  gives  the  detailed  record,  for  each  pair  of  experimenters,
of  the  numbers  of  correct  judgments  obtained  in  the  successive  sets  of
fifty  trials  of  judgment  made  by  that  pair.  Table  II.  exhibits  the
number  of  sets  in  which  each  experimenter  took  part  as  percipient,
and  the  number  in  which  he  took  part  as  agent,  and  the  mean  number
of  correct  judgments  to  a  set  in  each  case.  In  both  tables,  the  re-
sults for  Forms  A  and  B  are  exhibited  separately.  The  experimenters
are  designated,  as  already  stated,  by  Roman  numerals.


TABLE    I.
Detailed  Record;  Color-Test.


Correct  Judgments  out

Correct  Judgments  out

Pat

op  Fifty.

of  Fifty.

Percipient.

Agent.

A.

B.

VIII.

IX.

23.

25.

IX.

VIII.

28,  29.

25,  29.

X.

XIII.

29.

25.

XI.

X.

26.

19.

XII.

X.

25.

24.

XIII.

X.

24.

21.

XIV.

X.

29.

23.

XV.

X.

16.

20.

XVI.

XVII.

24.

22.

XVII.

XVI.

23.

30,  19.

XXV.

XXX.

(  31,  25,  36,  21,  22,  22,  25,  )
]                26,  24.                ]

j  23,  18,  22,  27,  25,  31,  33,  )
!                26,  27.                 j

XXVI.

XXV.

j  24,  21,  24,  26,  23,  24,  29,  )
\                 23,  26.                 \

(  27,  26,  26,  29,  23, 19,  26,  i
1                27,  27.                J

XXVII.

XXVI.

\  27,  23,  23,  30,  23,  31,  23,  )
)                31,  22.                 \

j  25,  23,  20,  27,  27,  28,  20,  )
(                27,  24.                j

XXVIII.

XXVII.

j  22,  27,  25,  33,  25,  29,  24,  )
]                 28,  20.                 j

j  29,  29,  21,  28,  29,  23,  24,  i
]                24,  30.                J

XXIX.

XXVIII.

j  22,  25,  21,  28,  27,  20,  20,  i
\                25,  25.                 j"

j  23,  28,  29,  31,  23,  27,  25,  \

\                24,  27.                f

XXX.

XXIX.

j  29,  24,  24,  28,  28,  28,  28,  /
\                33,  24.                J

(  21,  27,  28,  31,  24,  24,  28,  )
1                25,  28.                J

XXXI.

XXXII.

j  27,  21,  28,  23,  35,  24,  26,  i
\             26,  24,  23.              J

f  25,  29,  22, 19, 19,  20,  27,  \
}             34,  27, 27.             |

XXXII.

XXXI.

(  28,  23,  26,  21,  22,  24, 19,  )
}  20,  25,  26,  22,  21,  23,  25,  >
(    26,  29,  27,  28,  27,  24.    )

(  24,  18,  24,  25,  24,  22,  22,  )
{  26,  26,  25,  27,  23,  24,  30,  >
(     25,  20,  23,  32,  21,  24.     )

XXXIV.

XXXIII.

27.

26.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

j  27,  30,  21,  21,  30,  31,  25,  )
.1 24,  28,  25,  25,  28,  23, 19.  J

25,  26,  23,  26,  26,  27.

Appendix  B,


19


TABLE    II.
Summary  for  each  Experimenter;  Color-Test.


Experimenter.

A.

B.

As  Percipient.

As  Agent.

As  Percipient.

As  Agent.

No.  of

Sets.

Mean.

No.  of
Sets.

Mean.

No.  of

Sets.

Mean.

No.  of

Sets.

Mean.

VIII.

1

23.0

2

28.5

1

25.0

2

27.0

IX.

2

28.5

1

23.0

2

27.0

1

25.0

X.

1

29.0

5

24.0

25.0

5

21.4

XI.

1

26.0

-

-

19.0

-

-

XII.

1

25.0

-

-

24.0

-

-

XIII.

1

24.0

-

-

21.0

-

-

XIV.

1

29.0

-

-

23.0

-

-

XV.

1

16.0

-

-

20.0

-

-

XVI.

1

24.0

1

23.0

22.0

2

24.5

XVII.

1

.23.0

1

24.0

2

24.5

1

22.0

XXV.

9

25.8

9

24.4

9

26.3

9

25.6

XXVI.

9

24.4

9

25.9

9

25.6

9

24.6

XXVII.

9

25.9

9

25.9

9

24.6

9

26.3

XXVIII.

9

25.9

9

23.7

9

26.3

9

26.3

XXIX.

9

23. 7

9

27.3

9

26.3

9

26.2

XXX.

9

27.3

9

25.8

9

26.2

9

26.3

XXXI.

10

25.7

20

24.3

10

24.9

20

24.2

XXXII.

20

24.3

10

25.7

20

24.2

10

24.9

XXXIII.

-

-

1

27.0

-

-

1

26.0

XXXIV.

1

27.0

-

-

1

26.0

-

-

XXXV.

14

25.5

-

-

6

25.5

-

—

XXXVI.

14

25.5

"~

■"

6

25.5

The  110  sets  of  Form  A,  exhibited  in  the  above  tables,  contain
2,778  correct  judgments,  giving  a  general  average  of  25.25  correct
judgments  to  a  set,  or  a  percentage  of  50.51.  The  103  sets  of  Form
B  contain  2,593  correct  judgments,  giving  an  average  of  25.17  to  a
set,  or  a  percentage  of  50.35.  As  the  chances  are  even  for  the  cor-
rectness or  incorrectness  of  each  single  judgment,  the  theoretical
average  is  25,  or  50  per  cent  of  the  whole  number  of  judgments.
The  deviation  from  this  theoretical  average  exhibited  by  Form  B  may
be  taken  as  showing  the  order  of  magnitude  which  such  deviation,
when  due  to  pure  chance,  may  be  expected  to  attain  in  such  a  number
of  trials  as  we  here  have  under  consideration.

The  probable  errors  of  the  above  averages,  computed  on  the  ordi-


20  Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.

nary  principle  used  in  the  reduction  of  observations  of  a  single  quan-
tity (that  quantity  being,  in  this  case,  the  measure  of  the  tendency  to
form  correct  judgments  in  such  trials  as  the  present) ,  will  also  serve
to  indicate,  so  far  as  an  inference  can  be  drawn  from  the  present
series  of  experiments,  the  range  through  which  the  averages  given  by
similar  future  series  may  be  expected  to  vary.  The  results,  with  the
addition  of  their  probable  errors,  may  then  be  stated  as  follows :  —

Form  A,  percentage  of  correct  judgments=50.51±0.45.

Form  B,  percentage  of  correct  judgments=50.35±0.45.

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  results  of  these  trials  are  in  close
accordance  with  those  of  a  nearly  equal  series  of  similar  trials  made
by  Quetelet,  and  mentioned  in  his  "  Lettres  sur  la  Th^orie  des  Proba-
bility "  (p.  57).  In  5,460  drawings  from  an  urn  containing,  at  each
drawing,  equal  numbers  of  white  and  black  balls,  Quetelet  drew  2,756
white  balls,  a  percentage  of  50.48.

The  case  of  widest  deviation  from  probability  in  this  series  of
experiments,  and  the  only  case  which  requires  notice,  is  that  in  which
XXX.  was  percipient,  and  XXIX.  agent,  —  where  246  correct  judg-
ments were  made  in  a  set  of  450  judgments.  The  probability  of  the
occurrence  of  so  great  a  proportion  of  correct  judgments  in  any  set
of  450  judgments,  in  a  series  of  10  such  sets  (which  approximately
represents  our  present  series  of  experiments),  is  about  0.2 ;  so  that
a  case  as  striking  as  that  now  presented  to  us  would  occur,  by  the
mere  operation  of  chance,  in  one  out  of  five  series  of  trials  like  the
present.  The  case  does  not,  therefore,  exhibit  a  remarkable  propor-
tion of  successful  judgments.

But  the  theory  of  probabilities  enables  us  to  compute,  for  any  great
number  of  sets  of  trials,  not  only  the  probable  general  average  of  cor-
rect judgments  for  the  whole  series,  but  also  the  proportion  in  which
different  numbers  of  correct  judgments  in  a  set  ought  to  be  distributed
through  the  series ;  and  this  computation  will  furnish  a  further  and
more  searching  test  of  the  conformity  of  our  results  with  those  which
the  hypothesis  of  pure  chance  would  lead  us  to  expect.

Table  III.  gives  the  probability  (to  the  nearest  thousandth)  of  the
occurrence,  in  any  set  of  50  judgments  (each  judgment  being  equally
likely  to  be  correct  or  incorrect) ,  of  every  possible  number  of  correct
judgments  from  14  to  36  inclusive.  The  numbers  below  14  and
above  36  are  omitted,  because  the  probability  of  there  being  any  such
number  of  correct  judgments  is  so  small  as  to  count  for  less  than  1  in
1,000  sets.  It  is  to  be  added  that  the  probability  of  the  occurrence
of  any  number  of  correct  judgments  is,  also,  the  probable  proportion
of  occurrences  of  that  number  in  any  long  series  of  sets.


Appendix  B,


21


In  this  table,  column  x  gives  the  numbers  of  correct  judgments  from
14  to  25,  and  column  y  from  25  to  36.  The  other  columns  give,  for
each  value  of  x  or  ?/,  the  probability  of  there  being  any  number  of
correct  judgments  below  that  value  of  x  or  y,  of  there  being  exactly
x  or  y  correct  judgments,  and  of  there  being  any  number  above  x  or  y.
The  name  of  the  column  is  to  be  read  at  the  top  for  the  numbers  in
column  x,  and  at  the  bottom  for  those  in  column  y.

TABLE  III.
Fbob abilities;  Single  Chance  Even;  Set  of  50.


X.

Below  x.

Exactly  x.

Above  x.

14

0.000

0.001

0.999

36

15

0.001

0.002

0.997

35

16

0.003

0.004

0.992

34

17

0.008

0.009

0.984

33

18

0.016

0.016

0.968

32

19

0.032

0.027

0.941

31

20

0.059

0.042

0.899

30

21

0.101

0.060

0.839

29

22

0.161

0.079

0.760

28

23

0.240

0.096

0.664

27

24

0.336

0.108

0.556

26

25

0.444

0.112

0.444

25

Above  y.

Exactly  y.

Below  y.

y-

We  see,  for  example,  that  out  of  every  thousand  sets  of  50  judg-
ments in  each  set,  the  alternatives  of  right  and  wrong  being  equally
probable  in  each  judgment,  there  ought  to  be,  in  the  long-run,  101
sets  in  which  less  than  21  correct  judgments  are  made,  60  sets  of
exactly  21,  and  839  sets  of  more  than  21  ;  that  there  ought  to  be  839
sets  giving  less  than  29,  60  giving  exactly  29,  and  101  giving  more
than  29  ;  again,  that  more  than  half  the  sets  (520  out  of  1,000)  ought
to  give  23,  24,  25,  26,  or  27  correct  judgments  in  each  set,  and  that
more  than  seven-eighths  (882  out  of  1,000)  ought  to  give  from  20  to
30  each.

The  theoretical  probabilities  on  which  the  above  table  depend  are
given  more  precisely  in  Table  XII.  The  first  column  gives  the
number  of  cases  in  which  a  correct  guess  is  made ;  and  the  second
column  gives  the  logarithm  of  the  corresponding  probability,  in  the


22


Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee,


case  of  guessing  colors,  or  where  fifty  guesses  are  made  ;  the  proba-
bilities being  one  to  one  in  each  case.  The  third  column  gives  the
numbers  corresponding  to  these  logarithms.  This  column,  given  to
the  nearest  thousandth,  is,  therefore,  the  same  as  the  third  column  of
Table  III.  If  the  numbers  of  the  first  column  are  subtracted  from
50,  the  second  and  third  columns  will  give  the  probability  of  a  num-
ber of  correct  guesses  greater  than  25.  Thus  the  probability  is  the
same  for  9  as  for  41  correct  guesses.  The  last  two  columns  give  the
logarithm  and  numerical  value  of  the  probability  in  the  case  of  one
hundred  guesses,  where  the  probability  in  each  guess  is  one  out  of
ten.  These  columns  were  used  in  computing  the  changes  in  guessing
the  digits,  and  the  last  column  expressed  in  thousandths  is  accord-
ingly the  same  as  the  third  column  of  Table  VI.

Table  IV.  exhibits  the  distribution  of  numbers  of  correct  judgments,
per  set  of  50  judgments,  for  the  actual  series  A  and  B,  and  for  the
theoretical  series  obtained  by  probabilities,  which  we  denote  by  P.
For  convenience  of  comparison,  all  our  results  are  reduced  to  the
scale  of  100  sets  of  judgments ;  that  is,  to  percentages.  We  omit
the  enumeration  of  cases  "  above  #,"  which  is  easily  derived  from  the
other  columns  of  the  table,  and  give  the  residuals,  or  positive  and
negative  deviations  of  the  actual  from  the  theoretical  values.  The
numbers  are  given  to  the  nearest  unit ;  and  this  will  account  for  some
apparent  discrepancies,  which  are  due  to  the  concurrence  of  fractions
having  the  same  sign.

We  see,  for  example,  from  this  table,  that  there  were  less  than  24
correct  judgments  to  a  set  in  32  per  cent  of  the  sets  of  series  A,  and
in  29  per  cent  of  the  sets  of  series  B,  against  a  theoretical  percentage
of  34,  the  deficiencies  being  2  and  4  per  cents  respectively  ;  and  that
exactly  24  correct  judgments  were  made  in  14  per  cent  of  the  sets  of
A,  and  in  12  per  cent  of  B,  theory  requiring  11,  and  the  excesses
being  2  and  1  per  cent.

Taking  the  numbers  of  judgments  in  groups  of  five,  arranged  sym-
metrically about  the  most  probable  group  of  five  (namely,  23-27),
we  see,  from  Table  IV.,  that  there  are  —


A.

B.

P.

Below  18 .     .     .

1

0

2

18-22  ....

19

20

22

23-27  ....

54

57

52

28-32   ....

23

20

22

Above  32      .     .

4

2

2

Appendix  B.


23


The  general  agreement  with  probability  is  very  close.  Future  series
of  experiments  may  lead  us  to  regard  the  slight  deviations  from  the
law  of  chance,  which  appear  in  these  results,  as  regular  and  signifl-
cant,  not  accidental ;  but,  so  far  as  the  investigation  has  yet  gone,
they  cannot  be  regarded  as  indicating  any  real  cause  tending  to  dis-
turb that  law.

TABLE  IV.

Distribution;  Color-Test;  Scale  of  100  Sets  of  50  Judgments  Each.


Occurrences  of  Num-

Occurrences of  Num-

Residuals be-

Residuals ex-

X.

bers  below

X.

bers

exactly  x.

low

X.

actly

X.

A.       B.

p.

A.

B.          P.

A.

B.

A.

B.

15

0       0

0

0

0         0

0

0

0

0

16

0       0

0

1

0         0

0

0

+1

0

17

18

1        0

1

0

0         1

0

—1

-1

—1

1        0

2

0

2          2

-1

—2

—2

0

19

1        2

3

2

5         3

-2

-1

-1

+2

20

3        7

6

4

5         4

-3

+1

-1

+1

21

6      12

10

7

4         6

-4

+2

+  1

-2

22
23

14      16

16

6

5         8

-2

-1

-2

-3

20      20

24

12

9        10

-4

-4

+2

-1

24

32      29

34

14

12        11

-2

-4

+3

+1

25

45      41

44

12

12        11

+  1

-4

+1

0

26

57      52

56

8

10        11

+2

-3

-3

-1

1    27
28

65      62

66

7

16        10

—1

-4

-2

+6

73      78

76

11

7         8

-3

+2

+3

—1

29

84      84

84

6

7         6

0

+1

0

+1

30

90      91

90

3

3         4

0

+1

-1

-1

31

93      94

94

4

3         3

-1

0

+  1

0

32
33

96      97

97

0

1         2

0

0

-2

-1

96      98

98

2

1         1

—2

0

+1

0

34

98      99

99

0

1         0

-1

0

0

+1

35

98    100

100

1

0         0

-2

0

+1

0

36

99    100

100

1

0         0

-1

0

+1

0

37

100    100

100

0

0         0

0

0

0

0

The  figures  on  page  24  are  graphical  representations,  illustrating
Table  IV.  The  smooth  curves  are  the  probability  curves  for  this
case  ;  the  abscissas  being  the  numbers  in  column  x,  and  the  ordinates
being  the  numbers  under  P  in  the  column  headed  "  Occurrences  of
numbers  exactly  x."     The  ordinates  of  the  angular  points  of  the


24


Report  of  Thought-Transference  Committee.


jagged  lines  are  the  numbers  under  A  and  B ;  Fig.  1  containing  the
points  given  by  the  numbers  in  the  column  A,  and  Fig.  2  those  given
by  the  numbers  in  the  column  B.  Fig.  1  shows  a  slight  depression
at  the  beginning,  and  a  slight  elevation  at  the  end,  but  the  main
course  of  the  curve  indicates  no  tendency  to  an  excess  in  the  number
of  correct  judgments.     In  fact,  if  we  throw  out  the  five  sets  which


f         r»i

:J.         \

\

1

5

I

0

2

5

3

0                          3

5

<S^      Ri

*                       \

1

5

2

a

ft

5

3

0                             3

S

GRAPHICAL  REPRESENTATION   OF  TABLE  IV.

give  numbers  below  18  or  above  32,  we  have  105  sets  and  2,625
correct  judgments,  —  an  average  of  precisely  25,  or  50  per  cent.

THE   DIGIT-TEST.

In  this  experiment,  of  which  the  description  is  given  in  Appendix
A,  under  the  designation  of  the  experiment  with  numbers,  the  chance
of  a  single  judgment  being  correct  is  only  1  in  10.     The  square  con-


Appendix  B.


25


taining  100  judgments  may  be  regarded  as  a  set.  But  this  may  be
subdivided  into  columns,  or  smaller  sets,  of  10  judgments  each  ;  and,
again,  when  a  sheet  of  ten  squares,  containing  1,000  judgments,  has
been  filled  out  by  one  pair  of  experimenters,  it  may  be  treated  as  a
larger  set.

Tables  V.,  VI.,  and  VII.  give  the  probabilities  of  the  different
possible  numbers  of  correct  judgments  in  a  column  (a  set  of  10),  in


TABLE  V.

Probabilities;  Single  Chance

=  tV;  Set  of  10.


TABLE  VI.
Probabilities;  Single  Chance


—  TT»)


Set  of  100.


Below  x

Exactly  x

Above  x

in  10.

in  10.

in  10.

0

0.000

0.349

0.651

1

0.349

0.387

0.264

2

0.736

0.194

0.070

3

0.930

0.057

0.013

4

0.987

0.011

0.002

5

0.998

0.001

0.000

6

1.000

0.000

0.000

a  square  (a  set  of  100),  and  in
a  full  sheet  (a  set  of  1,000).
The  comparison  of  these  tables
well  illustrates  the  principle,
that,  as  the  number  of  trials  in-
creases, the  number  of  correct
judgments  has  an  increasing
tendency  to  approach  the  most
probable  number,  which  is,  in
this  case,  always  one-tenth  of
the  whole  number.  Thus  the
probability  of  as  many  as  2  cor-
rect judgments  in  a  set  of  10  is
0.264,  or  more  than  1  in  4 ;  so
that,  out  of  1,000  sets  of  10
judgments,  264  ought  to  contain  as  many  as  2  correct  judgments.  But
the  probability  of  as  many  as  20  in  100  —  that  is,  of  an  average  of  as
many  as  2  in  10  for  ten  sets  of  10  —  is  only  0.002.  Again,  the  proba-
bility of  as  many  as  12  in  100  —  an  average  of  1.2  in  10  for  ten  sets
of  10  — is  0.297,  nearly  1  in  3  ;  but  the  probability  of  an  average  of
as  many  as  12  in  100  for  ten  sets  of  100  is  only  0.022,  less  than  1  in  40.


Below  x

Exactly  x

Above  x

0

in  100.

in  100.

in  100.

0.000

0.000

1.000

1

0.000

0.000

1.000

2

0.000

0.002

0.998

3

0.002

0.006

0.992

4
5

0.008

0.016

0.976

0.024

0.034

0.942

6

0.058

0.060

0.883

7

0.117

0.089

0.794

8

0.206

0.115

0.679

9
10

0.321

0.130

0.549

0.451

0.132

0.417

11

0.583

0.120

0.297

12

0.703

0.099

0.198

13

0.802

0.074

0.124

14
15

0.876

0.051

0.073

0.927

0.033

0.040

16

0.960

0.019

0.021

17

0.979

0.011

0.010

18

0.990

0.005

0.005

19
20

0.995

0.003

0.002

0.998

0.001

0.001

21

0.999

0.000

0.000

22

1.000

0.000

0.000

26


Report  of  Thought-Transference  Committee,


TABLE  VII.
Probabilities;  Single  Chance  =  tV;  Set  of  1,000.


Below  x

Exactly  x

Above  x

in  1,000.

in  1,000.

in  1,000.

70

0.000

0.000

0.999

71

0.001

0.000

0.999

72

0.001

0.000

0.999

73

0.001

0.001

0.998

74
75

0.002

0.001

0.997

0.003

0.001

0.996

76

0.004

0.001

0.995

77

0.005

0.002

0.993

78

0.007

0.003

0.990

79
80

0.010

0.003

0.987

0.013

0.004

0.982

81

0.018

0.005

0.977

82

0.023

0.007

0.970

83

0.030

0.008

0.962

84
85

0.038

0.010

0.951

0.049

0.012

0.939

86

0.061

0.014

0.925

87

0.075

0.017

0.908

88

0.092

0.019

0.889

89
90

0.111

0.022

0.867

0.133

0.025

0.842

91

0.158

0.028

0.814

92

0.186

0.030

0.784

93

0.216

0.033

0.751

94
95

0.249

0.035

0.716

0.284

0.037

0.678

96

0.322

0.039

0.639

97

0.361

0.040

0.599

98

0.401

0.041

0.557

99
100

0.443

0.042

0.515

0.485

0.042

0.473

Below  x

Exactly  x

Above  «

in  1,000.

in  1,000.

in  1,000.

100
101

0.485

0.042

0.473

0.527

0.042

0.432

102

0.568

0.041

0.391

103

0.609

0.039

0.352

104

0.648

0.038

0.314

105
106

0.686

0.036

0.278

0.722

0.034

0.244

107

0.756

0.031

0.213

108

0.787

0.029

0.184

109

0.816

0.026

0.158

110
111

0.842

0.023

0.135

0.865

0.021

0.114

112

0.886

0.018

0.095

113

0.905

0.016

0.079

114

0.921

0.014

0.065

115
116

0.935

0.012

0.053

0.947

0.010

0.043

117

0.957

0.008

0.035

118

0.965

0.007

0.028

119

0.972

0.006

0.022

120
121

0.978

0.005

0.017

0.983

0.004

0.013

122

0.987

0.003

0.010

123

0.990

0.002

0.008

124

0.992

0.002

0.006

125
126

0.994

0.001

0.005

0.995

0.001

0.003

127

0.997

0.001

0.003

128

0.997

0.001

0.002

129

0.998

0.000

0.001

130

0.999

0.000

0.001

We  have  received,  in  the  digit- test,  116  squares,  comprising  11,600
judgments,  besides  several  incomplete  squares,  containing  53  col-
umns, or  530  judgments ;  so  that  we  have,  in  all,  12,130  judgments.
We  have  also  one  square  and  two  columns  of  another  square,  in  which
the  experiment  of  contact  between  the  agent  and  percipient  was
tried,  with  no  observed  change   of  result.     These  trials  have  been


Appendix  B.


27


made  by  twenty-nine  pairs  of  experimenters,  twenty-seven  different
individuals  participating.

Tables  VIII.  and  IX.  give  the  detailed  record  and  summary  of
these  experiments.

TABLE  VIII.  TABLE    IX.

Summary  for  Each  Experi-
menter; Digit-Test.


Detailed  Record;  Digit-Test.


Percip-
ient.

Agent.

No.  of  Correct  Judgments.

I.

II.

10, 13.

II.

I.

9,19.

11.

xvm.

4  [in  90].

II.

XIX.

7.

11.

XX.

9.

II.

XXI.

11.

III.

II.

7.

III.

rv.

12.

III.

v.

11  [in  90].

IV.

HI.

9  [in  90],  5  [in  90].

V.

hi.

5  [in  90].

VII.

VI.

7, 10,  11, 10,  8,  12, 10, 10, 6, 4.

X.

xn.

9,  9,  7, 11,  6, 10,  8.

X.

XIII.

14, 11.

XII.

X.

8,  12,  6, 17, 10,  17, 12.

XIII.

X.

9,8.

XIX.

II.

8.

XX.

II.

11.

XXI.

II.

10,8.

XXIII.

xxn.

11.

xxrv.

XXII.

12  [in  80].

XXV.

XXX.

7, 14,  11,  12,  13,  8,  8,  8, 13,  7.

XXVI.

XXV.

13, 10,  8, 10, 11, 7, 10, 14, 13, 11.

XXVII.

XXVI.

9,  10,  13,  8,  10,  13,  9,  9, 16, 10.

XXVIII.

xxvn.

11,  10,  11, 11, 13, 9, 15, 14, 4,  9.

XXIX.

XX  VIII.

J 14, 10,  6,  8,  18,  9,  8,  20,  18,)
\                   10  (E).                  )

XXX.

XXIX.

9,  9,  9,  6,  13,  9,  11,  6,  20, 11.

XXXII.

XXXI.

9,  17,  8, 11,  11,  6,  9,  6,  12, 15.

XXXIV.

XXXIII.

11,  8,  12,  9.

Experi-
menter.

As  Percip-
ient.

As  Agent.

No.

of

Aver-

No

of

Aver-

Sets.

age.

Sets.

age.

I.

2.0

11.5

2.0

14.0

II.

5.9

10.0

7.0

9.6

HI.

2.9

10.3

2.7

7.0

IV.

1.8

7.8

1.0

12.0

V.

0.9

5.6

0.9

12.2

VI.

-

-

10.0

8.8

VII.

10.0

8.8

-

-

X.

9.0

9.4

9.0

11.0

XII.

7.0

11.7

7.0

8.6

XIII.

2.0

8.5

2.0

12.5

XVIII.

-

-

0.9

4.4

XIX.

1.0

8.0

1.0

7.0

XX.

1.0

11.0

1.0

9.0

XXI.

2.0

9.0

1.0

11.0

XXH.

-

-

1.8

12.8

XXIII.

1.0

11.0

-

-

XXIV.

0.8

15.0

-

-

XXV.

10.0

10.1

10.0

10.7

XXVI.

10.0

10.7

10.0

10.7

xxvn.

10.0

10.7

10.0

10.7

XXVIII.

10.0

10.7

10.0

12.1(E)

XXIX.

10.0

12.1(E)

10.0

10.3

XXX.

10.0

10.3

10.0

10.1

XXXI.

-

-

10.0

10.4

xxxn.

10.0

10.4

-

-

XXXIII.

-

-

4.0

10.0

XXXIV.

4.0

10.0

-

-

These  tables  will  at  once  be  seen  to  exhibit  one  case  of  marked
deviation  from  probability ;  namely,  the  series  in  which  XXIX.  was
percipient  and  XXVIII.  agent,  a  series  of  ten  sets  giving  the  average
of  12.1  correct  judgments  to  a  set.  The  probability  of  so  high  an
average  in  a  series  of  ten  sets  of  100  is,  by  Table  VII.,  0.017 ;  and
the  probability  of  such  a  case  occurring  in  eight  such  series  (which
may  be  taken  as  roughly  representing  the  present  collection  of  re-


28  Report  of  Thought-Transference   Committee.

suits)  is  0.13,  or  1  in  8.  This  case,  which  we  will  designate  as  case
E,  exhibits  no  striking  improbability,  as  these  numbers  show  ;  but  we
have  thought  it  desirable  to  submit  it  to  separate  discussion  ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  it  may  properly  be  left  out  of  account  in  estimating
the  general  character  of  the  main  body  of  our  results.

Let  us  now  consider  the  results  of  this  experiment  in  their  total-
ity. The  number  of  correct  judgments  made  in  the  whole  series  of
12,130  judgments  (which  we  denote  by  C)  is  1,253,  a  percentage  of
10.33;  but,  if  we  exclude  the  exceptional  case  E,  we  have  11,130
judgments  (which  we  denote  by  D),  of  which  1,132  are  correct,  a
percentage  of  10.17.  The  theoretical  percentage,  on  the  hypothesis  of
chance,  is  10.00.  Adding  the  probable  errors,  we  have  for  C,  10.33
±0.20;  forD,  10.17  ±0.20.

Turning  next  to  the  question  of  distribution,  we  give  in  Table  X.
the  proportion  in  which  each  number  of  correct  judgments,  and  in
which  any  less  or  any  greater  number,  occurs  in  the  series  of  sets.
We  must  here  limit  ourselves  to  the  complete  sets  of  100  judgments
each.  Under  G  we  place  the  results  for  the  full  number  of  116  com-
plete sets ;  under  D,  the  results  for  the  106  sets  which  remain  when
case  E  is  excluded ;  and  under  P,  those  given  by  the  theory  of  prob-
abilities. For  convenience  of  comparison,  all  the  results  are  reduced
to  the  scale  of  100  sets  of  complete  judgments,  or  to  percentages  of
the  whole  number  of  sets.  The  general  agreement  of  C  and  D  with
P  is  obvious  at  a  glance,  the  agreement  in  the  case  of  D  being  a  little
closer  than  in  that  of  C.  The  experiment  presents  a  slight  excess
of  high  values  of  x.  But  it  is  the  usual  experience  in  experimental
work,  that  scattered'  instances  of  wide  deviation  from  probability
are  to  be  expected  in  any  series  of  trials.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
very  observable  that  the  number  of  cases  near  the  mean  is  decidedly
larger  in  the  experiment  than  would  be  expected  theoretically.  Thus
there  are  9,  10,  or  11  correct  judgments  in  45  per  cent  of  the  cases
of  Series  C,  in  47  per  cent  of  Series  D,  and  in  only  38  per  cent  ac-
cording to  theory.  But  this  discrepancy,  which  consists  in  an  excess
beyond  the  demands  of  the  theory  of  chance  of  those  cases  which
are,  by  the  theory  of  chance,  the  most  probable,  can  hardly  be
regarded  as  due  to  thought-transference.

Table  XI.  gives  the  distribution  of  correct  judgments  among  the
columns.  In  forming  this  table,  we  are  obliged  to  leave  out  of  ac-
count a  series  of  18  squares,  of  which  only  the  aggregates  have  been
reported  to  the  committee.  The  cases  included  under  C  make  1,033
columns ;  those  included  under  D  (case  E  being  omitted)  make  933
columns.     All  the  results  are  reduced  to  the  scale  of  1,000  columns.


Appendix  B.


29


TABLE  X.
Distribution;  Digit-Test;  Scale  of  100  Sets  op  100  Judgments  Each.


Below  x

Exactly

X.

Residual  be-

Residual ex-

X.

low  X.

actly  X.

C.

D.

P.

C.       D.

p.

C.           D.

C.           D.

0

0

0

0

0       0

0

0           0

0             0

1

0

0

0

0       0

0

0           0

0           0

2

0

0

0

0       0

0

0           0

0           0

3

0

0

0

0       0

1

0           0

-1      -1

4
5

0

0

1

2        2

2

-1      -1

0           0

2

2

2

0        0

3

-1      -1

-3        -3

6

2

2

6

7       7

6

-4        -4

+  1        +1

7

9

8

12

6       7

9

-3        -3

-3        -2

8

15

15

21

13      12

11

-6        -6

+  1        +1

9
10
11

28

27

32

16      16

13

-5        -5

+3        +3

43

43

45

15      14

13

—2        —2

+  1        +1

58

58

58

15      16

12

—1        -1

+3        +4

12

72

74

70

6        7

10

+2        +3

-4        -3

13

78

80

80

8        8

7

-2           0

0        +1

14

86

89

88

4       4

5

-1        +1

-1        —1

15

16

91

92

93

2        2

3

-2           0

-2       —1

92

94

96

1        1

2

-4        -2

-1        -1

17

93

95

98

3        3

1

-5        -3

+  1        +2

18

96

98

99

2        0

1

-3        -1

+  1        -1

19

97

98

100

1        1

0

-2        -1

+1        +1

20

98

99

100

2        1

0

-2        -1

+2        +1

21

100

100

100

0        0

0

0           0

0           0

TABLE  XI.

Distribution;  Digit-Test;  Scale  op  1,000  Sets  op  10  Judgments  Each.


...

Below

X.

Exactly

X.

Residual  be-

Residual ex-

X.

low

X.

actly  X.

C.

D.

P.

C.

D.

p.

C.

D.

C.            D.

0

0

0

0

345

352

349

0

0

-4       +3

1

345

352

349

389

393

387

-  4

+  3

+2      +6

2

734

745

736

189

178

194

-  2

+  9

-5      -16

3

923

923

930

52

53

57

-  7

-  7

—5      —  4

4
5

975

975

987

20

20

11

-12

—12

+9      +9

995

996

998

3

2

1

-  3

—  2

+2       +1

6

998

998

1,000

0

0

0

—  2

—  2

0           0

7

998

998

1,000

1

1

0

—  2

—  2

+1      +1

8

999

999

1,000

0

0

0

-  1

-  1

0           0

9

999

999

1,000

1

1

0

-  1

-  1

+1    +  1

30


Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.


The  following  figures  are  graphical  representations  of  the  column
"Exactly  a?"  in  Table  X.  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  if  the  two
squares  of  Series  D,  which  give  19  and  20  correct  judgments  respec-
tively, and  which  correspond  to  the  slight  elevation  at  the  end  of
Fig.  4,  be  thrown  out,  we  have  10,930  judgments,  of  which  1,093,
precisely  10  per  cent,  are  correct.  Fig.  3  represents  column  C  ;  and
Fig.  4,  column  D.


i  i  — — — —j—— — — ^— — — —» » —  ■

A  Fi'g.3.  \\

I  !i  10  15  20

/J  FlgA  \\

(i  ji  \l  is  *"£()


GRAPHICAL  REPRESENTATION  OE  THE   COLUMN  "EXACTLY  X  "  IN  TABLE   X.

It  remains  to  consider  case  E.  In  looking  over  the  sheet  which
contains  this  case,  one  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  a  peculiarity  in  one
of  the  squares  on  that  sheet ;  namely,  the  frequent  repetition  of  a


Appendix  B.  31

digit  in  the  same  horizontal  line  or  row,  in  cases  where  it  has  no
relation  to  the  digit  thought  of  for  that  row  by  the  agent.  We  repro-
duce this  square  to  add  clearness  to  our  discussion.

5:  9,  6,  3,  4,  3,  8,  3,  7,  7,  7.

2:  7,  9,  7,  7,  7,  9,  4,  9,  6,  4.

8:  5,  7,  5,  5,  5,  7,  5,  8,  5,  5.

4 1  o,  0,  o,  o,  o,   o,   o,  o,  o,  o.

9:  1,  3,  1,  1,  1,   1,   1,  1,  1,  1.

0:  0,  0,  0,  3,  4,  0,  0,  0,  0,  0.

0  l  A}  Z,  ^,  Z,  Z ,    Z,    Z 1  z,  z,  z.

1  :  4,  4,  4,  4,  6,  4,  4,  4,  4,  4.
6  :  6,6,  6,  5,  6,  6,  7,  6,  6,  6.
7:  8,  9,  7,  3,  5,  3,  6,  5,  5,  2.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  third  row  contains  seven  5's ;  the  fourth,
eight  3's ;  the  fifth,  nine  l's;  the  sixth,  eight  0's ;  the  seventh,  ten
2's ;  the  eighth,  nine  4's ;  the  ninth,  eight  6's.  It  happens  that,  in
two  of  these  rows,  that  of  0  and  that  of  6,  the  prevailing  digit  co-
incides with  that  thought  of  by  the  agent ;  and  we  thus  get  16  of  the
18  correct  judgments  which  occur  in  this  square.

The  tendency  to  the  repetition  of  a  digit,  or  group  of  digits,  in  a
row,  is  also  observable  in  other  squares  of  Case  E.  Thus  we  find  in
that  sheet  such  rows  as  the  following  :  —

6:  0,  2,  1,  2,  2,  2,  0,  4,  7,  2

7:  5,  4,  6,  8,  7,  7,  7,  5,  4,  6

9:  1,  0,  0,  4,  4,  8,  8,  7,  7,  3

7:  1,  0,  1,  2,  1,  9,  0,  2,  3,  1

0:  0,  2,  7,  5,  4,  7,  7,  5,  4,  7

where  the  number  placed  before  the  colon  is  that  thought  of  by  the
agent.

This  approximate  regularity  in  the  arrangement  of  the  digits  sug-
gests the  question  whether  the  succession  of  judgments  made  by  the
percipient,  in  going  up  and  down  the  vertical  lines  or  columns,  was  not
in  fact  governed  —  doubtless,  without  his  consciousness  —  by  some
principle  of  arrangement  in  his  own  mind.  Professor  Pickering  ob-
served that  such  a  principle  of  arrangement,  in  fact,  exists.  In  the
first  column  of  the  square  given  above,  the  judgments  occur  in  the
order —

9,  7,  5,  3,  1,  0,  2,  4,  6,  8;


32  Report  of  Thought-Transference   Committee.

the  odd  numbers  being  first  named  in  regular  decreasing  order,  and
then  the  even  numbers  in  regular  increasing  order.  In  the  other
columns  we  have  merely  slight  variations  of  this  pattern.  But  this
principle  of  arrangement  has  not  been  imparted  to  the  mind  of  the
percipient  from  that  of  the  agent,  for  it  does  not  appear  in  the  series
thought  of  by  the  agent ;  namely,  —

5,  2,  8,  4,  9,  0,  3,  1,  6,  7.

The  agreements  which  exist  in  this  square  arise  mainly,  as  has  been
pointed  out,  from  the  accidental  concurrence  at  two  points  (the  0  and
the  6)  of  two  differently  arranged  series.

A  similar  principle  of  arrangement  can  be  traced  in  other  squares
of  Case  E.  Indeed,  there  is  a  tendency  throughout  this  sheet  to  the
separation  of  odd  and  even  numbers  into  two  series,  each  series  being
thought  of  in  a  regular  order.  In  some  cases  this  is  varied  by  a
tendency  to  the  natural  order  of  digits.

It  is  further  noticeable,  that,  in  that  set  of  experiments  in  which
XXIX.  (the  percipient  in  Case  E)  was  the  agent,  the  series  of  num-
bers thought  of  by  him,  and  placed  in  columns  on  the  left  of  the
successive  squares,  exhibit  a  similar  principle  of  arrangement.  Those
series  are  as  follows  (we  give  them  in  successive  columns)  :  —

6854643256


4

6

0

6

7

2

1

7

7

9

8

4

3

8

9

0

4

8

9

0

0

2

4

0

3

1

5

1

0

4

2

1

7

1

1

3

8

5

1

8

1

3

9

3

4

5

0

6

3

2

3

5

6

5

5

7

9

3

8

5

5

7

8

7

8

9

2

4

6

1

9019366043
79220879  2*7

There  is  an  evident  tendency  to  separate  odd  and  even  numbers,
and  place  them  in  ascending  or  descending  order ;  and  from  this
tendency  the  agent  has  not  wholly  escaped,  in  spite  of  some  endeavor
to  give  variety  to  his  arrangements.

Now,  a  tendency  in  the  mind  of  the  percipient  to  follow  a  system
in  the  order  of  his  judgments  may  easily  give  the  appearance  of
thought-transference  ;  but  it  must  seriously  interfere  with  real  thought-
transference,  if  that  exists.     Thus,  in  the  present  case,  the  tendency


Appendix  B.


33


to  the  repetition  of  a  digit  throughout  a  row  makes  a  set  of  a  hundred
judgments  approximate  to  equivalence  with  a  set  of  only  ten  judg-
ments ;  and  hence  wide  deviations  from  the  normal  result  (of  ten  per
cent  of  the  judgments  being  correct)  cease  to  be  improbable.  For,
if  the  tendency  were  complete,  the  probability  would  be  judged  by
Table  V.,  not  by  Table  VI.  On  the  other  hand,  this  repetition  arises
in  fact  from  the  percipient's  tendency  to  reproduce  his  own  former
thought,  not  the  thought  of  the  agent.  Case  E,  therefore,  appears
to  afford  no  evidence  of  thought-transference.

It  may  be  added  that  Dr.  C.  S.  Minot  has  found  evidence  in  Case
E,  and  in  other  series  of  squares,  of  a  more  comprehensive  principle
governing  or  influencing  the  order  in  which  the  digits  have  been
named  by  percipients.  He  is  now  engaged  in  investigating  this
subject,  which  promises  to  be  of  considerable  interest,  in  its  bearing
on  our  experiment,  and  from  a  general  psychological  point  of  view.

OTHER   TESTS.

Besides  the  experiments  already  discussed,  the  committee  have
received  one  return  of  trials  of  the  die-test  and  other  forms  of
experiment,  in  all  of  which  the  chance  of  any  single  judgment  being
correct  was  one  in  six.  These  experiments  were  performed  under
the  conditions  designated  by  A  and  B  in  the  color-test ;  that  is,
'*  agent  aware,"  and  "  agent  ignorant.''     The  results  are  :  —


A.

B.

Number  of  correct  judgments     .     .     .
Percentage  of  correct  judgments      .     .

318.0
60.0
18.9
16.7

234.0
35.0
15.0

16.7

This  is  a  striking  result ;  but  it  is  founded  on  an  insufficient  number
of  trials,  and  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  need  to  be  more  defi-
nitely fixed.

It  is  proper  to  say,  in  conclusion,  that  the  computations  which  are
involved  in  this  appendix  have  been  directed  by  well-known  formulae,
to  be  found  in  any  good  treatise  on  probability ;  for  example,  in  the
"  Calcul  des  Probability  "  of  H.  Laurent.  The  chief  formula  is  that
for  the  probability  of  k  occurrences,  in  a  set  of  n  independent  trials,
of  an  event  of  which  the  probability  of  a  single  occurrence  in  one  trial


34


Report  of  Thought- Transference  Committee.


is  equal  to  A.     This   formula  may  be  written  as  follows,  in  which
n\    denotes   "n  factorial;"    that  is,  n !  =  n(n  —  1)  (w  —  2)  .  .  .

3.2.1:—

n\


kl(n  -  k)\


A*(l  -  X)""*.


It  is  the  (k  -f-  l)th  term  in  the  development  of  [A  +  (1  —  A)]\  In
the  color-test,  n  =  50,  A  =  \.  In  the  digit-test,  n  =  10,  100,  or
1,000,  according  to  the  number  of  judgments  in  a  set ;  and  A  =  -j1^.

The  factorials  of  large  numbers  can  be  computed  approximately  by
an  exponential  formula,  which  will  be  found  in  Laurent  (p.  13),  —

nl  =  nne~ny%im,  approximately.

TABLE   XII.
Probabilities;  Single  Chance;  Even;  Set  of  50;  and  =  rV;  set  of  100.


No.

Log.

Probability.

Log.

Probability.

0

84.9485

0.00000,00000,00000,888

5.4243

0.0000266

1

86.6475

0.00000,00000,00044,4

6.4700

0.000295

2

88.0367

0.00000,00000,0109

7.2103

0.00162

3

89.2408

0.00000,00000,174

7.7700

0.00589

4

90.3108

0.00000,00002,05

8.2004

0.0158

5

91.2746

0.00000,00018,8

8.5294

0.0338

6

92.1496

0.00000,00141

8.7746

0.0595

7

92.9480

0.00000,00887

8.9483

0.0888

8

93.6784

0.00000,0477

9.0594

0.115

9

94.3473

0.00000,222

9.1146

0.130   /

10

94.9601

0.00000,912

9.1193

0.132

11

95.5208

0.00003,32

9.0778

0.120

12

96.0327

0.00010,8

8.9937

0.0986

13

96.4986

0.00031,5

8.8700

0.0741

14

96.9206

0.00083,3

8.7090

0.0511

15

97.3008

0.00200

8.5131

0.0326

16

97.6408

0.00437

8.2841

0.0192

n

97.9419

0.00875

8.0237

0.0105

18

98.2051

0.0160

7.7332

0.00541

19

98.4314

0.0270

7.4139

0.00259

20

98.6218

0.0419

7.0671

0.00117

21

98.7767

0.0598

6.6937

0.00049  ,

22

98.8967

0.0788

6.2946

0.000197'

23

98.9821

0.0960

5.8707

0.0000743

24

99.0333

0.108

5.4227

0.0000265

25

99.0504

0.112

4.9513

0.00000894

JAMES  M.  PEIRCE.
E.  C.  PICKERING.


APPENDIX  0.

Possibility  of  Errors  in  Scientific  Researches,  due  to
Thought-Transference.


If  the  theory  of  Richet  is  true,  an  important  error  may  enter  many
scientific  researches  in  which  an  assistant  is  aware  of  facts  a  knowl-
edge of  which  the  observer  intentionally  avoids.  An  excellent  ex-
ample occurs  in  the  revision  of  the  northern  stars,  contained  in  the
Durchmusterung  of  Argelander,  which  has  been  undertaken  by  the
Astronomische  Gesellschaft.  It  was  provided  that  the  observers,
after  familiarizing  themselves  with  the  scale  of  magnitudes  of  the
Durchmusterung,  should  estimate  the  brightness  of  each  star  observed.
The  Durchmusterung  magnitude  was  then  read  aloud  by  the  recorder,
to  enable  the  observer  to  continually  correct  his  estimates  of  the  scale
of  magnitudes.  Let  M  represent  the  number  of  cases  in  which  the
difference  between  the  estimated  and  catalogue  magnitudes  was  D.
If  the  number  of  observations  is  large,  we  should  in  general  expect
that  the  relation  between  N  and  D  would  be  represented  by  a  smooth
curve.  If  no  errors  entered  but  those  due  to  accident,  this  would
become  the  probability  curve.  On  the  other  hand,  if  any  thought-
transference  occurs  between  the  recorder  and  observer,  we  should  ex-
pect an  increase  in  the  value  of  N  when  D  is  zero  ;  that  is,  of  cases
in  which  the  magnitude  was  estimated  correctly.  It  is  accordingly
only  necessary  to  count  the  values  of  N  corresponding  to  various
values  of  D.  These  results  may  then  be  compared  with  that  given
by  the  law  of  frequency  of  error ;  or  a  curve  may  be  constructed
with  the  various  values  of  N  and  D,  not  including  those  in  which  D
equals  zero.  The  value  of  N,  when  D  is  zero,  is  now  derived  from
the  curve  passing  through  the  other  points.  If  the  actual  value  of
N,  when  D  is  zero,  in  general  exceeds  that  given  from  the  curve,  we
may  infer  that  thought-transference  occurs,  unless  some  other  ex-
planation can  be  found.  The  amount  of  material  available  for  this
discussion  is  very  large.  The  number  of  stars  to  be  observed  ex-
ceeds a  hundred  thousand,  each  of  which  is  measured  on  at  least  two
nights.  More  than  a  dozen  observatories  participated  in  the  work ;
so  that  the  test  may  be  applied  to  many  different  persons.  The  stars
between  -\-50°  and  -|~55°  were  observed  at  the  Harvard  College
35


#


36  Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.

Observatory.  A  count  has  been  made  of  the  residuals  in  0,  6,  12,
and  18  hours  of  right  ascension.  This  furnishes  sufficient  material
for  the  present  investigation,  although  only  about  one-sixth  of  the
entire  work.  Similar  estimates  of  magnitude  were  also  made  in  con-,
nection  with  observations  with  the  meridian  photometer,  and  thus  the
results  of  a  number  of  observers  and  recorders  could  be  tested.  The
various  series  employed  are  compared  in  the  successive  lines  of  Table
L,  where  a  comparison  is  also  made  with  the  result  derived  from  the
theory  of  probabilities,  assuming  that  no  error  enters  but  that  due  to
accident.  The  successive  columns  give  a  number  for  reference,  the
initial  of  the  observer  who  becomes  the  percipient  if  any  thought-
transference  occurs,  and  the  recorder  or  agent.  The  letters  C,  E.,  M.,
P.,  P.,  and  W.  indicate  Messrs.  Cutler,  Eaton,  McCormack,  Picker-
ing, Rogers,  and  Wendell  respectively.  When  the  results  of  various
persons  are  combined,  they  are  indicated  by  V.  The  fourth  column
gives  the  number  of  observations  contained  in  the  series ;  the  fifth,
the  average  value  of  the  residual,  or  arithmetical  sum  of  all  the
residuals  divided  by  their  number.  The  sixth  column  gives  the  num-
ber of  cases  in  which  the  residual  is  zero ;  and  the  seventh,  the  ratio
of  these  numbers  to  the  numbers  in  the  fourth  column.  This  quan-
tity is,  therefore,  the  observed  proportion  of  zeros.  From  the  aver-
age deviation  we  may  compute  what  proportion  of  residuals  should  be
zero  according  to  the  theory  of  probabilities.  The  average  deviation
of  each  series  was  next  multiplied  by  .845,  which  gives  the  probable
error  according  to  the  formula  of  Peters,  and  .05  was  divided  by  this
quantity.  The  quotient  gives  the  fraction  of  the  probable  error  which
an  error  must  not  exceed  to  give  a  residual  zero.  A  table  of  the
frequency  of  error  then  gives  the  proportion  of  the  observations  whose
error  should  fall  within  this  limit,  or  which  should  give  residuals  zero.
These  computed  proportions  are  given  in  the  last  column  but  one  of
Table  I.  The  last  column  is  found  by  subtracting  the  computed
from  the  observed  proportion  of  cases  in  which  the  residual  is  zero.
About  four-fifths  of  the  stars  are  estimated  in  the  Durchmusterung
as  fainter  than  the  magnitude  7.9  ;  and  these  only  are  employed,  since
the  brighter  stars  are  much  more  difficult  to  estimate.  In  line  7  all
the  stars  are  included,  and  all  are  brighter  than  this  limit.  This  is
probably  the  cause  of  the  larger  average  deviation.

The  first  four  lines  of  the  table  give  the  results  of  the  observations
of  Professor  Rogers,  in  0,  6,  12,  and  18  hours  of  right  ascension,
respectively,  with  the  meridian  circle.  It  is  impossible  to  determine
whether  the  conditions  in  this  case  were  favorable  to  thought-trans-
ference, as  Mr.  McCormack  is  not  now  living.     He  was  instructed  to


Appendix   0,
TABLE   I.


37


Per-
cipient.

No.  of

No.  of

Observed

Computed

No.

Agent.

Observa-
tions.

A.  D.

Zeros.

Propor-
tions.

Propor-
tions.

O-C

1

E.

M.

981

.223

191

.195

.143

+.052

2

E.

M.

759

.244

129

.170

.129

+  .041

3

E.

M.

458

.231

92

.201

.135

+  .066

4

E.

M.

930

.233

152

.163

.134

+  .029

5

P.

E.

514

.240

74

.144

.131

+.013

6

P.

E.

540

.200

88

.163

.158

+  .005

7

P.

E.

492

.332

51

.104

.096

+  .008

8

P.

C.

513

.226

75

.153

.139

+  .014

9

P.

W.

580

.213

108

.186

.147

+  .039

10

P.

W.

609

.190

97

.159

.167

-.008

11

W.

E.

163

.198

30

.184

.160

+.024

12

w.

C.

141

.160

30

.233

.192

+  .041

13

w.

P.

402

.199

82

.204

.159

+  .045

14

w.

P.

486

.180

100

.206

.177

+  .029

15

E.

V.

3,128

.232

564

.180

.135

+  .045

16

P.

Y.

3,248

.231

493

.152

.136

+.016

17

W.

Y.

1,192

.187

242

.203

.170

+  .033

18

V.

Y.

7,568

.226

1,299

.172

.139

+  .033

record  the  estimated  magnitude  before  calling  out  the  catalogue
magnitude ;  and,  if  he  did  not  look  at  the  catalogue  magnitude  until
then,  no  thought-transference  would  be  indicated.  Line  5  gives  the
observations  made  in  series  1  to  100  with  the  meridian  photometer,  or
between  Feb.  28,  1882,  and  Jan.  23, 1883.  The  observer  had  proba-
bly not  as  yet  acquired  a  fixed  habit  of  estimating  the  magnitudes.
Line  6  relates  to  series  101  to  400  between  the  dates  Jan.  23,  1883,
and  Feb.  7,  1885.  Line  7  relates  to  similar  estimates  of  the  magni-
tudes of  the  standard  stars  of  the  Uranometria  Argentina,  and  are
the  only  estimates  not  relating  to  the  Durchmusterung  magnitudes.
Line  9  contains  the  observations  contained  in  series  301  to  400,  be-
tween July  25, 1884,  and  Feb.  7,  1885  ;  and  line  1Q,  those  from  series
401  to  450,  between  Feb.  10,  1885,  and  April  25,  1885.  The  same
distinction  applies  to  lines  12  and  13.  A  portion  of  the  last  five
series  were  recorded  by  Professor  Searle,  but  not  enough  to  render
a  subdivision  desirable.  Lines  15,  16,  and  17  give  the  results  of  all
of  the  observations  by  the  three  percipients  respectively  ;  and  line  18
gives  the  results  of  all  combined.

Table  II.  gives  the  details  of  the  count  of  the  number  of  residuals


38


Report  of  Thought-Transference   Committee,


of  various  magnitudes.  These  magnitudes  are  given  in  the  first
column,  and  the  successive  columns  give  the  number  of  residuals
in  the  first  fourteen  lines  of  Table  I.  When  the  residual  is  larger
than  one  magnitude,  it  is  indicated  by  an  L  in  the  first  column.  The
numbers  at  the  top  of  the  columns  of  Table  II.  have  the  same  mean-
ing as  those  in  the  first  column  of  Table  I.

TABLE  II.


Re-
sidual.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

13.

13.

14.

+  L.

1

4

_

2


_

14

_

_

_

_

_

_

1

+  1.0

2

-

-

-

-

-

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

+0.9

2

1

-

2

1

-

4

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

+0.8

1

11

-

2

2

2

10

-

1

-

1

-

-

1

+0.7

6

5

4

8

-

1

13

1

3

-

-

1

-

-

+0.6

6

13

8

16

4

3

9

5

2

1

-

1

4

2

+0.5

27

36

8

31

5

8

21

8

8

3

4

1

3

5

+0.4

37

27

25

49

12

17

23

16

16

11

7

2

8

9

+0.3

85

65

40

77

28

26

33

31

22

30

12

6

21

13

+0.2

111

85

62

131

55

44

40

59

37

37

12

7

34

43

+0.1

132

95

65

111

73

63

43

46

78

70

29

16

44

66

0.0

191

127

92

152

74

88

51

75

108

97

30

33

82

100

-0.1

114

95

41

104

54

84

51

68

85

113

26

34

52

89

—0.2

89

72

43

91

69

77

58

63

80

101

13

20

53

70

-0.3

68

49

28

67

51

52

34

53

50

72

14

10

46

45

—0.4

37

28

12

36

22

35

31

52

44

42

4

5

30

14

—0.5

19

16

12

26

24

15

20

20

20

17

6

3

17

12

—0.6

14

6

5

7

16

14

16

12

10

7

-

1

2

10

-0.7

9

5

4

6

10

6

8

2

7

4

3

-

2

3

—0.8

6

4

2

2

8

4

5

2

4

2

2

-

1

1

—0.9

2

2

-

2

3

-

1

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

—1.0

4

3

1

2

2

1

2

-

2

2

-

-

-

-

— L.

18

8

6

6

1

-

-

-

2

-

-

—

2

2

Every  residual  in  the  last  column  of  Table  I.,  with  one  exception,
is  positive.  The  actual  number  of  residuals  equal  to  zero  is,  there-
fore, in  excess  of  that  given  by  theory ;  and  this  effect  is  most
marked  in  the  cases  of  Professor  Rogers  and  Mr.  Wendell.  It  would
not  be  safe,  however,  to  infer  from  this  the  existence  of  any  thought-
transference  until  all  other  explanations  of  this  deviation  have  been
carefully  considered.  If  the  probable  error  is  diminished  in  any
series  of  observations,  the  theoretical  number  of  zero-residuals  would
be  increased.     But,  in  almost  every  series  of  observations,  the  num-


Appendix  0.  39

ber  of  large  residuals  is  greater  than  that  given  by  theory,  on  account
of  various  sources  of  large  errors.  Such,  in  the  present  case,  are
variability  of  the  stars,  clouds,  error  in  identification  or  of  record.
According  to  theory,  the  entire  number  of  residuals  exceeding  a  mag-
nitude should  not  exceed  half  a  dozen,  or  one  tenth  part  of  its  actual
amount.  On  the  other  hand,  the  estimated  magnitudes  differ  syste-
matically from  those  of  the  catalogue,  as  is  shown  in  several  series
by  the  difference  in  the  number  of  positive  and  negative  residuals.
The  effect  of  this  would  be  to  diminish  the  theoretical  proportion  of
zero  residuals.  Moreover,  if  thought-transference  really  exists,  the
excess  of  zero-residuals  should  not  be  included  in  deducing  the  prob-
able error.  The  latter  would  then  become  larger,  and  the  computed
proportion  of  zero-residuals  would  be  diminished.  If  the  recorder
should  enter  the  catalogue  magnitude  by  mistake  for  that  estimated,
the  number  of  zero-residuals  would  be  increased.  But,  with  the
careful  recorders  employed,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  this  effect
could  be  sensible.

A  comparison  must  next  be  made,  of  the  number  of  zero-residuals
with  those  of  other  magnitudes.  In  Table  III.,  the  first  column  gives
the  magnitudes  of  the  residuals,  as  in  Table  II.  The  next  three
columns  give  for  the  three  observers  the  proportion  of  residuals  of
each  magnitude  which  constitute  series  15,  16,  and  17.  The  next
three  columns  give  the  residuals  found  by  subtracting  from  these
quantities  the  theoretical  proportions,  according  to  the  law  of  the
frequency  of  error.  A  correction  is  first  applied  for  the  constant
differences  in  the  estimated  scales  from  that  of  the  Durchmusterung.
In  the  case  of  Professor  Eogers,  his  estimates,  on  the  average,  were
too  faint  by  .02.  Mr.  Wendell's  estimates,  and  my  own,  were  too
bright  by  .05  and  .07,  respectively.

The  last  three  columns  show  that  the  agreement  with  the  proba-
bility-curve is  all  that  can  be  desired,  except  for  the  residual's  zero.
The  graphical  comparison  by  drawing  a  smooth  curve  through  the
given  point  is  not  needed.  The  zero-residuals,  however,  show  a
marked  result  of  observation  over  theory,  which  is  much  too  great  to
be  ascribed  to  accident,  at  least  in  the  case  of  Messrs.  Rogers  and
Wendell.

One  other  source  of  error  remains  to  be  considered.  The  stars  in
the  Durchmusterung  are  not  distributed  regularly,  according  to  mag-
nitude. There  is  an  excess  of  those  in  which  the  tenth  of  a  magni-
tude is  either  0  or  5,  and  a  deficit  for  1,  4,  6,  and  9  tenths.  If  a
similar  irregularity  occurred  in  the  scale  of  an  observer,  we  should
expect  an  excess  of  residuals  0  and  5,  as  compared  with  the  other


40


Report  of  Thought  Transference   Committee,
TABLE  III.


Residual.

15.

16.

17.

15.

16.

17.

+L.

0.002

0.004

0.001

+0.002

+0.004

+0.001

+  1.0

0.001

0.002

0.000

+0.001

+0.002

0.000

+0.9

0.002

0.002

0.001

+0.001

+0.001

+0.001

+0.8

0.004

0.005

0.002

+0.001

+0.002

+0.002

+  0.7

0.007

0.00G

0.001

-0.001

+0.001

—0.001

+0.0

0.014

0.007

0.006

-0.004

—0.003

+0.002

+0.5

0.033

0.016

0.011

-0.003

—0.004

0.000

+0.4

0.044

0.029

0.022

-0.014

—0.009

—0.005

+0.3

0.085

0.052

0.044

-0.003

—0.009

—0.013

+0.2

0.124

0.084

0.080

+0.011

—0.006

—0.016

+0.1

0.130

0.114

0.130

0.000

—0.002

—0.008

0.0

0.181

0.151

•  0.205

+0.045

+0.019

+0.040

-0.1

0.113

0.140

0.108

-0.012

+0.005

+0.003

-0.2

0.094

0.138

0.131

-0.010

+0.015

—0.007

-0.3

0.0G8

0.096

0.096

-0.008

—0.004

—0.002

-0.4

0.03G

0.070

0.044

-0.012

—0.001

—0.014

-0.5

0.023

0.036

0.032

-0.005

—0.010

+0.004

-0.6

0.010

0.023

0.011

-0.004

—(J.  004

0.000

-0.7

0.008

0.011

0.007

0.000

—0.002

+0.004

-0.8

0.004

0.008

0.004

+0.001

0.000

+0.003

-0.9

0.002

0.002

0.000

+  0.002

+0.002

0.000

-1.0

0.003

0.003

0.000

+0.003

+0.003

0  000

— L.

0.012

0.001

0.004

+0  012

+0.001

+0.004

residuals.  Unfortunately,  the  only  means  of  determining  the  irregu-
larity in  an  observer's  seale  is  by  counting  the  number  of  times  he
has  employed  each  tenth  of  a  magnitude.  It  then  becomes  difficult
to  decide  how  far  this  irregularity  is  caused  by  that  of  the  Durch-
musterung.  A  discussion  of  the  magnitudes  7.5  to  9.2  shows,  that,
in  the  Durchmusterung,  the  proportion  of  stars  having  the  tenth  of  a
magnitude  0  or  5  is  .22,  instead  of  .10.  About  .05  arc  in  each  class,
differing  one-tenth  from  these,  or  having  the  tenths,  1,  4,  6,  and  9.
About  .09  differ  two-tenths,  or  equal  2,  3,  7,  and  8,  each.  These
proportions,  for  Professor  Rogers,  become  .10,  .07,  and  .10.  My
early  estimates  were  mainly  made  in  half  magnitudes  ;  and  in  line  5
of  Table  I.  the  proportions  are,  accordingly,  .22,  .04,  and  .10.  Later,
my  scale  became  the  same  as  Mr.  Wendell's,  and  gave  the  propor-
tions, .14,  .08,  and  .1*0.

This  source  of  error  will  be  eliminated  if  the  scale,  either  of  the
catalogue   or  of   the   observer,  is   rendered   uniform,  however  great


Appendix   C.


41


the  irregularity  is  in  the  other.  Accordingly,  a  re-count  of  the  re-
siduals was  made,  selecting  the  first  twenty-five  in  each  series  for
which  the  Durchrnusterung  magnitude  was  8.3  ;  and  an  equal  number
for  each  of  the  magnitudes,  8.4,  8.5,  to  9.2.  This  count  was  made  for
each  of  the  series  given  in  lines  1,  2,  3,  4,  13,  and  14.  Lines  11
and  12  were  also  included  with  13.  It  did  not  seem  necessary  to  re-
count my  own  estimates,  since  the  evidence  of  thought-transference
is  here  very  slight.  The  results  of  this  count  are  given  in  Table  IV.,
which  has  a  form  similar  to  Table  III.  The  four  series  of  Professor
Rogers  are  combined,  as  in  line  15  of  Table  I.  Occasionally  there
were  not  a  sufficient  number  of  estimates  of  a  given  magnitude,  and
in  these  cases  the  proportion  of  each  was  assumed  from  what  observa-
tions were  actually  made.

TABLE   IV.


Residual.

13.

14.

15.

13.

14.

15.

+L.

0.000

0.000

0.015

0.000

0.000

+0.015

+  10

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

+0.9

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

—0.001

+0.S

0.004

0.000

0.004

+0.002

—0.002

+0.001

+0.7

0.004

0.000

0.005

0.000

—0.004

0.000

+0.6

0.004

0.034

0.009

—0.007

+0.023

—0.003

+0.5

0.062

0.032

0.022

+0.037

+0.005

—0.002

+0.4

0.0S7

0.012

0.039

+0.030

—0.045

—0.004

+0.3

0.0S1

0.064

0.072

—0.015

-0.032

+0.006

+0.2

0.133

0.143

0.095

—0.005

+0.005

+0.003

+0.1

0.130

0.212

0.110

—0.035

+0.047

—0.008

0.0

0.176

0.183

0.145

+0.011

+0.018

+0.012

—0.1

0.104

0.140

0.137

—0.0:34

+0.002

+0.003

—0.2

0.092

0.113

0.115

—0.006

+0.015

—0.003

—0.3

0.081

0.027

0.105

+0.023

—0.031

+0.010

—0.4

0.028

0.032

0.058

0.000

+0.004

—0.009

—0.5

0.000

0.004

0.036

—0.011

—0.007

—0.007

—0.6

0.000

0.004

0.015

—0.003

+0.001

—0.009

—0.7

0.000

0.000

0.009

—0.001

—0.001

—0.004

—0.8

0.000

0.000

0.005

0.000

0.000

—0.002

—0.9

0.004

0.000

0.002

+0.004

0.000

+0.001

—1.0

0.000

0.000

a  ooi

0.000

0.000

+0.001

— L.

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.000

0.000

+0.001

In  each  of  the  three  last  columns  of  Table  IV.  the  differences  cor-
responding to  the  zero-residuals  are  greatly  diminished.     They  are


42  Report  of  Thought- Transference   Committee.

still  positive  ;  but  this  may  be  clue  to  the  fact  that  the  reduction  is
only  approximate,  and  the  number  of  observations  insufficient  to
render  the  accidental  errors  very  small.  At  least,  the  differences,
which  in  Table  III.  were  so  large  that  it  was  impossible  to  assign
them  to  chance,  are  now  not  much  greater  than  the  other  quantities
in  the  same  column,  and  do  not  require  any  special  cause  to  account
for  them.  The  reality  of  this  small  positive  excess  is,  however,  con-
firmed by  some  other  facts.  It  is  perceptible  in  line  7  of  Table  I.,
although  in  the  Uranometria  Argentina  there  is  no  perceptible  excess
of  the  magnitudes  0  and  5  tenths.  If  due  to  the  irregularity  of  the
scale,  it  should  be  more  marked  in  line  5  than  in  the  following  line.
Finally,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  effect  appears  so  much
more  marked  in  Mr.  Wendell's  observations  than  in  mine,  when  we
were  both  employing  the  same  scale.  All  these  deviations  are,  how-
ever, so  small  that  much  weight  should  not  be  assigned  to  them.

The  results  of  Tables  III.  and  IV.  are  represented  on  the  opposite
page.  Horizontal  distances  indicate  the  magnitude  of  the  residuals,
and  vertical  distances  the  corresponding  number  of  residuals  expressed
as  a  fraction  of  the  whole  number  of  residuals.  The  smooth  curves
indicate  theoretical  values,  the  broken  lines  the  results  of  observa-
tion. Figs.  1,  2,  and  3  show  the  proportion  of  residuals  of  various
magnitudes  corresponding  to  the  observations  of  Professor  Rogers,
Mr.  Wendell,  and  myself.  They,  therefore,  show  the  results  of  the
second,  fourth,  and  third  columns  of  Table  III.  The  preponderance
of  zero-residuals  is  well  shown,  in  Figs.  1  and  2,  by  the  projec-
tion of  the  broken  lines  above  the  curves.  Fig.  4  represents  the
corresponding  values  from  Professor  Rogers's  observations,  after
correction  for  the  inequality  in  the  scale  of  the  Durchmusterung.
These  quantities  are  also  given  in  the  fourth  column  of  Table  IV.
The  mean  of  the  second  and  third  columns  of  Table  IV.  are  shown
in  Fig.  5.  It  gives  the  result  of  Mr.  Wendell's  observations  after
correction  for  inequality  of  scale.  Figs.  4  and  5  show  how  greatly
the  excess  of  zero-residuals  is  reduced  by  the  application  of  these
corrections.  Figs.  6  and  7  show  the  differences  between  the  observed
and  computed  proportion  of  residuals  in  Professor  Rogers's  observa-
tions before  and  after  the  correction  for  inequality  of  scale.  They
represent  the  fifth  column  of  Table  III.,  and  the  last  column  of
Table  IV.

It  is  extremely  desirable  that  a  discussion  similar  to  this  may  be
made  at  the  other  observatories  taking  part  in  the  revision  of  the
Durchmusterung.  The  apparent  absence  of  thought-transference  in
the  observations  at  Cambridge  by  no  means  proves  that  it  may  not


Appendix  0.


43


JS


-*5


.00


i  a        -09


0  <+Q5  +JQ


£>


J5


JD


Frg.5.


■OS


.DO


0  -OS


+05  +-IQ


+.05


Fig.6.


.TO


R.


V


-j


a       «-o


a      +os       +ia


+.05


Fi*7.


K.


-i


a       -09


405  +10


GRAPHICAL  REPRESENTATION  OP  THE  RESULTS  OP  TABLES  III.  AND  IV.


exist  elsewhere.  The  time  required  to  apply  this  test  is  so  small  that
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  opportunity  will  not  be  neglected,  to  search
for  a  phenomenon,  which,  if  real,  would  exert  so  wide  an  influence  on
human  affairs.

E.  C.  PICKERING.


APPENDIX   D.


Thought-Transference  by  Means  of  Pictures.

Besides  the  experiments  called  for  by  Circular  No.  4,  Mr.  W.  H.
Pickering  of  Boston  met  with  some  success  in  the  experiments  which
have  attracted  so  much  attention  from  the  English  society,  —  experi-
ments in  which  a  drawing  thought  of  by  one  person  is  reproduced  by
another,  who  has  no  visible  means  of  obtaining  information  as  to  what
the  drawing  may  be.  In  the  accompanying  illustration  we  have
reproduced  all  the  figures  as  they  were  drawn,  numbering  them  from
1  to  52.  The  upper  line  in  each  case  contains  the  originals,  and  the
lower  the  reproductions  The  originals  were  made  either  by  Mr.
Pickering  or  by  one  of  his  friends  ;  and  the  reproductions  were  most
of  them  made  by  a  young  lady,  who,  on  one  or  two  evenings  when


y/.w:  &mQ   #-0^

31  A/Z-  /£><-  J/  a  2?-  W?'  ©

040,,  /ZEE*  /2>*  -m>


2J>       I    /  **


a^^Vt^B  S   #.$7B0&


\\\9j


FSffVV  V


=)  c^


J7,         »1


Jlr  -»e,


)£»•


44


Appendix  B.  45

the  experiments  were  tried,  met  with  some  success.  It  may  be  well
to  state,  that,  with  Figs.  6,  7,  8,  and  20,  certain  extraneous  causes
acted  which  interfered  with  the  results.  The  first  forty  figures  were
all  made  in  one  clay  ;  Figs.  41  to  47,  inclusive,  were  made  by  another
person  ;  the  remaining  figures  were  made  by  the  sensitive,  so  called,
on  a  day  when  she  showed  no  powers  of  mind-reading.


CIRCULAR  No.  5.

Issued  by  the  Thought-Transference  Committee.

Early  in  the  year,  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  issued
a  circular  (No.  4)  with  a  view  to  obtaining  the  co-operation  of  all
persons  interested  in  their  investigation.  In  that  circular  it  was
stated  that  the  committee  desired  to  make  experiments  upon  persons
supposed  to  have  the  faculty  of  mind-reading,  and  requested  that  any
persons  conscious  of  the  power,  and  willing  to  aid  the  committee,
should  send  their  names  and  addresses  to  the  secretary  of  the  society.
The  main  object  of  the  circular  was  to  describe  experiments  in  the
guessing  of  digits,  the  colors  of  cards,  and  the  number  upon  a  die,
which  should  show  whether  the  power  of  mind-reading  existed  to  any
extent  in  ordinary  persons,  —  experiments  similar  to  those  which  have
been  carried  out  by  Professor  Charles  Richet  of  Paris.  In  answer  to
this  circular,  a  large  number  of  returns  have  been  received,  which
have  been  carefully  discussed  by  members  of  the  committee ;  and  a
report  has  been  prepared,  which  will  appear  in  the  first  number  of
the  Proceedings  of  the  Society.  It  is  thought  that  these  returns  are
ample  to  cover  the  form  of  investigation  proposed.

It  is  now  the  wish  of  the  committee  to  carry  the  investigation  one
step  farther.  The  most  promising  results  obtained  by  the  English
society  were  when  the  conceptions  were  those  of  simple  geometrical
forms.  It  will  be  understood,  that,  in  the  former  circular  (No.  4)  of
our  committee,  the  conceptions  were  those  of  number  and  color.  In
the  series  of  experiments  which  follows,  it  is  sought  to  give  direc-
tions by  which  experiments  may  be  tried  in  transferring  from  one
mind  to  another  the  conceptions  of  geometrical  forms  in  such  a  way
that  the  result  may  be  readily  tabulated,  and  subjected  to  mathemati-
cal discussion.  The  percipient  should  be  told  after  each  guess  if  he
is  right,  that  he  may  endeavor  to  put  himself  in  the  same  frame  of
mind  for  the  next  following  trial.  This  can  do  no  harm  in  the  ex-
periments described  below,  as  the  chance  of  his  guessing  correctly
remains  the  same  whether  he  knows  or  not  as  to  the  correctness  of
any  previous  guess.


46  Circular  No.  5.

It  is  desirable  that  records  of  experiments  should  be  forwarded  to
the  secretary  as  fast  as  they  are  made ;  and  all  returns  should  be  in
his  hands  by  Sept.  15,  1885.

All  inquiries  and  communications  should  be  addressed  to  the  secre-
tary, Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  19  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
(Signed)
H.  P.  BOWDITCH,  Chairman.        E.  C.  PICKERING.
C.  C.  JACKSON.  WILLIAM  WATSON.

C.  S.  MINOT.  N.  D.  C.  HODGES,  Secretary.

J.  M.  PEIRCE.


DIRECTIONS  FOR  MAKING  EXPERIMENTS.

In  these  directions,  the  person  whose  thought  is  to  be  transferred
is  called  the  agent ;  the  person  to  whom  the  agent's  thought  is  to  be
transferred  is  called  the  percipient.  We  number  our  tests  continu-
ously from  Circular  No.  4.

Fourth,  Card-Face  Test.  — The  kings,  queens,  and  knaves  are  re-
moved from  a  pack  of  playing-cards  ;  so  that  just  forty  cards  remain,
running  from  the  ace  to  the  ten,  inclusive,  in  the  four  suits.  The  agent
holds  the  pack  of  forty  cards,  shuffles  it,  cuts  or  opens  it  at  random,
and  observes  the  card  thus  disclosed.  He  notes  only  its  denomina-
tion, as  an  ace,  two,  or  card  of  other  number;  paying  no  attention  to
its  suit  or  color ;  not  thinking  of  its  value,  either  as  an  abstract  num-
ber, or  as  a  trick-taking  card  ;  but  fixing  his  mind  on  the  arrangement
of  pips  on  its  face,  by  which  the  value  of  the  card  is  ordinarily  recog-
nized by  a  player.  The  percipient,  having  his  thoughts  also  occupied
with  the  different  arrangements  which  appear  on  the  faces  of  cards,
tries  to  name  the  denomination  (not  the  color  or  suit)  of  the  card  seen
and  thought  of  by  the  agent.  He  immediately  enters  his  judgment
in  blank  D,  under  the  heading  "  Percipient."  The  agent  then  names
the  true  card,  which  the  percipient  repeats  aloud,  and  then  enters  in
blank  D,  against  his  own  judgment  of  the  same,  under  the  heading
"  Agent."     The  agent  re-shuffles  the  pack,  and  the  trial  is  repeated.

The  cards  should  be  held  out  of  the  sight  of  the  percipient ;  and
both  experimenters  should  use  every  precaution  to  avoid  the  passage
of  any  intimation,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  from  the
agent  to  the  percipient.  They  should  speak  no  more  than  is  neces-
sary. Thus  the  conversation  should  be  only  as  follows ;  where,  for
the  sake  of  illustration,  we  suppose  that  the  percipient  guesses  "nine,"
and  that  the  true  card  is  a  "  four :  " —

Agent  (as  soon  as  he  has  noted  the  card).  — Yes  (or,  Ready).

Percipient.  —  Nine  (enters  9  in  blank  D).


Directions  for  Making  Experiments.


47


Agent.  —  Four.

Percipient  (repeating  after  the  agent) .  —  Four  (enters  4  in  blank  D) .

The  agent  should  thoroughly  shuffle  the  pack  before  each  trial,  so
as  to  make  each  cutting  a  pure  matter  of  chance.  The  percipient
should  cover  the  record  while  guessing,  and  should  avoid  thinking
of  the  cards  already  cut,  and  of  his  own  previous  judgments,  so  as
to  receive  freely  every  influence  of  thought-transference,  if  such  an
influence  exists.     The  percipient  should  not  unduly  hurry  his  guess.


Figures  for  Use  in  the  "  Diagram-Test  "  of  Thought-Transference.


The  experiment  should  not  be  continued  at  any  sitting  after  either
experimenter  is  tired,  or  otherwise  unable  to  fix  his  mind  on  the  work.

It  is  desired  that  each  pair  of  experimenters  (the  same  person
acting  as  agent,  and  the  same  person  as  percipient)  should  hand  in
their  results  in  sets  of  a  hundred  judgments  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that
some  pairs  of  experimenters  will  send  in  several  (say  ten)  such  sets.
Less  than  a  hundred  judgments  from  one  pair  of  experimenters  will
be  hardly  of  value  to  the  committee.


48  Circular  No.  5.

It  will  be  interesting  for  every  pair  of  experimenters  to  try  different
sets  of  experiments,  reversing  the  parts  of  percipient  and  agent.
But  these  parts  should  be  unchanged  throughout  each  set  of  a  hundred
judgments.

The  agent  should  take  pains  to  have  the  exact  pack  of  forty  cards
in  his  hands  at  each  trial.

The  ten  cards  prepared  for  the  diagram-test  may,  however,  also
be  used  in  this  experiment ;  and  trials  with  those  cards  will  also  be
acceptable  to  the  committee.

Fifth,  Diagram- Test.  — On  the  preceding  page  are  given  ten  simple
figures  ;  and  accompan}Ting  this  circular  is  sent  a  set  of  ten  cards,  on
each  of  which  is  printed  one  of  the  figures.  The  agent  is  to  take
the  pack  of  cards,  and  shuffle  them,  and  then  is  to  place  before  him,
out  of  sight  of  the  percipient,  the  card  at  which  the  pack  may  be  cut.
He  should  then  look  as  steadily  as  possible,  or  at  least  keep  his
mind  fixed  upon,  the  figure  upon  the  card ;  and  the  percipient,  with
pencil  and  paper  before  him,  should  endeavor  to  reproduce  that  one
of  the  ten  diagrams  which  he  thinks  the  agent  may  have  in  sight.
The  resulting  drawings  should  all  be  entered  according  to  Blank  E,
and  forwarded  to  the  secretary.  To  render  the  discussion  more  easy,
it  is  important  that  the  drawings  should  be  made  in  sets  of  ten  ;  that
is,  each  percipient  should  make  at  least  ten  trials.

That  the  percipient  may  not  be  too  hasty  in  deciding  upon  the  dia-
gram which  he  thinks  the  agent  may  have  in  mind,  it  is  directed  that
the  percipient  shall  actually  draw  the  figures.  Those  who  prefer  may
simply  name  the  figure,  without  drawing  it ;  but  it  should  be  stated,
on  the  returns  made  to  the  secretary,  which  method  was  pursued.

Sixth,  Free  Draiuing  Test.  —  Many  must  have  heard  of  the  striking
results  obtained  by  the  English  society,  where  the  percipient  was  able
to  reproduce  a  drawing  which  he  had  not  seen,  but  was  only  thought
of  in  the  agent's  mind.  We  have  already  given  specific  directions
for  the  carrying-out  of  this  experiment  with  a  set  of  ten  fixed  dia-
grams ;  but  as  the  experiment  of  free  drawing  may  prove  more  in-
teresting to  some  persons,  it  is  hoped  that  more  elaborate  figures
may  be  tried,  and  the  results  forwarded.  In  this  experiment,  the
agent  makes  any  drawing  he  chooses,  and  the  percipient,  without
knowing  the  drawing  made  by  the  agent,  tries  to  make  a  reproduction
of  it  on  another  sheet.

The  percipient  should  not  be  allowed,  during  the  drawing,  to  see
the  motion  of  any  part  of  the  pencil,  or  to  hear  any  sound  from  it.
The  agent  should  avoid  taking  suggestions  for  his  drawings  from  sur-
rounding  objects,  or  from  objects  which  are  specially  likely  to  be
present  to  the  mind  of  the  percipient.


Extracts  from  the  Records.  49

Seventh,  Game.  —  It  is  not  expected  that  the  game  with  cards  de-
scribed below  will  give  results  which  will  be  in  themselves  of  import-
ance, but  it  is  possible  that  through  it  some  persons  may  be  found
who  possess  the  power  of  thought-transference  without  knowing  it.
If  such  persons  are  willing  to  submit  themselves  to  proper  tests,  they
will  very  materially  aid  the  committee  in  its  work.  Four  persons  are
seated,  as  in  whist.  A  pack  of  cards  is  divided  between  them,  so
that  each  player  holds  all  of  one  suit.  Each  player  in  turn  then
selects  a  card  from  his  hand,  places  it  face  downward  on  the  table,
and  tries  to  communicate  to  his  partner,  by  thought-transference,  the
number  of  the  card.  If  the  partner  names  the  card  correctly,  it  is
turned  up,  and  placed  on  the  table  in  front  of  him.  If  the  power
of  thought-transference  exists  in  perfection  between  all  the  players,
it  is  evident,  that,  after  each  has  played  thirteen  times,  the  suits  will
have  all  changed  hands;  i.e.,  the  player  who  began  by  holding
spades  will  end  by  holding  clubs,  etc.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there
is  no  thought-transference,  the  successful  guesses  are  only  such  as
are  due  to  chance.  It  is  also  evident  that  each  successful  guess
increases  the  probability  of  further  success,  until  finally,  when  twelve
cards  have  been  named  correctly,  the  thirteenth  is  known  with  cer-
tainty.

—— ^— ___ ____ ^^^^__  t

EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  SECRETARIES'  RECORDS.

Boston,  Dec.  18. —  First  meeting  of  the  society.  The  meeting  was  called  to  order  by  Prof .
E.  C.  Pickering.  Mr.  S.  H.  Scudder  was  chosen  chairman  pro  tern..,  and  Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges
secretary  pro  tern.  Mr.  Scndder  stated  the  origin  of  the  society,  and  what  had  been  done  by
the  committee  on  organization,  and  called  on  the  secretary  to  read  the  list  of  the  names  of  those
who  had  accepted  the  invitation  to  join,  issued  by  the  committee  on  organization.  The  first
business  in  order  was  the  election  of  a  council,  and  the  following  were  elected:  G.  Stanley  Hall,
George  S.  Fullerton,  William  James,  E.  C.  Pickering,  three  years;  Simon  Newcomb,  C.  S.
Minot,  H.  P.  Bowditch,  N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  two  years;  George  F.  Barker,  S.  H.  Scudder,  C.  C.
Everett,  Morefield  Storey,  John  Trowbridge,  William  Watson,  Alpheus  Hyatt,  one  year.  It
was  Voted,  That  the  American  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Psychical  Research  accepts  with
thanks  the  offer  of  the  English  society  to  furnish  its  members  with  the  proceedings  of  the  English
society  at  reduced  rates.  The  sub-committee  on  work,  of  the  committee  on  organization,  made
an  informal  report,  in  which  they  suggested  that  the  society  should  consider  the  three  main  ques-
tions :  (1)  Thought-transference  ;  (2)  Hypnotism  ;  (3)  Spiritualism,  physical  manifestation.
Adjourned.

Boston,  Jan.  8. —  Second  meeting  of  the  society.  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering  in  the  chair.  After
the  routine  business,  the  society  proceeded  to  the  election  of  six  members  of  the  council,  three
to  hold  office  for  three  years,  and  three  for  two,  and  chose  Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce,  Coleman  Sellars,
Major  A.  A.  Woodhull,  three  years;  Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  C.  C.  Jackson,  W.  H.  Pickering,
two  years.  Professor  Pickering  then  declared  the  organization  of  the  society  complete,  and  spoke
of  the  need  of  some  investigations.  Dr.  Bowditch  spoke  of  the  intention  of  the  council  to
appoint  a  committee  on  thought-transference.    A  lengthy  discussion  followed.    Adjourned.

Boston,  June  4.  —  Third  meeting  of  the  society.  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering  in  the  chair.  The
first  report  of  the  committee  on  thought-transference  was  presented.  Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce  gave
an  abstract  of  the  discussion  by  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering  and  himself  of  the  discussion  of  the  returns
in  answer  to  Circular  No.  4.  Dr.  Minot  was  called  to  the  chair,  and  Professor  Pickering  pre-
sented a  paper  on  the  possibility  of  errors  in  scientific  research  due  to  thought-transference.
Dr.  James  reported  that  the  committee  on  mediumistic  phenomena  had  made  a  number  of  visits
to  mediums,  but  had  nothing  of  importance  to  report.    Adjourned.


50  Constitution,


CONSTITUTION.

Article  I.  —  Name  and  Objects.

Section  1.  This  association  shall  be  called  the  American  Soci-
ety for  Psychical  Research.

Sect.  2.  The  object  of  the  Society  shall  be  the  systematic  study
of  the  laws  of  mental  action.

Article  II.  —  Government.

Section  1.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Society,  a  Council  shall  be
chosen  consisting  of  twenty-one  members,  —  seven  to  hold  office  for
one  year,  seven  for  two  years,  and  seven  for  three  years  ;  and  there-
after seven  shall  be  chosen  by  the  members  at  each  annual  meeting,
to  serve  for  three  years.

Sect.  2.  The  Council  shall  elect  from  its  number  each  year,  at
its  first  meeting  after  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Society,  the  follow-
ing officers  of  the  Society  :  a  President,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Treasurer,
who  shall  discharge  the  duties  usually  assigned  to  these  respective
officers.  The  Council  shall  elect  as  many  Vice-Presidents  as  shall  be
deemed  advisable.

Sect.  3.  The  Council  shall  exercise  general  supervision  of  the
investigations  of  the  Society,  and  shall  appoint  the  investigating
committees.

Sect.  4.  Vacancies  in  the  Council,  caused  by  death  or  resigna-
tion, shall  be  filled  by  the  Council.

Article  III.  —  Members  and  Associates.

Section  1.  Any  person  of  respectable  character  and  attainments
is  eligible  to  the  Society  as  an  associate.  Associates  shall  receive  all
the  publications  of  the  Societ}7,  may  participate  in  all  the  meetings,
present  communications,  and  join  in  the  debates.

Sect.  2.  Members,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  in  number,  may
be  elected  by  the  Council  from  the  body  of  associates.  Members
have  all  the  privileges  of  associates,  are  entitled  to  vote,  and  are
eligible  to  the  Council.

Sect.  3.  Associates  may  be  elected  by  ballot  at  any  meeting  of
the  Society,  after  nomination  in  writing  by  two  members  or  associates,
and  approval  by  the  Council.


Constitution,  51

Sect.  4.  Each  member  and  associate  shall  pay  to  the  treasurer  an
annual  assessment  of  three  dollars.  The  name  of  any  member  or
associate  two  years  in  arrears  for  annual  assessments  shall  be  erased
from  the  list  of  the  Society ;  and  no  such  person  shall  be  restored
until  he  has  paid  his  arrearages,  or  has  been  re-elected.

Sect.  5.  Any  member  or  associate  may  be  dropped  from  the  rolls
of  the  Society  on  recommendation  of  the  Council  and  a  two-thirds
vote  at  any  meeting  of  the  Society,  notice  of  such  recommendation
having  been  given  at  least  two  weeks  previously.

Article  IV. — Meetings.
Section  1.  The  annual  meeting  shall  be  held  the  first  Tuesday  in
October.

Sect.  2.  Other  meetings  may  be  held  at  the  call  of  the  Council.

Article  V.  —  Quorum.

Ten  members  shall  constitute  a  quorum  of  the  Society,  and  five  a
quorum  of  the  Council.

Article  VI.  —  Accounts.

A  committee  of  two  shall  be  appointed  at  each  annual  meeting  to
audit  the  accounts  of  the  treasurer  for  the  year  closing  with  that
meeting.

Article  VII.  —  Similar  Societies.

It  shall  be  the  policy  of  this  Society,  by  correspondence  and  other-
wise, to  co-operate  with  societies  of  similar  object  elsewhere.

Article  VIII.  —  By-Laws.

Section  1.  By-laws  recommended  by  the  Council  may  be  adopted
at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Sect.  2.  By-laws  may  be  rescinded  or  changed  upon  recommenda-
tion of  the  Council,  at  any  meeting,  by  a  majority  vote.

Article  IX. — Amendments.

Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  recommended  by  the  Council,
may  be  adopted  at  any  annual  meeting  by  a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the
members  present.


52


List  of  Members.


LIST   OF  MEMBERS.


Dr.  Chaeles  C.  Abbott,  Trenton,  N.J.

Prof.  G.  F.  Barker,  3909  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Dr.H.  P.  Bowditch,  Harv.Med.  School,  Boston.

Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  233  Clarendon  St.,
Boston.

Edward  Burgess,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Lucien  Carr,  Cambridge.

Dr.  J.  R.  Chadwick,  270  Clarendon  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Edward  D.  Cope,  2100  Pine  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  W.  O.  Crosby,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  R.  Cross,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Geo.  Dimmock,  61  Sacramento  St.,  Cambridge.

Prof.  W.  B.  Dwight,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.

Dr.  R.  T.  Edes,  76  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

S.  F.  Emmons,  23  Lafayette  Place,  Washington.

Glendower  Evans,  39  Court  St.,  Boston.

Rev.  C.  C.  Everett,  53  Garden  St.,  Cambridge.

Dr.  Persifor  Frazer,  917  Clinton  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  G.  S.  Fullerton,  3629  Walnut  St.,  Phila.

Thomas  Gaffield,  54  Allen  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  F.  H.  Gerrish,  Portland,  Me.

G.  K.  Gilbert,  Box  591,  Washington.

Prof.  Asa  Gray,  Cambridge.

Rev.  John  B.  Haines,  Burlington,  N.J.

E.  II.  Hall,  Harvard  College,  Cambridge.

Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Baltimore,  Md.

Prof.  James  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Prof.  A.  S.  Hardy,  Hanover,  N.H.

William  T.  Harris,  Concord,  Mass.

Angelo  Heilprin,  Acad,  of  Nat.  Sc,  Phila.

Samuel  Henshaw,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  Cambridge.

N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  Cambridge.

Dr.  J.  B.  Holder,  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Cen-
tral Park,  N.Y.

Henry  Holt,  29  West  23d  St.,  N.Y.

Gardiner  G.  Hubbard,  Washington.

Prof.  A.  Hyatt,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

C.  C.  Jackson,  181  Commonwealth  Ave.,  Bos-
ton.

Prof.  William  James,  Cambridge.

J.  H.  Kidder,  Smithson.  Inst.,  Washington.

Prof.  D.  G.  Lyon,  7  Lowell  St.,  Cambridge.

J.  B.  Marcou,  National  Museum,  Washington.


Prof.  John  P.  Marshall,  College  Hill,  Mass.

W.  J.  McGee,  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  Washington.

Dr.  C.  S.  Minot,  25  Mount  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Simon  Xewcomb,  Washington.

Prof.  A.  S.  Packard,  Providence,  R.I.

Prof.  B.  O.  Peirce,  Box  74,  Waverly,  Mass.

Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge.

Prof.  Edward  C.  Pickering,  Cambridge.

W.  H.  Pickering,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  Boeton.

Raphael  Pumpelly,  Newport,  R.I.

Dr.  C.  P.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

F.  W.  Putnam,  Cambridge.

Dr.  J.  J.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

N.  A.  Randolph,  3706  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  E.  T.  Reichert,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  Phila.

Prof.  J.  M.  Rice, U.S. Nav.Acad., Annapolis, Md.

C.  V.  Riley,  1700  13th  St.,  N.W.,  Washington.

John  Ritchie,  Jun.,  Box  2725,  Boston.

John  C.  Ropes,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Josiah  Royce,  Cambridge.

C.  S.  Sargent,  Brookline.

Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage,  Boston.

Samuel  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge.

Dr.  E.  C.  Seguin,  24  West  50th  St.,  N.Y.

Coleman  Sellers,  3301  Baring  St.,  Phila.

Benjamin  Sharp,  Acad,  of  Nat.  Sc,  Phila.

R.  W.  Shufeldt,  Smithson.  Inst.,  Washington.

R.  Pearsall  Smith,  4653  Germantown  Ave.,
Phila.

Moorfield  Storey,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  H.  Toy,  Cambridge.

F.  W.  True,  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  Washington.

Edmund  Tweedy,  Newport,  R.I.

B.  H.  Van  Vleck,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Dr.  O.F.  Wadsworth,  139  Boylston  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Sereno  Watson,  Cambridge.

Prof.  W.  Watson,  107  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Samuel  Wells,  155  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Andrew  D.  White,  Cornell  Univ.,  Ithaca,  N.Y.

Major  A.  A.  Woodhull,  David's  Isl.,  Pelham,
N.Y.

Rev.  E.  J.  Young,  Raymond  St.,  Cambridge.


List  of  Associates,


53


LIST  OF  ASSOCIATES.


Francis  E.  Abbot,  Cambridge.

Prof.  Felix  Adler,  50  East  77th  St.,  N.Y.

Joseph  Albree,  401  Wood  St.,  Pittsburg.

Francis  Almy,  Anchor  Line  Office,  Buffalo.

Charles  H.  Ames,  218  W.  Canton  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Peter  T.  Austen,  New  Brunswick,  N.J.

"\V.  H.  Babcock,  Box  220,  Washington.

Dr.  Dallas  Bac  he,  Fort  Adams,  Newport,  R.I.

Robert  H.  Bancroft,  247  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Pres.  F.  A.  P.  Barnard,  Columbia  Coll.,N.Y.

Rev.  S.  J.  Barrows,  141  Franklin  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  G.  Bartlett,  48  West  53d  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  W.  E.  Bartlett,  48  West  53d  St.,  N.Y.

Waldron  Bates,  7  Pemberton  Sq.,  Boston.

George  Biddle,  208  South  5th  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  W.  R.  Birdsall,  144  East  74th  St.,  N.Y.

James  B.  Bond,  230  West  59th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  H.  I.  Bo'wditch,  113  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

George  H.  Bradford,  care  Bradford,  Thom-
as, &  Co.,  Boston.

Frederick  G.  Bromberg,  Mobile,  Ala.

Dr.  S.  Brown,  Bloomingdale  Asylum,  N.Y.

G.  H.  Browne,  Appian  Way,  Cambridge.

Dr.  J.  C.  Browne,  Vincenton,  N.J.

Dr.  Albert  II.  Buck,  109  Madison  Ave.,  N.Y.

Dr.  W.  N.  Bullard,  127  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Col.  John  C.  Bundy,  92  La  Salle  St.,  Chicago.

Dr.  R.  M.  Burke,  London,  Ontario,  Can.

John  B.  Burnett,  Esq.,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Gouverneur  M.  Carnochan,  Cambridge.

A.  E.  Carpenter,  3  Concord  Sq.,  Boston.

Samuel  Cassner,  Jun.,  203  Walnut  St.,  Phila.

Capt.  R.  Catlin,  U.S.A.,  Dobbs  Ferry,  N.Y.

Dr.  G.  B.  Chase,  234  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

John  P.  Clarke,  50  Post-Office  Building,  N.Y.

S.  B.  Clarke,  50  Post-Oflice  Building,  N.Y.

W.  B.  Clark,  214  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Samuel  Coleman,  Newport,  R.I.

Prof.  A.  S.  Cook,  Univ.  of  Cal.,  Berkeley,  Cal.

Dr.  A.  Coolidge,  81  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

C.  B.  Cory,  8  Arlington  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  Cowles,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville.

Prof.  John  C.  Curtis,  127  East  35th  St.,  N.Y.

E.  C.  Cushman,  Newport,  R.I.

Arthur  H.  Cutter,  20  West  43d  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  C.  L.  Dana,  66  West  46th  St.,  N.Y.

Thomas  Davidson,  Orange,  N.J.

Mrs.  M.  L.  Dickinson,  230  West  59th  St.,  N.Y.

Prof.  E.  Emerton,  Cambridge.

Samuel  H.  Emery,  Jun.,  Concord,  Mass.

Prof.  J.  H.  Farmer,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.

Thomas  C.  Fei.ton,  4  Mt.  Vernon  PI.,  Boston.

Prof.  George  Forman,  Rahway,  N.J.

Christine  Ladd  Franklin,  Baltimore.

Amos  Tuck  French,  Newport,  R.I.

G.  French,  'Evening  Gazette,'  Worcester,
Mass.

Rev.  O.  B.  Frothingham,  Boston.


E.  G.  Gardiner,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.
Benj.  I.  Gilman,  5  Waterhouse  St.,  Cambiidge.
Mrs.  John  Gray,  120  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
Prof.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
William  K.  Haines,  Vincenton,  N.J.
George  S.  Hale,  10  Tremont  St.,  Boston.
Prof.  T.  P.  Hall,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.
Judge  William  D.  Harden,  Savannah,  Ga.
H.  F.  Harrington,  Superintendent  of  Schools,

New  Bedford,  Mass.
Rev.  Charles  Higbee,  Pelham,  N.Y.
Dr.  J.  L.  Hildreth,  16  Garden  St.,  Cambridge.
Edward  B.  Hill,  58  Wall  St.,  N.Y.
R.  A.  Holland,  Trinity  Rectory,  New  Orleans.
Samuel  V.  V.  Holmes,  Princeton,  N.J.
Prof.  E.  J.  Houston,  610  North  17th  St.,  Phila.
Woodward  Hudson,  Esq.,  Concord,  Mass.
Rev.  J.  E.  Hurlbut,  West  Springfield,  Mass.
Mrs.  M.  L.  Jackson,  261  North  6th  St.,  Phila.
Dr.  Walter  James,  59th  St.  and  G  Ave., N.Y.
Dr.  William  C.  Jarvis,  N.Y.
Prof.  H.  Jayne,  1826  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.
H.  La  Barre  Jayne,  208  South  5th  St.,  Phila.
Charles  R.  Johnson,  Worcester,  Mass.
Rev.  Franklin  Johnson,  Cambridge.
Dr.  Daniel  Karsner,  Germantown,  Penn.
Prof.  William  Laugh lin,  Cambridge.
Walter  E.  Lawton,  31  Broadway,  N.Y.
Dr.  Albert  Leffingwell,  Dausville,  N.Y.
Louis  E.  Levy,  846  North  8th  St.,  Phila.
Frank  S.  Lewis,  1507  North  18th  St.,  Phila.
Prof.  William  Libbey,  Jun.,  Princeton,  N.J.
John  S.  Lockwood,  17  Franklin  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.  A.  C.  M.  Lodge,  31  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
John  Lothrop,  10  Gloucester  St.,  Boston.
J.  B.  McChesney,  Oakland,  Cal.
Edward  W.  McClure,  Concord,  Mass.
Robert  McCook,  Steubeuville,  O.
Charles  MacVeagh,  45  William  St.,  N.Y.
Rev.  John  E.  Mandl,  Exeter,  N.H.
Prof.  Allan  Marquand,  Princeton,  N.J.
H.  Map.quand,  Madison  Ave,  cor.  68th  St.,  N.Y.
Henry  Rutgers  Marshall,  74  Wall  St.,  N.Y.
Dr.  W.  Mendelson,  209  West  46th  St.,  N.Y.

F.  Carles    Merry,    Pelham    Manor,  West
Chester  Co.,  N.Y.

Dr.  C.  K.  Mills,  113  South  19th  St.,  Phila.
Dr.  G.  R.  Morehouse,  227  South  9th  St.,  Phila.
Dr.  J.  L.  Morrill,  301  East  72d  St.,  N.Y.
Charles    Morris,    1822    Spring-Garden    St.,

Phila.
Dr.  James  R.  Nichols,  Haverhill,  Mass.
John  Hawkes  Noble,  Cambridge.
Lieut.  Charles  R.  Noyes,  Fort  D.  A.Russell,

Cheyenne,  Wy.
Richard  J.Nunn,  119  York  St.,  Savannah,  Ga.
Dr.  C.  A.  Oliver,  1507  Locust  St.,  Phila.
Gen.  F.  A.  Osborn,  236  Marlboro'  St.,  Boston.


54


Circular  No.  5.


William  K.  Otis,  108  "West  34th  St.,  N.Y.
A.  E.  Outerbridge,  249  North  18th  St.,  Phila.
Capt.  Carl  Palfrey,  Cambridge.
Prof.  G-.  H.  Palmer,  Cambridge.
Wm.  L.  Parker,  339  Marlboro'  St.,  Boston.
Fraxcis  Parkman,  50  Chestnut  St,,  Boston.
Rev.  F.  G-.  Peabody,  Cambridge.
Dr.  Grace  Peckham,5  Livingston  Place,  N.Y.
Dr.  C.  B.  Penrose,  1331  Spruce  St.,  Phila.
Rev.  Henry  Powers,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
W.  P.  Preble,  Jun.,5  Pemberton  Sq.,  Boston.
George  Putnam,  Quiucy  St.,  Cambridge.
Rev.  Mr.  Rainsford,  209  East  16th  St.,  N.Y.
Arthur  Reed,  66  State  St.,  Boston.
Edwin  Reed,  163  Brattle  St.,  Cambridge.
Pres.  W.T.  Reid,  Univ.  of  Cal.,  Berkeley,  Cal.
Dr.  J.  West  Roosevelt,  56  W.  18th  St.,  N.Y.
Theodore  Roosevelt,  N.Y.
Samuel  H.  Russell,  135  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
G.  C.  Sawer,  Utica,  N.Y.
Erwin  Schermerhorn,  Burlington,  N.J.
Pres.  Julius  H.  Seelye,  Amherst,  Mass.
Prof.  O.  Seidenstecker,1016  Cherry  St., Phila.
Prof.  N.  S.  Shaler,  Cambridge.
Thomas  Sherwin,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Mrs.  Aubrey  H.  Smith,  Phila.
H.  W.  Smith,  4th  and  Walnut  Sts.,  Phila.
Mrs.  Hannah  W.  Smith,  4653  Germantown
Ave.,  Phila.


Horace  J.  Smith,  Coulter  House,  German-
town,  Penn.

L.  Logan  Smith,  8  Berkeley  St.,  Cambridge.

Loyd  P.  Smith,  Philadelphia  Library,  Phila.

Mary  W.  Smith,  Phila.

R.  Morris  Smith,  3711  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  M.  Allan  Starr,  29  East  62d  St.,  N.Y.

Francis  P.  Stearns,  College  Hill,  Mass.

Dr.  H.  Stedman,  Roslindale,  Mass.

A.  W.  Stevens,  University  Press,  Cambridge.

Dr.  William  G.  Stevenson,  339  Mill  St.,
Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.

Albert  Storer,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Malcolm  Storer,  Cambridge.

Albert  Stone,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Charles  W.  Stone,  68  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Frederick  S.  Taylor,  Cambridge.

Roland  Thaxter,  98  Pinckney  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  R.  E.  Thompson,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  Phila.

Dr.  W.  G.  Thompson,  49  East  30th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  George  M.  Tuttle,  25  West  26th  St.,  N.Y.

Rev.  C.  Van  Norden,  Springfield,  Mass.

William  H.  Wahl,  Franklin  Institute,  Phila.

Dr.  E.  W.  Warren,  84  Cbarles  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Walter  Wesselhoeet,  Cambridge.

Miss  Frances  E.  Willard,  Evanstou,  111.

J.  E.  Woodhead,  171  W.  Wash'n  St.,  Chicago.

T.  K.  Worthington,  Johns  Hopkins  Univer-
sity, Baltimore.


/


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.


Vol.  I.  JULY,  1886.  No.  2.

CONSTITUTION.

Article  I.  —  Name  and  Objects.

Section  1 .  This  Association  shall  be  called  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Research.

Sect.  2.  The  object  of  the  Society  shall  be  the  systematic  study
of  the  laws  of  mental  action.

Article  II. — Government.

Section  1.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Society  a  Council  shall  be
chosen  consisting  of  twenty-one  members, —  seven  to  hold  office  for
one  }rear,  seven  for  two  years,  and  seven  for  three  }Tears  ;  and  there-
after seven  shall  be  chosen  by  the  members  at  each  annual  meeting,
to  serve  for  three  years.

Sect.  2.  The  Council  shall  elect  from  its  number  each  year,  at  its
first  meeting  after  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Society,  the  following
officers  of  the  Society :  a  President,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Treasurer,
who  shall  discharge  the  duties  usually  assigned  to  these  respective
officers.  The  Council  shall  elect  as  many  Vice-Presidents  as  shall  be
deemed  advisable.

Sect.  3.  The  Council  shall  exercise  general  supervision  of  the
investigations  of  the  Society,  and  shall  appoint  the  investigating
committees.

Sect.  4.  Vacancies  in  the  Council,  caused  by  death  or  resigna-
tion, shall  be  filled  by  the  Council.

Article  III.  —  Members  and  Associates*

Section  1.  Any  person  of  respectable  character  and  attainments
is  eligible  to  the  Society  as  an  associate.  Associates  shall  receive  all
the  publications  of  the  Society,  may  participate  in  all  the  meetings,
present  communications,  and  join  in  the  debates.

55


56  Constitution,

Sect.  2.  Members,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  num-
ber, may  be  elected  by  the  Council  from  the  body  of  associates.
Members  have  all  the  privileges  of  associates,  are  entitled  to  vote,
and  are  eligible  to  the  Council.

Sect.  3.  Associates  may  be  elected  either  by  the  Council  or  by
the  executive  committee  of  any  branch,  after  nomination  in  writiDg
by  two  members  or  associates.

Sect.  4.  Each  member  and  associate  shall  pay  to  the  treasurer
an  annual  assessment  of  three  dollars.  The  name  of  any  member  or
associate  two  years  in  arrears  for  annual  assessments  shall  be  erased
from  the  list  of  the  Society ;  and  no  such  person  shall  be  restored
until  he  has  paid  his  arrearages  or  has  been  re-elected.

Sect.  5.  Any  member  or  associate  may  be  dropped  from  the
rolls  of  the  Society  on  recommendation  of  the  Council  and  a  two-
thirds  vote  at  any  meeting  of  the  Society,  notice  of  such  recommen-
dation having  been  given  at  least  two  weeks  previously.

Article  IV.  —  Meetings.

Section  1.  The  annual  meeting  shall  be  held  the  second  Tuesday
in  January.

Sect.  2.     Other  meetings  may  be  held  at  the  call  of  the  Council.

Article  V.  —  Quorum.

Ten  members  shall  constitute  a  quorum  of  the  Society,  and  five  a
quorum  of  the  Council.

Article  VI. — Accounts.

A  committee  of  two  shall  be  appointed  at  each  annual  meeting  to
audit  the  accounts  of  the  treasurer  for  the  year  closing  with  that
meeting.

Article  VII.  —  Similar  Societies.

It  shall  be  the  policy  of  this  Society,  by  correspondence  and  other-
wise, to  co-operate  with  societies  of  similar  object  elsewhere.

Article  VIII.  —  Branch  Societies.

Section  1 .  A  branch  of  the  Society  may  be  established  in  any
place  by  the  Council,  on  written  application  from  not  less  than  five
members  resident  in  that  place.

Sect.  2.  The  members  of  the  Society  on  whose  application  a
branch  is  established  shall  constitute  an  executive  committee  to
arrange  the  affairs  of  that  branch.     The  executive  committee  shall


Officers.  57

have  power  to  add  to  their  numbers  by  the  election  of  other  members
of  the  Society  belonging  to  that  branch.  They  shall  also  have  power
to  choose  from  their  own  members  officers  of  the  branch,  to  frame
by-laws  for  its  government,  and  to  elect  persons  resident  in  their
immediate  vicinity  as  associates  of  the  Society  and  members  of  the
branch.

Article  IX. —  By-Laws.

Section  1.  By-laws  recommended  by  the  Council  may  be  adopted
at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Sect.  2.  By-laws  may  be  rescinded  or  changed  upon  recommen-
dation of  the  Council  at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Article  X. — Amendments.

Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  recommended  by  the  Council,
may  be  adopted  at  any  annual  meeting  by  a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the
members  present.

OFFICERS.

President.
Prof.  SIMON  NEWCOMB,  Washington,  D.C.

Vice-Presidents.
Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Johns  Hopkins  Uni-    Prof.  Edward  C.  Pickering,  Harvard  College

versity.  Observatory.

Prof.  George   S.  Fullerton,  University  of    Prof.  Henry  P.  Bowditch,  Harvard  Medical
Pennsylvania.  School.

Dr.  Charles  S.  Minot,  Harvard  Medical  School.

Treasurer.
Prof.  William  Watson,  Boston.

Secretary.
Dr.  Edward  G.  Gardiner,  12  Otis  Place.


COUNCIL   OF  THE   SOCIETY.

To  hold  office  till  January ',  1887.
Dr.  Henry  P.  Bowditch,  Boston.  Dr.  Charles  S.  Minot,  Boston.

Mr.  C.  C.  Jackson,  Boston.  Prof.  Simon  Newcomb,  Washington.

Dr.  Edward  G.  Gardiner,  Boston.  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering,  Boston.

Mr.  N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  New  York.

To  hold  office  till  January,  1888.
Prof.  G.  S.  Fullerton,  Philadelphia.  Prof.  E.  0.  Pickering,  Cambridge.

Prof.  William  James,  Cambridge.  Mr.  R.  Pearsall  Smith,  Philadelphia.

Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Baltimore.  Major  A.  A.  Woodhull,  New  York.

Prof.  James  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge.


58


Members.


To  hold  office  till  January,  1889.

Dr.  E.  H.  Hall,  Cambridge.  Mr.  Coleman  Sellers,  Philadelphia.

Mr.  John  C.  Ropes,  Boston.  Mr.  S.  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge.

Prof.  Josiah  Rotce,  Cambridge.  Prof.  William  Watson,  Boston.
Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  Boston.


MEMBERS.


Dr.  Charles  C.  Abbott,  Trenton,  N.J.

Prof.  Geo.  F.  Barker,  3909  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Pres.  F.  A.  P.  Barnard,  Columbia  Coll.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Birdsall,  144  East  74th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  H.  P.  Bowditch,  Harv.  Med.  Sch.,  Boston.

Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  233  Clarendon  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  W.  N.  Bullard,  127  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Edward  Burgess,  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Lucien  Carr,  344  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Edward  D.  Cope,  2100  Pine  St.,  Phila.

C.  B.  Cory,  8  Arlington  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  Cowles,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,
Mass.

Prof.  W.  O.  Crosby,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Bos-
ton.

Prof.  C.  R.  Cross,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Prof.  John  G-.  Curtis,  127  East  35th  St.,  N.Y.

Thomas  Davidson,  Orange,  N.J.

Dr.  F.  X.  Dercum,  Phila.

George  Dimmock,  61  Sacramento  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Prof.  William  B.  Dwight,  Poughkeepsie,
N.Y.

Dr.  Robert  T.  Edes,  76  Marlborough  St.,  Bos-
ton.

S.  F.  Emmons,  Box  591,  Washington.

Rev.  C.  C.  Everett,  53  Garden  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Mrs.  C.  L.  Franklin,  Baltimore,  Md.

Dr.  Persifor  Frazer,  201  South  5th  St.,
Phila.

Prof.  George  S.  Fullerton,  3629  Walnut  St.,
Phila.

Thomas  Gaffield,  54  Allen  St.,  Boston.

Edward  G.  Gardiner,  12  Otis  Place,  Boston.

Dr.  F.  H.  Gerrish,  Portland,  Me.

G.  K.  Gilbert,  Washington.

Prof.  Asa  Gray,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Rev.  John  B.  Haines,  Burlington,  N.J.

Dr.  E.  H.  Hall,  5  Avon  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,
Baltimore,  Md.

Prof.  James  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Prof.  A.  S.  Hardy,  Hanover,  N.H.

William  T.  Harris,  Concord,  Mass.

Angelo  Heilprin,  Acad,  of  Nat.  Sci.,  Phila.

Samuel  Henshaw,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  Cambridge,  Mass.


E.  B.  Hill,  58  Wall  St.,  N.Y.

N.  D.  C.  Hodges,  47  Lafayette  Place,  N.Y.

Dr.  J.  B.  Holder,  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,
Central  Park,  New  York.

Henry  Holt,  29  West  23d  St.,  New  York.

W.  D.  Howells,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Gardiner  G.  Hubbard,  Washington.

Prof.  Alpheus  Hyatt,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,
Boston.

C.  C.  Jackson,  181  Commonwealth  Avenue,
Boston.

Dr.  Ed.  Jackson,  215  South  17th  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  William  James,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  Joseph  Jastrow,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,
Baltimore,  Md.

J.  H.  Kidder,  Smithsonian  Inst.,  Washington.

Prof.  D.  G.  Lyon,  Cambridge,  Mass.

J.  B.  Marcou,  National  Museum,  Washington.

Prof.  John  P.  Marshall,  College  Hill,  Mass.

W.  J.  McGee,  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  Washington.

C.  K.  Mills,  113  South  19th  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  Charles  Sedgwick  Minot,  25  Mt.  Ver-
non St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Simon  Newcomb,  Washington.

Prof.  A.  S.  Packard,  Providence,  R.I.

Prof.  G.  H.  Palmer,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Francis  Parkman,  50  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  B.  O.  Peirce,  P.O.  Box  74,  Waverly,
Mass.

Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  Edward  C.  Pickering,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Prof.  W.  H.  Pickering,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Bos-
ton.

W.  P.  Preble,  Jun.,  5  Pemberton  Sq.,  Boston.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  71  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Raphael  Pumpelly,  Newport,  R.I.

Dr.  Charles  P.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Prof.  F.  W.  Putnam,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  James  J.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  M.  A.  Randolph,  1004  Walnut  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  Edward  T.  Rbichert,  Univ.  of  Penn.,
Phila.

Prof.  J.  M.  Rice,  U.  S.  Nav.  Acad.,  Annapo-
lis, Md.

C.  V.  Riley,  1700  13th  St.,  N.  W.,  Washington.


Associate  Members.


59


John  Ritchie,  Jun.,  Box  2725,  Boston.

John  C.  Ropes,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Josiah  Royce,  Cambridge,  Mass.

C.  S.  Sargent,  Brookline,  Mass.

Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  37  W.  Newton  St.,  Boston.

G.  C.  Sawyer,  Utica,  N.Y.

Samuel  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  E.  C.  Seguin,  24  West  50th  St.,  New  York.

Coleman  Sellers,  3301  Baring  St.,  Phila.

Benjamin  Sharp,  Univ.  of  Peun.,  Phila.

R.  W.  Shufeldt,  Smithson.  Inst.,  Washington.

R.  Pearsall  Smith,  4653  Germantown  Ave.,

Phila.
Moorfield  Storey,  40  Water  St.,  Boston.
Roland  Thaxter,  98  Pinckuey  St.,  Boston.
Prof.  C.  H.  Toy,  Cambridge,  Mass.


Frederick  William  True,  U.  S.  Nat.  Mua.,
Washington.

Edmund  Tweedy,  Newport,  R.I.

B.  H.  Van  Vleck,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Dr.  O.  F.  Wadsworth,  139  Boylston  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Sereno  Watson,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  William  Watson,  107  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Samuel  Wells,  155  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Andrew  D.  White,  Cornell  Univ.,  Ithaca,
N.Y.

Major  Alfred  A.  Woodhull,  David's  Isl-
and, Pelham,  N.Y.

Rev.  Edward  J.  Young,  Raymond  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.


ASSOCIATE  MEMBERS.


Francis  E.  Abbot,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Miss  Mary  Agnew,  Orange  Valley,  N.J.

Joseph  Albree,  401  Wood  St.,  Pittsburg.

Francis  Almy,  Buffalo.

Charles  H.  Ames,  218  W.  Canton  St.,  Boston.

C.  F.  Atkinson,  46  Mason  Building,  Boston.

Prof.  Peter  T.  Austen,  New  Brunswick,  N.J.

George  D.  Ayers,  Maiden,  Mass.

W.  H.  Babcock,  Box  220,  Washington.

Dr.  Dallas  Bache,  Fort  Adams,  Newport,  R.I.

Robert  H.  Bancroft,  247  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

8.  J.  Barrows,  141  Franklin  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  G.  Bartlett,  48  West  53d  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  W.  E.  Bartlett,  48  West  53d  St.,  N.Y.

Waldron  Bates,  5  Peraberton  Sq.,  Boston.

Bernard  Berenson,  Harvard  Coll.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Gorham  Blake,  Londsville,  White  Co.,  Ga.

James  B.  Bond,  Carrollton  Hotel,  Balti-
more, Md.

C.  P.  Bowditch,  28  State  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  H.  I.  Bowditch,  113  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Martin  Brimmer,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Frederick  G.  Bromberg,  Mobile,  Ala.

G.  H.  Browne,  Appian  Way,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Dr.  J.  C.  Browne,  Vincenton,  N.J.

Dr.  S.  Brown,  Boulevard  and  117th  St.,  New
York.

Albert  H.  Buck,  19  East  38th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Frank  E.  Bundy,  402  Columbus  Ave.,
Boston.

Col.  John  C.  Bundy,  92  La  Salle  St.,  Chicago.

Dr.  R.  M.  Burke,  London,  Ontario,  Can.

John  B.  Burnett,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Helen  Campbell,  Orange,  N.J.

Gouverneur  M.  Carnochan,  Cambridge,
Mass.


A.  E.  Carpenter,  3  Concord  Sq.,  Boston.

Samuel  Cassner,  Jun.,  3729    Chestnut   St.,
Phila.

Capt.  R.  Catlin,  Soldiers'  Home,  Washington.

G.  B.  Chase,  234  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

John  P.  Clarke,  50  Post-Office  Building,  N.Y.

S.  B.  Clarke,  50  Post-Office  Building,  N.Y.

W.  B.  Clark,  214  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Samuel  Coleman,  Newport,  R.I.

Prof.  A.  S.  Cook,  Univ.  of  Cal.,  Berkeley,  Cal.

Dr.  A.  Coolidge,  81  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Robert  Craven,  Ridley  Park,  Peun.

E.  C.  Cushman,  Newport,  R.I.

Arthur  H.  Cutter,  20  West  43d  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  C.  L.  Dana,  66  West  46th  St.,  N.Y.

Arthur  Dexter,  Somerset  Club,  Boston.

Mrs.  M.  L.  Dickinson,  230  West  59th  St., N.Y.

Miss  A.  A.  Draper,  531  5th  Ave.,  N.Y.

Prof.  E.  Emerton,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Samuel  H,  Emery,  Jun.,  Concord,  Mass.

Prof.  J.  H.  Farmer,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.

Thomas  C.  Felton,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Andrew  Fiske,   10  Tremout  St.,  Room  65,
Boston.

Charles  H.  Fiske,  10  Tremont  St.,  Room  65,
Boston.

Prof.  George  Form  an,  Rahway,  N.J.

Abbott  Foster,  Utica,  N.Y.

Amos  Tuck  French,  Newport,  R.I.

G.  French,  "Evening  Gazette,"  Worcester,
Mass.

Rev.  O.  B.  Frothingham,  118  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

J.  R.  Garfield,  968  Prospect  St.,  Cleveland,  O.

Jos.  M.  Gibbens,  153  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Benj.    I.  Gilman,   5  Waterhouse    St.,    Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Rev.  Percy  8.  Grant,  Brookline,  Mass.


60


Associate  Members.


Prof.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
"Wili,iam  K.  Haines,  Vincenton,  N.J.
George  S.  Hale,  10  Tremont  St.,  Boston.
Prof.  T.  P.  Hall,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.
Oliver  B.  Harden,  907  Walnut  St.,  Phila.
Judge  William  D.  Harden,  Savannah,  Ga.
H.  F.  Harrington,  Superintendent  of  Schools,

New  Bedford,  Mass.
C.    H.    Harwood,   32    Matthews,  Cambridge,

Mass.
Rev.  Charles  Higbee,  Pelhara,  N.Y.
R.  A.  Holland,  Trinity  Rectory,  New  Orleans.
Samuel  V.  V.  Holmes,  Princeton,  N.J.
Prof.  E.  J.  Houston,  610  North  17th  St.,  Phila.
Woodward  Hudson,  Concord,  Mass.
Rev.  J.  E.  Hurlbut,  West  Springfield,  Mass.
Jos.  Hutchinson,  520  Montgomery  St.,  San

Francisco,  Cal.
Mrs.  M.  L.  Jackson,  261  North  6th  St.,  Phila.
Prof.  E.  J.  James,  204  South  41st  St.,  Phila.
Dr.  Walter  James,  59th  St.  and  9th  Ave.,

N.Y.
Dr.  William  C.  Jarvis,  N.Y.
Prof.  H.  Jayne,  1826  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.
H.  La  Barre  Jayne,  208  South  5th  St.,  Phila.
Charles     R.    Johnson,   Worcester,    Mass.,

Box  492.
Rev.  Franklin  Johnson,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Dr.  Daniel  Karsner,  Germantown,  Penn.
W.  A.   Kelsoe,  City   Editor  "  Republican,"

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Prof.  O.  H.  Kendall,  3828  Locust  St.,  Phila.
Graham  G.  Lacy,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.
Asst.  Prof.  William  Laughlin,  Cambridge,

Mass.
John  Lathrop,  10  Gloucester  St.,  Boston.
Walter  E.  Lawton,  Box  3429,  New  York.
Dr.  Albert  Lepfingwell,  Dansville,  N.Y.
Louis  E.  Levy,  846  North  8th  St.,  Phila.
Frank  S.  Lewis,  1507  North  16th  St.,  Phila.
Prof.  William  Libbey,  Jun.,  Princeton,  N.J.
John  S.  Lockwood,  17  Franklin  St.,  Boston.
Mrs;  A.  C.  M.  Lodge,  31  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
Theodore  Lyman,  Brookline,  Mass.
J.  B.  McChesney,  Oakland,  Cal.
Edward  W.  McClure,  Concord,  Mass.
Robert  McCook,  Steubenville,  O.
Charles  MacVeagh,  45  William  St.,  N.Y.
Rev.  John  E.  Mandl,  Exeter,  N.H.
Prof.  Allan  Marquand,  Princeton,  N.J.
H.  Marquand,  Madison  Ave.,  cor.  68th  St.,

N.Y.
Henry  Rutgers  Marshall,  74  Wall  St.,  N.Y.
Dr.  W.  Mendelson,  209  West  46th  St.,  N.Y.
F.    Carles    Merry,    Pelham   Manor,   West

Chester  Co.,  N.Y.
Dr.  G.  R.  Morehouse,  227  South  9th  St.,  Phila.
Dr.  J.  L.  Morrill,  301  East  72d  St.,  N.Y.
Charles    Morris,    1822   Spring-Garden    St.,

Phila.


Dr.  James  R.  Nichols,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Prof.  Chas.  Eliot  Norton,  Cambridge,  Mass.

John  Hawkes  Noble,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Lieut.  Charles  R.  Noyes,  Cheyenne,  Wy.

Richard  J.  Nunn,  119  York  St.,  Savannah,  Ga.

Dr.  C.  A.  Oliver,  1507  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Gen.  F.  A.  Osborn,  236  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Wm.  K.  Otis,  108  West  34th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Horace  Packard,  Concord  and  Washing-
ton Sts.,  Boston.

Capt.  Carl  Palfrey,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Edmund  M.  Parker,  5  Craigie  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Wm.  L.  Parker,  339  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

R.  F.  G.  Peabody,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  Grace  Peckham,  25  Madison  Ave.,  N.Y.

Dr.  C.  B.  Penrose,  1331  Spruce  St.,  Phila.

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps,  Andover,  Mass.

Rev.  Henry  Powers,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.

Geo.  Putnam,  Quincy  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Josiah  Quincy,  66  State  St.,  Boston.

Rev.  W.  S.  Rainsford,  209  East  16th  St.,  N.Y.

Arthur  Reed,  66  State  St.,  Boston.

Edwin  Reed,  163  Brattle  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Pres.  W.  F.  Reid,  Univ.  of  Cal.,  Berkeley,  Cal.

Mrs.  Sarah  F.  Rogers,  1013  Vine  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  J.  West  Roosevelt,  56  W.  18th  St.,  N.Y.

Theodore  Roosevelt,  N.Y.

Samuel  H.  Russell,  13  Doane  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Winthrop  Sargent,  107  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Erwin  Schermerhorn,  Burlington,  N.J.

Pres.  Julius  H.  Seelye,  Amherst,  Mass.

Prof.  O.  Seidenstecker,  1016  Cherry  St.,
Phila.

Prof.  N.  S.  Shaler,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Thomas  Sherwin,  95  Milk  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Aubrey  H.  Smith,  Phila.

H.  W.  Smith,  4th  and  Walnut  Sts.,  Phila.

Mrs.  Hannah  W.  Smith,  4653  Germantown
Ave.,  Phila.

Horace  J.  Smith,  Coulter  House,  German-
town,  Penn.

L.  Logan  Smith,  8  Berkeley  St,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Loyd  P.  Smith,  Philadelphia  Library,  Phila.

Mrs.  Mary  W.  Smith,  Phila.

R.  Morris  Smith,  3711  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

S.  Townsend  Southwick,  175  Tremont  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  M.  Allan  Starr,  29  East  62d  St.,  N.Y.

Francis  P.  Stearns,  College  Hill,  Mass.

Dr.  H.  Stedman,  Roslindale,  Mass.

A.  W.  Stevens,  Univ.  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  Wm.  G.  Stevenson,  339  Mill  St.,  PoHgh-
keepsie,  N.Y.

Albert  Storer,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Malcolm  Storer,  182  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Chas.  W.  Stone,  68  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.


Meetings  of  Society.


61


Miss  Tappan,  170  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Frederick  S.  Taylor,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  R.  E-  Thompson,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  Phila.

Dr.  W.  G.  Thompson,  49  East  30th  St.,  N.Y.

S.  Lothrop  Thorndike,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Miss  Timmins,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Geo.  M.  Tuttle,  25  West  26th  St.,  N.Y.

Rev.  C.  Van  Norden,  98  Elliot  St.,  Spring-
field, Mass.

Wm.  H.  Wahl,  Franklin  Institute,  Phila.

Dr.  J.  R.  Walker,  42  Baronne  St.,  New  Or-
leans, La.

Henshaw  Bates  Wallet,  40  State  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  C.  Walsh,  121  W.  44th  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  George  Waring,  Newport,  R.I.

Joseph  B.  Warner,  39  Court  St.,  Boston.


Dr.  E.  W.  Wabren,  84  Charles  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  J.  W.  Warren,  107  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Wm.  H.  Watson,  Utica,  N.Y.

Dr.;WALTER  Wesselhoeft,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Rev.  D.  C.  Weston,  2  Rutherford  Place,  N.Y.

Harold  Whiting,  3  Garden  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Miss  Frances  E.  Willard,  Evanston,  111.

Russell  Whitman,  380  Chicago  Ave.,  Chi-
cago.

Isaiah  Williams,  Chappaqua,  West  Chester
Co.,  N.Y.

J.  E.  Woodhead,  171  W.  Wash.  St.,  Chicago.

Miss  K.  P.  Wormelay,  Newport,  R.I.

T.  K.  Worthington,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,
Baltimore.

Morrill  Wyman,  Jun.,  Cambridge,  Mass.


MEETINGS   OF  SOCIETY.

Boston,  Oct.  6, 1885.

Fourth  meeting  (annual)  of  society.

Fourteen  present.     Professor  E.  C.  Pickering  in  the  chair.

The  Treasurer's  report  was  read.

The  proposed l  changes  in  the  constitution  of  the  society
were  adopted,  the  new  article  to  be  called  Article  VIII.

The  members  named  in  the  following  list  were  elected  to
the  Council  for  three  years.

Josiah  Royce.  J.  C.  Ropes.

William  Watson.  S.  H.  Scudder.

E.  H.  Hall.  M.  J.  Savage.

Coleman  Sellers.

The  committee  appointed  to  consider  the  advisability  of  form-

i  ARTICLE  VIII.

Section  1.  A  branch  of  the  Society  may  he  established  in  any  place  by  the
Council  on  written  application  from  not  less  than  five  members  resident  in  that
place.

Sect.  2.  The  members  of  the  Society  on  whose  application  a  branch  is  estab-
lished shall  constitute  an  executive  committee  to  arrange  the  affairs  of  the  branch.

The  executive  committee  shall  have  power  to  add  to  their  numbers  by  the  elec-
tion of  other  members  of  the  Society  belonging  to  that  branch.  They  shall  also
have  power  to  choose  from  their  own  members  officers  of  the  branch,  to  frame  by-
laws for  its  government,  and  to  elect  persons  resident  in  their  immediate  vicinity
as  associates  of  the  Society  and  members  of  the  branch.

To  amend  Art.  VIII. ,  Sect.  3,  so  as  to  read:  Associates  maybe  elected  either  by
the  Council,  or  by  the  Executive  Committee  of  any  branch,  after  nomination  in
writing  by  two  members  or  associates.


62  Meetings  of  Society.

ing  a  permanent  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted
Houses  (see  Council  meeting,  Sept.  29,  1885)  reported  in  favor
of  such  a  committee.  Report  accepted,  and  referred  to  Coun-
cil.

Dr.  Bowditch  made  an  informal  report  for  the  Committee
on  Thought-Transference,  which  was  commented  upon  by  vari-
ous members,  —  Prince,  Pickering,  Palmer,  James,  Higginson,
Cory,  and  Minot.

Phantasms  of  the  dead  discussed  by  James  and  Higginson.

The  annual  meeting  adjourned,  to  meet  on  the  second  Tues-
day in  January,  1886.

Jan.  12, 1886.

Fourth  (adjourned)  meeting  of  the  society.

Forty-one  persons  present.     Professor  Bowditch  in  the  chair.

Report  of  the  previous  meeting  (Oct.  6,  1885)  read  and  ap-
proved.

List  of  candidates  for  associate  membership,  as  approved  by
the  Council  at  various  times  since  Oct.  6,  1885,  was  read,  and
all  present  named  in  the  list  were  elected  Associates.

List  of  new  members  elected  by  Council  at  meeting  of  Jan.
12,  1886,  was  read.

Sect.  2,  Art.  III.,  of  the  Constitution  was  amended  by  insert-
ing the  words  "  and  fifty  "  after  the  word  "  hundred."

Sect.  1,  Art.  IV.,  of  the  Constitution  was  amended  so  as  to
read,  "  The  annual  meeting  shall  be  held  the  second  Tuesday  in
Januar}'."

President  Newcomb's  address  was  read.

Dr.  Minot  was  called  to  the  chair,  and  Professor  Bowditch
reported  for  the  Thought-Transference  Committee.

Dr.  Minot  spoke  on  guessing  at  digits,  and  the  preference
and  aversion  shown  toward  particular  numericals.

Dr.  Royce  reported  for  the  Committee  on  Apparitions,  out-
lining the  plan  of  work  adopted.

Dr.  James  reported  for  the  Committee  on  Hypnotism;  put-
ting Mr.  Carnochan  into  the  hypnotic  state  in  the  presence  of
the  audience,  and  causing  him  to  exhibit  various  phenomena
characteristic  of  this  condition.

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

E.  H.  HALL,  Secretary.


Address  of  the  President.  63


ADDRESS   OF  THE  PRESIDENT.

It  might  naturally  be  expected  that  in  addressing  you  on  the
present  occasion  your  president  should  enter  into  an  account
of  work  done  and  results  gained.  There  are,  however,  difficul-
ties in  the  way  of  doing  this  in  a  satisfactory  way.  It  has  been
my  misfortune  to  reside  so  far  from  the  seat  of  the  society,  that
I  have  not  been  able  to  take  that  active  part  in  your  work
which  would  have  been  appropriate  to  my  office.  Moreover,  so
far  as  I  have  followed  this  work,  it  would  seem  that  up  to  the
present  time  it  consists  more  in  preliminary  efforts,  and  prepara-
tions for  further  research,  than  in  finished  experiments  leading
to  establish  conclusions.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  ques-
tion in  what  direction  our  efforts  should  tend  is  a  most  impor-
tant one ;  and  I  shall,  therefore,  ask  your  permission  to  enter
into  a-  discussion  of  the  general  aspect  and  relations  of  the
subject.

Looking  at  the  situation  from  the  most  general  point  of  view,
the  first  question  to  present  itself  would  be :  Why  are  we  here  ?
what  is  our  field  of  work  ?  We  might  reply  in  a  way  equally
general,  that  we  are  investigating  those  obscure  mental  phe-
nomena which  do  not  seem  to  accord  with  the  laws  of  mental
action  as  ordinarily  apprehended  through  the  experience  of  the
race.  We  are  more  particularly  concerned  with  a  large  class  of
sporadic,  but  well-known  phenomena,  which  seem  to  indicate
that  the  mind  may  possess  certain  susceptibilities  outside  the
limits  which  experience  teaches  us  is  commonly  imposed  upon
its  powers.

We  are  perfectly  familiar  with  a  certain  system  of  inter-
action between  mind  and  matter.  Every  instance  of  voluntary
motion,  and  every  instance  of  a  mental  effect  produced  by  an
external  cause,  is  a  case  of  such  inter-action.  Taking  any  one
mind,  we  may  consider  it  either  as  an  agent  producing  effects
external  to  itself  by  the  action  of  the  will,  or  as  an  object  acted
upon  by  external  causes.  Now,  a  very  wide  induction  from
general  experience  shows  us  that  this  inter-action  is,  in  our
ordinary  experience,  subject  to  the  following  restrictions :  —

Firstly,  no  individual  mind  can  be  acted  upon  except  through


64  Address  of  the  President.

the  medium  of  a  material  organism  with  which  it  is  associated.
The  external  cause,  whatever  it  may  be,  must  act  on  the  organ-
ization itself  in  order  that  the  mind  may  either  be  excited  to
consciousness,  or  affected  in  any  other  way.  Moreover,  the
action  of  such  external  causes  is  a  physical  process,  subject  to
purely  physical  laws.

Secondly,  the  mind  cannot  act  upon  any  thing  external  to
itself,  except  through  the  agency  of  its  material  organism ;  and,
this  organism  being  set  in  action,  the  effect  is  subject  to  purely
physical  laws.

Both  of  these  laws  are  strikingly  illustrated  in  our  every-
day experience.  For  example,  if  a  living  organism  is  left
unsupported,  it  will  fall  exactly  like  dead  matter,  in  spite  of
any  thing  the  mind  can  do  to  stop  it.  When  supported,  it
presses  upon  the  support  with  a  force  equal  to  the  weight  of
the  matter  composing  it ;  and  no  effort  of  the  will  can  increase
or  diminish  this  pressure.  Two  persons  in  each  other's  neigh-
borhood cannot  be  conscious  of  each  other's  existence  except
through  the  physical  medium  of  light,  sound,  or  material  mo-
tion, produced  by  one  and  acting  upon  the  organism  of  the
other.  By  no  act  of  the  will  can  we  produce  motion  or  any
other  change  in  an  external  object  unless  we  set  in  operation  a
sufficient  physical  force  through  the  medium  of  our  organism.
These,  I  say,  are  hypothetical  laws,  and  may  be  regarded  as
conclusions  from  general  experience.  They  are,  however,  like
all  other  general  laws,  in  seeming  disaccord  with  occasional
phenomena.  It  is  these  sporadic  phenomena  with  which  we  are
mainly  concerned,  and  which  we  desire  to  subject  to  some  form
of  law.  If  mind  is  not  subject  to  the  restrictions  which  have
been  just  denned,  we  have  a  mental  actio  in  distans  which  is
variously  known  as  "  thought-transference,"  "  telepathy,"  and
"mind-reading."  Granting  this  apparent  actio  in  distans,  we
may  either  suppose  it  real,  or  attribute  it  to  some  unrecognized
physical  agency.  This  question  will,  however,  arise  at  a  later
period  in  our  researches.  The  main  question  with  which  we
are  now  concerned  is,  Can  one  mind  influence  another  in  any
other  way  than  through  the  action  of  known  plrvsical  causes
acting  between  and  through  their  respective  organisms?  If
this  question  is  answered  in  the  affirmative,  then  a  great  dis-


Address  of  the  President.  65

covery  is  made,  opening  up  a  new  field,  not  only  of  research,
but  of  philosophical  speculation  and  of  practical  application.
If  answered  in  the  negative,  our  work  is  not  done,  because  we
then  have  to  explain  the  sporadic  phenomena  which  seem  to
indicate  thought-transference.

Let  us  begin  by  looking  at  the  question  from  its  two  sides,
beginning  with  the  affirmative  one.  If  we  consider  the  current
of  our  mental  processes  while  sitting  listlessly  at  our  desks,  we
may  find  our  minds  to  wander  in  a  half-unconscious  way  from
one  subject  to  another."  Vague  emotions  of  various  kinds  may
arise  without  our  being  able  to  assign  any  reason  for  them.
We  may  feel  elated  without  being  conscious  of  any  agreeable
event  to  cause  elation,  and  depressed  without  having  heard  any
evil  tidings.  The  visual  image  of  absent  friends,  or  the  thought
of  an  exciting  scene  which  has  been  before  us,  may  arise  un-
bidden. Memories  follow  each  other  without  any  apparent  logi-
cal order.     Ideas  come  and  go  as  if  of  their  own  accord.

That  these  mental  impressions  are  all  results  of  sufficient
causes,  is  a  conclusion  so  instinctive  that  we  can  feel  no  doubt
of  its  truth,  and  therefore  shall  take  it  for  granted.  The  first
question  which  arises  is  whether  the  causes  are  all  contained,
consciously  or  unconsciously,  within  the  organism ;  or  whether
they  may  operate  and  produce  their  effect  through  it  from
outside,  without  the  mediation  of  the  organism.  Considering
the  subject  apart  from  our  general  experience  of  the  world,
there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  reason,  a  priori,  why  we  should
admit  one  of  these  hypotheses  rather  than  the  other.  The
belief  that  the  impressions  of  distant  friends  or  relatives  are  in
some  way  reproduced  in  our  minds,  is  one  generally  entertained
in  infancy.  Neither  to  the  infant  nor  to  the  adult  mind  need
the  question,  how  can  such  impressions  be  conveyed  from  mind
to  mind,  cause  any  more  difficulty  than  the  question  how  a
body  millions  of  miles  away  can  exert  force  upon  a  ball  in  my
hand.  If  we  know  by  experience  that  the  force  is  exerted,  that
must  satisfy  us.  The  discovery  of  the  medium,  if  any,  by
which  the  effect  is  produced,  is  a  different  and  independent
problem.

The  mental  operations  alluded  to  may  be  rationally  attrib-
uted, not  only  to  the  action  of  distant  minds  known  to  us,  but


66  Address  of  the  President

to  that  of  minds  otherwise  totally  unknown.  It  is  not  uncom-
mon among  some  classes  to  attribute  those  varying  mental
#  states  which  they  cannot  otherwise  account  for  to  the  action  of
intelligences  in  another  and  invisible  sphere.  From  a  scientific
point  of  view,  the  whole  question  is  an  open  one,  except  so  far
as  it  may  have  been  settled  by  observation  and  experiment.

The  opinion  that  a  mind  can  act  where  the  organism  is  not
is  one  which  we  know  to  have  been  held  in  one  form  or  another
by  men  in  all  ages.  In  it  originates  the  belief  in  the  possession
of  miraculous  powers  by  gifted  beings.  Indeed,  were  we  asked
what  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  conception  of  a  miracle,
as  it  exists  in  the  mind  of  a  believer,  we  might  reply  by  saying
that  it  is  the  belief  that  certain  gifted  persons  possess  the
power  of  producing  effects  through  the  immediate  agency  of
their  minds,  without  bringing  into  action  any  sufficient  physical
cause.  Although  the  belief  in  the  possibility  of  such  a  power
is  stronger  and  more  general  among  the  lower  races,  we  cannot
say  that  men  of  any  race  or  degree  of  intelligence  are  wholly
free  from  it.  From  his  own  observations  the  writer  believes
that  one-third  of  the  intelligent  people  of  his  acquaintance  in
England  and  America  are  more  01  less  under  its  influence.
The  fact  that  the  majority  of  the  soundest  thinkers  not  only  do
not  accept  the  opinion,  but  look  upon  it  with  a  greater  or  less
degree  of  contempt,  as  an  evidence  of  mental  weakness,  exerts
a  repressive  effect  upon  its  free  expression,  and  thus  diminishes
its  apparent  prevalence.

The  speaker  distinctly  remembers  the  development  of  his
own  ideas  on  the  subject  in  childhood.  Remarks  dropped  in
the  conversation  of  others,  coupled  with  a  deep  feeling  of  the
wide  range  of  possibilities  involved  in  the  universe  so  newly
opened  to  his  mind,  led  him  to  grasp  with  some  eagerness  at
the  idea  that  impressions  might  be  conveyed  from  one  sym-
pathetic mind  to  another  at  great  distances.  But  continued
observation  never  showed  the  slightest  connection  between  his
own  mental  states  and  those  of  his  friends  or  relatives.  One
attempt  to  put  the  supposed  law  to  a  practical  use  is  still  dis-
tinctly remembered.  He  set  out  for  a  schoolhouse  where  his
father  (the  teacher)  usually  remained  a  short  time  after  school
to  read.     He  was  extremely  desirous  of  reaching  his  father  be-


Address  of  the  President,  67

fore  the  latter  should  leave,  and  therefore  exerted  himself  to  the
utmost  to  concentrate  his  desires  on  the  father  in  such  manner
as  to  induce  him  to  remain.  Arrived  at  the  schoolhouse,  he
found  him  still  there,  but  just  about  to  leave.  The  boy  inquired
diligently  of  the  father  whether  he  had  felt  any  unusual  disposi-
tion to  remain.  The  reply  was,  that  he  had  remained  only  to
finish  what  he  had  just  been  reading,  and  that  he  had  felt  no
impression  whatever  tending  to  make  him  stay.  The  natural
conclusion  was  adverse  to  what  is  now  called  telepathy,  and  it
may  be  supposed  that  the  majority  of  thinking  men  reach  the
same  conclusion  in  much  the  same  way.

When  we  look  carefully  into  the  subject,  we  find  that  the
general  course  of  experience  tends  in  this  direction.  The  fact
that  many  drugs  stimulate  in  the  highest  degree  the  mental
processes  which  I  have  sought  to  describe,  gives  color  to  the
view  that  their  origin  is  not  without  the  organism.  In  our
common  life-experience  we  find  that  one  mind  acts  on  another
only  through  the  medium  of  physical  causes  emanating  from  one
organism  and  reaching  the  other.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  con-
necting link  may  be  so  delicate  as  almost  to  evade  recognition.
Shades  of  feeling  in  one  mind  are  made  known  to  another  by
changes  in  the  countenance  so  slight  and  delicate  as  to  entirely
evade  description.  But  the  medium  of  communication  is  al-
ways present  in  the  light,  which,  reflected  from  one  face,  paints
its  image  on  the  retina  of  the  eye.  This  is  shown  very  conclu-
sively by  the  fact,  that,  if  the  room  is  darkened,  the  one  will  cease
to  be  conscious  of  the  feelings  of  the  other.  We  also  find  that
it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  the  conveyance  of  intelligence  by
such  connecting  physical  causes  that  the  person  receiving  the
intelligence,  or  otherwise  acted  upon,  should  be  conscious  of  it.
He  may  have  no  more  conception  of  the  mode  of  action  than
the  opium-eater  has  of  the  causes  of  his  visions.

If  thought-transference  really  exists,  it  has  hitherto  failed  in
the  case  where  its  agency  has  been  most  urgently  required  by
society.  A  man  on  trial  for  murder  knows  well  whether  he  has
or  has  not  done  the  deed  ;  and  his  mind  is  agitated  by  im-
pressions, which,  could  they  be  conveyed  to  those  who  sur-
round him,  would  settle  the  question  of  his  guilt  or  innocence.
Yet  no  case  has  yet  arisen  where  judge  or  jury  have  been  con-


68  Address  of  the  President

scious  of  any  mental  effect  caused  by  the  transfer  of  impres-
sions from  the  mind  of  the  prisoner  which  could  help  them  to
decide  this  question.  In  great  cities  we  are  surrounded  by
many  thousands  of  our  fellow-men  in  every  stage  of  mental
excitement.  Yet,  if  we  close  our  eyes  and  ears,  we  are  wholly
unconscious  of  any  impression  which  we  can  trace  to  emanations
proceeding  from  their  minds.

But  a  conclusion  thus  reached  is  not  necessarily  beyond  fur-
ther investigation.  We  must  admit,  that,  until  the  formation
of  our  parent  society  in  England,  no  one  ever  undertook  ex-
haustive experiments  to  determine  whether  there  is  or  is  not
any  such  action.  If  the  action  in  question  is  weak,  obscure,  or
rare,  it  might  well  elude  the  rough  tests  which  have  hitherto
been  applied.  The  undoubted  fact  that  the  belief  is  generally
found  in  very  bad  company,  though  suspicious,  is  not  conclu-
sive. The  phenomena  of  hypnotism  afford  an  excellent  illus-
tration of  an  analagous  case.  It  must  be  admitted  that  these
phenomena  have  always  been  found  in  very  bad  company.
From  this  fact  alone  they  scarcely  received  any  attention  from
investigators  for  nearly  a  century ;  and  many  rejected  them  as
spurious,  or  as  the  result  of  collusion  between  the  operator  and
his  subject.  But,  when  once  taken  up  in  a  scientific  spirit,  a
new  condition  of  the  nervous  system  was  discovered,  the  re-
sults of  which  upon  our  knowledge  we  cannot  yet  foresee.

We  must  not  overlook  another  side  of  the  case.  The  theo-
ries which  the  performers  presented  to  the  public,  and  by  which
they  professed  to  explain  the  phenomena,  were  as  false  and  as
spurious  as  any  one  had  ever  supposed  them.  There  was  only
a  residuum  of  truth  at  the  bottom  of  a  great  mass  of  fraudu-
lent pretension.     Yet  that  residuum  was  well  worth  collecting.

The  conclusion  which  an  unbiassed  mind  should  take  of  the
subject,  in  advance  of  any  investigation  or  evidence,  seems  to  be
this:  Leaving  out  all  theories  founded  on  any  supposed  rela-
tion of  the  mind  to  the  nervous  system,  there  can  be  no  sound
reason  for  denying  the  possibility  of  mental  action  at  a  dis-
tance. At  the  same  time,  the  probabilities  of  the  case  are
against  it.  As  it  is  always  best  to  bet  against  any  individual
horse  winning  a  race,  or  any  single  number  occurring  at  a  turn
of  the  roulette  table,  so  it  is  sound  to  consider  the  probabilities


Address  of  the  President.  69

>.
of  the  case  to  be  against  any  scientific  theory  of  the  class  re-
ferred to.     In  other  words,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  side
of  the  affirmative.

On  this  side  we  have  a  mass  of  evidence  so  great  that  we
cannot  deal  with  it  in  detail,  unless  our  task  is  facilitated  by
reference  to  those  logical  principles  which  should  direct  our
thoughts.  In  order  to  avoid  employing  these  principles  in  too
abstract  a  form,  I  shall  borrow  them  directly  from  our  common-
sense  methods  of  drawing  conclusions  in  every-day  life.  It  is,
however,  necessary  to  lay  bare  the  frame-work  which  underlies
these  methods,  and  in  doing  this  I  must  ask  your  close  atten-
tion for  a  few  moments.

Every  explanation  of  natural  phonomena,  when  complete,
involves  two  elements,  —  a  general  law  and  a  particular  fact.
The  former  may,  and  nearly  always  is,  taken  for  granted  as  too
well  known  to  need  statement.  And,  in  fact,  the  ordinary
mind,  how  much  soever  influenced  by  it,  seldom  comprehends
it  with  entire  clearness.  Yet  it  must  exist  in  the  intellect,
consciously  or  unconsciously.

Walking  in  the  fields,  I  hear  a  sharp  explosion.  I  explain  it
by  the  fact  that  some  one  has  fired  a  gun.  In  doing  this,  I
assume  the  general  law  that  the  firing  of  a  gun  causes  an  explo-
sive sound.  To  one  unacquainted  with  this  general  fact,  the
statement  that  a  gun  had  been  fired  would  afford  no  adequate
explanation.  He  would  see  no  connection  between  the  sound
he  had  heard,  and  my  statement  that  it  was  caused  by  firing  a
gun,  until  he  apprehended  the  general  law.

Sitting  at  your  desk  on  a  sultry  afternoon,  you  find  the  air
gradually  growing  dark.  A  flash  of  light  suddenly  illuminates
the  room.  The  explanation  which  at  once  presents  itself  is
that  the  darkness  is  caused  by  a  thunder-cloud,  and  that  the
flash  is  the  result  of  an  electric  discharge  in  the  cloud.  Here
you  have  in  mind  the  general  laws,  that  a  thunder-cloud  cuts
off  a  large  part  of  the  solar  light,  and  that  an  electric  discharge
produces  a  brilliant  flash.  If  you  never  knew  that  an  electric
discharge  produced  a  flash,  the  explanation  would  fail.  But
the  supposition  of  the  particular  fact  that  a  cloud  is  passing  at
the  moment  is  equally  necessary  to  the  explanation.

I  need  not  stop  to  point  out  how  the  general  laws  necessary


70  Address  of  the  President

to  the  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  are  inferred  by  indue*
tion.  Every  rational  mind,  in  the  course  of  its  development,
may  be  said  to  apprehend,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  a  con-
tinual increasing  number  of  laws  of  nature.  Perhaps  the  qual-
ification "  rational "  may  not  here  be  required.  It  may  be  said
that  all  the  higher  animals  reach  a  conception  of  such  laws,
and  that  the  only  difference  is  that  the  irrational  animals  enter-
tain this  conception  unconsciously,  while  rational  minds  enter-
tain it  consciously,  and  can  separate  it  from  that  of  the  special
facts  in  which  it  is  exhibited.

The  main  fact  which  I  wish  to  illustrate  by  this  digression  is
that  every  mind,  in  the  course  of  its  development,  is  modifying
or  adding  to  its  conceptions  of  the  laws  o£  nature.  The  higher
order  of  minds  continually  group  the  laws  apprehended  by
minds  of  a  lower  order,  under  some  more  general  laws ;  and  it
is  in  this  grouping  that  scientific  progress  consists.  We  may
say  that  all  the  laws  apprehended  by  the  common  man  are
grouped  by  the  scientific  theorizer  under  more  general  laws.
In  the  common  mind,  there  are  a  great  number  of  laws  of
nature  determining  the  occurrence  of  physical  pain  or  pleas-
ure, heat,  cold,  blows,  contact  with  acids,  disease,  injuries.
In  the  cultivated  mind,  this  complex  system  of  laws  assumes
the  form  of  a  few  more  general  and  simple  laws.  But  how
far  soever  the  work  of  generalizing  laws  may  be  carried,  they
can  never  be  applied  to  the  explanation  of  phenomena  without
evoking  some  special  fact,  or  system  of  facts,  to  which  they
apply.

It  follows,  that,  when  a  phenomenon  is  presented  to  us  which
we  find  it  difficult  or  impossible  to  explain,  we  must  conclude,
either  that  we  have  some  new  law  of  nature  to  apprehend,  or
that  some  particular  facts  which  we  do  not  see  are  present  to
modif}^  the  action  of  known  laws.  Whether  our  difficulties
arise  from  ignorance  of  the  law  or  of  the  fact,  is  a  question
which  in  some  cases  involves  great  difficulty,  while  in  others
the  mind  settles  it  without  question.  The  untutored  man,  who
for  the  first  time  sees  iron  in  a  state  of  fusion,  learns  correctly
the  (to  him)  new  general  law  that  iron  is  melted  by  heat.  But
he  may  infer  a  new  law  when  he  really  has  to  deal  only  with  a
known  law,  acting  through  facts  which  are  concealed  from  him.


Address  of  the  President.  71

A  juggler  holds  in  front  of  him  a  dish  of  water  filled  with  jelly-
fish. An  assistant  having  thrown  a  large  handkerchief  over
the  dish,  the  juggler  rolls  the  handkerchief  in  a  lump ;  and  ves-
sel, water,  and  fish  have  all  disappeared.  A  looker-on  might
see  in  this  the  evidence  of  some  new  law  of  nature,  in  virtue
of  which  a  mass  of  matter  could  become  invisible ;  but  the  bet-
ter informed  spectator  knows  that  something  has  been  done
under  the  handkerchief  which  he  did  not  see,  and  that  no  new
law  of  nature  comes  into  play.  He  might  find  it  impossible  to
explain,  even  to  his  own  satisfaction,  how  the  disappearance  has
come  about :  but  this  ignorance  does  not  in  any  way  diminish
his  confidence  that  the  phenomenon  can  be  fully  explained  by
the  presence  of  some  particular  circumstances  of  which  he  is
ignorant.

I  hope  that  the  main  principle  which  I  wish  to  enforce  will
now  be  clearly  apprehended.  When  a  set  of  phenomena  pre-
sents themselves  to  us,  apparently  defying  explanation,  we  may
conclude  either  that  some  law  of  nature  of  which  we  have
before  remained  ignorant  has  come  into  play,  or  that  the
result  is  due  to  known  laws  acting  under  particular  circum-
stances of  which  we  are  ignorant.  The  whole  question  of  the
reality  of  psychic  force  is  of  this  kind.  We  have  seen  thought
transferred  from  mind  to  mind.  The  evidence  of  the  transfer
in  some  cases  is  beyond  doubt.  The  question  is,  Did  it  take
place  through  some  physical  connection  between  two  organisms
which  eludes  our  scrutiny,  but  which,  had  we  seen  it,  we  should
have  recognized  as  involving  no  new  principle,  or  did  some  new
law  of  nature  come  into  play?  Is  there  any  criterion  by  which
we  can  decide  between  these  two  hypotheses  ?  The  history  of
scientific  investigation  shows  that  there  is.  But,  before  point-
ing it  out,  let  us  glance  at  the  subject  from  a  slightly  different
standpoint.

Phenomena  which  we  are  unable  to  explain  at  the  moment
are  of  almost  daily  occurrence.  Every  sound  which  we  hear,
and  of  which  we  cannot  state  the  origin,  belongs  to  this  class.
The  course  of  our  thoughts,  and  the  internal  physical  pains
so  familiar  to  humanity,  frequently  belong  to  the  same  class.
Indeed,  the  number  of  particular  facts  which  we  do  not  know
is 'so  very  great,  that  our  natural  impulse  is  always  to  attribute


72  Address  of  the  President.

any  inexplicable  phenomenon,  not  to  some  new  law,  but  to
some  unknown  combination  of  circumstances.  In  many  cases
we  call  phenomena  thus  arising  spurious,  not  because  they  are
unreal,  but  because  we  may  suspect  that  circumstances  which
give  rise  to  them  have  been  intentionally  produced  to  deceive
us.  The  word  would,  however,  bear  a  connotation  which  we
should  avoid  applying  to  the  present  case  without  explanation.

One  very  natural  way  of  investigating  the  question  whether
inexplicable  phenomena  belong  to  the  class  just  mentioned  is
that  followed  by  our  parent  society.  It  consists  in  carefully
investigating  all  the  attendant  circumstances  with  a  view  of
finding  whether  they  afford  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  phe-
nomenon under  known  laws.  If  investigation  shows  the  pres-
ence of  conditions  under  which  the  phenomenon  could  be  pro-
duced by  such  laws  of  nature,  it  is  then  assumed  that  no  new
law  comes  into  play ;  but  if  the  most  searching  investigation
fails  to  discover  any  such  conditions,  then  it  is  to  be  concluded
that  a  new  law  of  nature  is  established,  with  a  greater  or  less
degree  of  probability.

Although  this  method  is  in  perfect  accord  with  our  ordinary
modes  of  investigating  phenomena  involving  no  new  law,  yet  I
must,  with  all  due  respect  to  those  who  have  applied  it,  express
my  dissent  from  its  validity  as  a  method  of  discovering  such
laws.  In  fact,  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  our  e very-day  habit
of  inference  to  infer  a  new  law  by  this  method.  I  think  the
following  illustration  will  make  this  habit  clear.

Let  us  have  presented  to  us  fifty  phenomena,  all  belonging,
so  far  as  we  can  see  at  the  first  glance,  to  one  class,  and  all
apparently  inexplicable  without  assuming  some  new  law.  We
proceed,  however,  to  investigate,  with  a  view  of  determining
whether  they  are  not  the  product  of  circumstances  not  evident
at  the  moment.  Suppose,  to  fix  the  ideas,  that  the  separate
phenomena  are  fifty  in  number:  it  matters  not  whether  fifty
repetitions  of  the  same  thing,  or  fifty  separate  occurrences  of
the  same  general  character,  all  differing  in  their  details.  What
connects  them  together  is  some  element  of  similarity.  They  may
be  produced  by  one  person,  or  they  may  show  certain  likenesses
in  virtue  of  which  they  supposed  them  explainable  by  some  one
new  law.


Address  of  the  President.  73

We  now  proceed  to  investigate.  A  very  little  examination
shows  that  twenty  of  them  are  the  product  of  known  causes
which  we  did  not  at  first  see.  More  careful  examination,  ex-
tended through  several  hours  or  days,  explains  twenty  more
in  the  same  way ;  leaving  only  ten  from  which  to  infer  a  new
law.  Bringing  in  new  means  of  investigation,  and  devoting
increased  industry  to  the  work,  we  succeed  in  explaining  five
more,  one  by  one  ;  leaving  yet  five  which  defy  our  powers.  Are
we  to  conclude  that  these  five  do  not  belong  to  the  same  class
as  the  others,  that  there  cannot  possibly  be  any  circumstances
unknown  to  us  which  have  produced  them,  and  that  some  new
law  of  nature  is  therefore  established  ?  I  think  not.  I  think
the  man  of  well-balanced  mind  in  such  a  case  always  reasqns
thus :  As  first  presented  to  me,  these  phenomena  were  all  of  the
same  general  character.  All  seemed  to  point  to  the  existence
of  a  new  law  of  nature.  All  had  the  character  of  individuals
claiming  that  they  were  not  the  product  of  known  causes.  But,
as  I  went  through  the  investigation,  I  find  that  ninety  per  cent
of  them  had  deceived  me  in  various  ways  by  being  the  product
of  known  causes,  concealed  from  my  sight.  As  some  of  these
hidden  causes  require  little  investigation  for  their  discovery,
others  yet  more ;  and  as  my  powers  of  investigation  are  limited,
and  I  can  never  be  sure  that  no  unknown  causes  are  present,  —
I  therefore  conclude  that  the  remaining  ten  per  cent  are  the
product  of  circumstances  which  have  only  the  common  property
of  eluding  my  present  powers  of  investigation.

This  is,  in  fact,  the  method  of  reasoning  which  we  always
adopt  in  every-day  life.  We  adopt  it  because  we  know  that
circumstances  are  constantly  present,  the  discovery  of  which
eludes  all  our  powers.  No  one  claims  the  ability  to  explain
every  thing  he  sees  and  hears  in  one  day.  He  knows  that  un-
known causes  are  continually  present,  and  is  satisfied  to  relegate
inexplicable  phenomena  to  their  action.  Hence,  the  method  of
investigation  in  question  can  only  show  satisfactorily  our  in-
ability to  discover  the  true  cause,  and  can  never  justify  us  in
concluding  that  a  new  law  of  nature  comes  into  play.

The  true  method  of  investigation  is  exemplified  by  the  whole
history  of  physical  science.  The  general  laws  of  nature  are  per-
permanent :  the  special  circumstances  under  which  they  act  are


74  Address  of  the  President.

continually  varying.  We  see  a  law  only  in  a  sequence  of  phe-
nomena permanent  in  its  character.  This  system  is  also  in  per-
fect accord  with  our  common-sense  method  of  drawing  conclu-
sions. When  the  same  phenomenon  occurs  under  the  same
conditions  time  after  time,  we  infer  a  law  of  nature.  When  we
cannot  trace  its  repetition  to  any  common  set  of  conditions,  we
conclude  that  it  is  due  to  varying  circumstances,  perhaps  un-
known to  us.

It  is  a  characteristic  of  all  scientific  progress,  that,  when  we
ascertain  any  new  law  connecting  phenomena,  we  are  able  to
produce  them  with  continually  increasing  facility.  Take  the
case  of  electricity,  for  example.  Before  regular  experiments
were  made,  electrical  phenomena  were  so  little  known  that  they
might  have  been  deemed  entirely  spurious.  The  early  experi-
menters met  great  difficulty  in  reproducing  them  at  pleasure.
Sometimes  they  appeared,  and  sometimes  they  did  not.  Some-
times electricity  was  conducted  from  one  body  to  another,  and
sometimes  it  was  not.  But,  as  investigation  went  on,  there  was
a  regular  progress,  step  by  step,  until  a  stage  was  reached  at
which  all  the  phenomena  could  be  produced  at  pleasure,  and
fully  explained  by  known  laws  and  attendant  circumstances.

How  does  psychic  research  stand  this  test  ?  I  think  we  must
all  admit,  that,  up  to  the  present  time,  it  does  not  stand  it  at  all.
The  unwelcome  fact  seems  to  be  that  we  have  absolutely  no
general  knowledge  that  we  did  not  have  ten  years  ago.  We
have  seen  that  there  is  sometimes  an  apparent  transfer  of  thought,
and  that  impressions  are  apparently  produced  from  time  to
time  by  unknown  causes.  We  knew  this  as  well  before  we
began  our  investigation  as  we  do  now.  If  any  new  law  of
nature  is  involved,  what  is  its  character?  Let  us  grant  that
thought  is  sometimes  transferred.  What  question  will  then
arise  ?  I  reply,  that  the  first  question  to  be  considered  is  under
what  circumstances  and  conditions,  and  by  what  agencies,  is  it
transferred?  That  these  circumstances,  conditions,  or  agencies
are  exceptional,  is  perfectly  obvious.  Were  they  universal  and
general,  our  minds  would  be  affected  by  those  of  the  thousands
who  surround  us.  We  know  that  they  are  not  so  affected.
The  whole  question,  is,  therefore,  under  what  conditions  are  men-
tal impressions  of  any  kind  communicated  from  mind  to  mind


Address  of  the  President.  75

without  the  intervention  of  known  physical  causes?  I  have
carefully  studied  the  proceedings  of  our  parent  society,  as  well
as  articles  in  magazines  describing  cases  of  supposed  thought-
transference,  without  being  able  to  find  any  answer  whatever
to  this  question.

Let  us  now  look  more  closely  into  the  history  of  the  inves-
tigation. As  our  own  work  is  in  some  sort  a  continuance  of
that  of  the  English  society,  we  may  begin  by  recalling  certain
extremely  interesting  experiments  of  the  former,  which,  if  prop-
erly followed  up,  might  be  expected  to  lead  to  a  definite  con-
clusion.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1882,  some  members  of  the
society  learned  through  Mr.  Douglas  Blackburn,  an  associate,
that  a  mesmerist  of  Brighton,  named  Smith,  had  the  power  of
describing  impressions  existing  in  Mr.  Blackburn's  mind.  After
some  tests  of  this  power,  it  was  found  that  Mr.  Smith  could
copy  a  drawing  of  which  it  was  supposed  he  had  no  knowledge,
except  as  it  existed  in  Mr.  Blackburn's  memory.  In  copying
the  drawings,  the  "  percipient,"  Mr.  Smith,  sat  at  a  table,  blind-
folded, while  behind  him  sat  the  "agent,"  Mr.  Blackburn,
thinking  intently  on  the  form  of  the  drawing  as  he  had  just
seen  it.  Very  soon  Mr.  Smith  began  to  make  a  copy  of  the
drawing  so  like  the  original  that  no  doubt  could  exist  of  a
relation  between  the  two.  This  copying  of  drawings  was  prac-
tised in  December,  1882,  in  Brighton,  and  again  for  three  or
four  days  during  the  following  month  in  London.

It  was  afterwards  found  that  two  young  ladies  in  a  large
drapery  establishment  in  Liverpool  possessed  a  similar  power;
and  reports  on  them  were  made  to  the  society  by  their  em-
ployer, Mr.  Malcolm  Guthrie,  J. P.,  and  by  Professor  Lodge.
In  some  respects  these  trials  are  more  complete  than  those
made  with  Mr.  Smith,  since  a  number  of  persons  seem  to  have
acted  successfully  as  agents.  Out  of  a  total  of  one  hundred
and  fifty  drawings,  only  sixteen  are  given  ;  so  that  the  data  for
deducing  any  law  bearing  upon  the  subject  are  entirely  wanting.

These  copies  of  drawings  have  a  great  advantage  over  ver-
bal descriptions,  in  that  the  record  can  be  made  the  subject  of
future  study.  It  was  found  that  the  three  or  four  persons  able
to  copy  invisible  drawings  were  also  able,  as  we  may  well  sup-


76  Address  of  the  President.

pose,  to  describe  invisible  objects.  It  is  difficult' to  see  how  one
could  draw  an  object  unless  he  had  some  conception  of  it  in  his
mind,  and  with  this  conception  he  should  be  able  to  describe  it.

There  was  also  one  interesting  case  of  an  apparently  marvel-
lous power  of  naming  objects  thought  of  by  others.  The  Rev.
A.  M.  Creery  discovered  that  his  four  little  girls,  as  well  as  a
waiting-maid  in  his  family,  possessed  this  power  in  a  remarkable
degree.  A  child  being  sent  out  of  the  room,  an  object  to  be
thought  of  was  agreed  upon  by  the  company,  or  a  card  was
drawn  from  a  pack  and  passed  around.  On  being  called  back
to  the  room,  the  child  was  very  soon  able  to  name  the  card  or
object.  What  is  yet  more  wonderful,  the  power  was  not  con-
fined to  merely  material  objects,  but  extended  to  the  guessing
of  numbers  and  names  which  could  convey  no  definite  idea  to
a  child's  mind.  Judging  from  the  number  of  reports  made
about  these  children,  it  would  seem  that  some  definite  conclu-
sion might  have  been  hoped  for.

The  question  which  now  arises  is,  Does  all  this  prove  that  in
this  case  thought  was  transferred  from  one  person  to  another
without  the  intervention  of  previously  recognized  agencies?
The  principles  I  have  already  enunciated  will  lead  us  to  answer
this  question  in  the  negative.  All  investigation  of  this  kind
should  assume  in  advance  that  the  phenomena  which  we  observe
are  the  result  of  certain  causes,  or  are  associated  with  certain
conditions ;  and  that  when  these  causes  or  conditions  are  repro-
duced, the  phenomenon  will  recur.  Until  these  causes  or  con-
ditions are  discovered,  nothing  can  be  inferred.

What  science  concerns  itself  with  is  not  the  mere  recurrence
of  the  phenomena,  but  the  nature  of  the  relation  between  the
cause  and  the  effect.  Such  isolated  facts  as  that  some  particu-
lar man  in  the  fifteenth  century  got  well  of  a  disease  after  a
priest  had  laid  hands  upon  him,  or  that  a  little  girl  at  a  certain
time  guessed  a  card  she  did  not  see,  are  in  themselves  of  no  sci-
entific interest  or  importance,  however  well  they  may  be  fitted
to  excite  our  curiosity.  What  we  want  to  discover  is  the
invariable  relation  by  which  every  sick  man  of  a  definable  class,
upon  whom  the  right  kind  of  a  priest  lays  his  hands,  shall  be
cured ;  and  to  discover  all  the  conditions  under  which  a  little
girl  can  name  a  card.    Until  these  conditions  can  be  discovered,


Address  of  the  President.  77

we  have  no  right  to  attribute  the  result  to  one  cause  rather
than  to  another.  It  is  true  that  we  have  not  the  right  to
demand  that  every  little  girl  shall  be  able  to  name  the  card
under  the  given  conditions.  There  may  be  only  one  girl  out
of  a  thousand,  or  only  one  out  of  a  million,  who  possesses  the
required  power,  just  as  there  is  only  one  man  out  of  a  thousand
who  can  integrate  a  differential  equation.  At  the  same  time,
the  cases  must  be  numerous  enough  to  make  them  a  subject  of
some  kind  of  investigation,  and  to  deduce  from  them  a  state-
ment of  some  kind  of  general  law.  The  rarer  they  are,  the
greater  the  attention  that  should  be  devoted  to  them  when
found.

Again,  in  the  case  of  the  drawings,  as  well  as  in  the  other  cases,
the  same  question  arises.  We  have  given,  an  "  agent "  A,  and
a  "  percipient "  P.  It  is  found  that  an  impression  of  some  sort
is  conveyed  from  A  to  P.  What  we  want  to  know  is,  how  it
is  conveyed.  When  we  can  answer  this  question,  we  shall  be
able  to  say  whether  a  new  theory  of  mind  is  to  be  established.
To  find  how  it  is  conveyed,  the  very  first  step  is  to  determine
by  experiment  the  laws  of  conveyance  ;  that  is,  the  conditions
necessary  and  sufficient  to  the  transmission.  The  first  ques-
tions which  would  arise  might  be  the  following :  —

Whether  the  power  on  the  part  of  A  diminishes  with  the
distance  from  P ;  and,  if  so,  according  to  what  apparent  law  ?

Whether  at  any  given  distance  the  relative  position  of  the
two  parties  affects  the  result  ?

Whether  the  intervention  of  a  material  obstacle,  such  as  a
door,  interferes  with  the  transmission  of  the  impression  ?

Whether  the  presence  of  light  or  darkness  affects  the  result  ?

Whether  sight  on  the  part  of  either  A  or  P  is  necessary  ?

Whether  the  result  is  any  more  successful  when  the  object
or  idea  selected  originates  with  the  agent  than  with  some  other
person  ?

Whether  the  presence  of  any  particular  person  is  necessary  ?

After  these  questions  are  all  answered,  other  details  without
number  would  arise.     But  these  would  come  first.

It  does  not  appear,  that,  up  to  the  present  time,  either  the
parent  society  or  our  own  has  been  able  to  decide  any  of  these
questions.     When  the  experiments  were  begun,  it  was  indeed


78  Address  of  the  President,

sought  to  determine  whether  contact  between  Mr.  Blackburn
and  Mr.  Smith  was  necessary.  This  question  was  decided  in  the
negative.  In  another  case,  where  the  trials  were  made  with
Messrs.  Blackburn  and  Smith,  the  observers,  after  making
eleven  numbered  experiments,  placed  the  two  men  in  separate
rooms.  It  was  then  found  that  the  communication  failed.
But  there  was  no  inquiry  why  it  failed,  and  no  statement
whether  the  door  was  open  or  shut,  or  whether  the  parties
were  farther  apart  than  they  were  when  the  experiment  suc-
ceeded.

Whatever  view  we  may  take  of  this  matter,  it  seems  to  me,
that,  in  the  absence  of  any  consideration  or  decision  upon  the
various  questions  which  I  have  raised  respecting  the  conditions
of  thought-transference,  we  are  not  entitled  to  conclude  that
any  causes  come  into  play  in  the  matter  except  unknown  con-
ditions. This  view  is  strengthened  by  another  consideration
to  which  I  shall  call  your  attention.  I  have  alreacty  alluded  to
the  general  fact  in  the  history  of  scientific  investigation,  that,
when  sequences  of  phenomena  which  are  rare  in  themselves
become  a  subject  of  inquiry,  their  reproduction  and  observation
become  easier  and  easier.  Two  centuries  ago  the  phenomena
of  electricity  produced  by  artificial  excitation  were  extremely
rare  and  had  little  variety.  But,  as  science  advanced,  new
methods  of  producing  electrical  effects  were  discovered,  and
the  conditions  of  the  production  of  electricity  became  easier
and  easier  to  fulfil.  Now  no  one  has  any  doubt  or  difficulty
about  the  method  of  producing  electrical  phenomena  at
pleasure.  Why  this  should  be  so  is  obvious.  The  more  we
study  a  phenomenon  which  is  the  product  of  a  law  of  nature
acting  under  certain  conditions,  the  more  likely  we  are  to  dis-
cover such  conditions.  The  more  we  find  out  about  them,  the
easier  it  will  be  to  produce  them,  or  to  determine  the  law  of
their  recurrence.  Easier  investigation  is  therefore  the  almost
necessary  result  of  scientific  progress.

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  phenomenon  becomes  more  rare  as
we  proceed,  we  reach  the  conclusion  that  it  is  not  associated
with  any  given  conditions  by  a  law  of  nature,  but  is  only  the
result  of  accidental  or  unknown  circumstances  unassociated
with  any  new  law.     I  may,  perhaps,  borrow  an  astronomical


Address  of  the  President.  79

illustration  of  this  principle.  We  know  that  astronomical
records  contain  many  observations  of  dark  bodies  passing  over
the  disk  of  the  sun.  It  has  frequently  been  supposed  that
these  phenomena  were  due  to  the  transits  of  unknown  inter-
Mercurial  planets.  But,  when  we  look  into  the  history  of  the
subject,  we  find  that  such  observations  are  nearly  always  made
by  comparatively  inexperienced  observers,  with  imperfect  in-
struments; and  that  as  instruments  are  improved,  and  observers
acquire  practice,  they  gradually  disappear.  These  facts  alone
have  sufficed  to  render  astronomers  sceptical  as  to  their  reality.
The  fact  that  the  observations  cannot  be  reconciled  with  each
other  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  they  belong  to  the  same
body  is  generally  considered  to  afford  nearly  conclusive  proof
of  their  spurious  character.  In  fact,  we  may  regard  this  charac-
ter as  now  fully  established.

Guided  by  this  analogy,  let  us  see  what  we  should  expect  the
history  of  psychical  research  to  be,  were  thought-transference
real.  An  investigator  would  have  found  one  or  more  persons
possessing  some  power  of  influencing  the  minds  of  others  by  a
direct  transfer  of  ideas.  It  would  probably  have  been  found
that  some  ideas  were  transferred  more  readily  than  others,  and
that  the  transfer  was  better  marked  under  some  conditions  than
under  others.  The  discovery  of  these  ideas  and  their  conditions
would  in  its  turn  have  facilitated  the  study  of  the  transfer  by
teaching  how  to  secure  it,  and  thus  the  body  of  knowledge
would  have  gone  on  increasing.  This  knowledge  would  have
resulted  in  the  discovery  of  other  laws,  and  in  the  gradual  en-
largement of  the  number  of  people  who  possessed  the  power.
Finally  the  investigators  would  have  been  able  to  say :  If  you
consider  this  or  that  form  of  thought ;  if  you  select  a  certain
definable  class  of  people,  and  proceed  in  a  certain  way,  —  then
you  will  be  able,  when  you  please,  to  observe  thought-trans-
ference.

Such  has  not  been  the  history  of  the  case.  The  most  careful
collection  of  facts  and  observations  during  three  years  has  failed
to  show  any  common  feature  in  the  ideas  transferred,  and  has
thrown  no  light  on  the  question  of  the  condition  under  which
the  phenomena  can  occur.  The  theory  cannot  be  reconciled  on
any  reasonable  hypothesis,  even  that  of  thought-transference,


80  Address  of  the  President.

with  the   absence   of  such   action  where  we   should  most  ex-
pect it.

When  we  consider  the  importance  of  the  problems  which
were  presented,  we  cannot  but  feel  regret  that  so  little  public
attention  was  given  to  the  subject.  If  we  accept  the  conclusion
of  thought-transference,  we  have  the  startling  result  that  there
were  and  probably  still  are  in  England  a  number  of  people
possessed  of  the  power  of  perceiving  or  being  affected  by  what
is  going  on  in  other  men's  minds.  Why  did  not  Parliament
grant  the  necessary  funds  to  enable  these  people  to  be  collected,
supported  at  the  public  expense,  and  experimented  upon?
"  Practice  makes  perfect,"  says  the  proverb ;  and  it  might  well
be  hoped  that,  after  a  little  well-directed  practice,  these  people
could  perceive  the  thoughts  and  memories  in  the  minds  of  mur-
derers and  robbers,  and  thus  do  away  at  one  stroke  with  one
of  the  greatest  difficulties  in  administering  justice.  Instead  of
this,  the  parties  and  the  subject  have  been  lost  sight  of,  so  far
at  least  as  appears  from  published  records.

To  suppose  that  the  society  has  made  no  effort  to  utilize  the
knowledge  acquired  during  its  existence,  by  discovering  other
persons  possessed  of  the  powers  in  question,  would  be  too
severe  a  reflection  upon  its  eminent  membership  for  any  one  to
indulge  in.  In  the  absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  we  are
to  presume  that  a  very  careful  search  has  been  kept  up.  But,
if  this  is  so,  not  only  have  no  new  discoveries  been  made,  but
the  old  ones,  if  we  can  call  the  conclusions  by  that  name,  have
not  been  confirmed.

I  feel  it  a  great  misfortune  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  take
an  active  part  in  the  work  of  this  society,  and  am  not  fully
acquainted  with  its  latest  details.  So  far,  however,  as  I  have
learned,  we  have  been  less  successful  than  the  parent  society  in
finding  satisfactory  subjects  of  investigation.  We  might  almost
say  that  careful  search  has  failed  to  bring  us  subjects  to  be  ex-
perimented upon.  An  exception  to  this  is  found  in  the  case  of
one  of  our  most  eminent  members,  who  has  been  experimenting
upon  mesmerized  persons.  His  work  having  not  yet  been  com-
municated to  the  society,  I  must  speak  of  it  with  much  reserve,
and  may  possibly  be  out  of  strict  order  in  alluding  to  it  at  all.
I  cannot,  however,  refrain  from  citing  one  result  which  he  has


Address  of  the  President,  81

verbally  communicated  to  me.  It  is  well  known  that  mesmer-
ized persons  are  those  supposed  to  be  most  susceptible  to  the
reception  of  agencies  exerted  by  other  minds  without  physical
communication.  I  learn,  however,  that  our  fellow-experimenter
has  not  been  able  to  find  any  cases  in  which  any  mental  impres-
sion could  be  conveyed  to,  or  any  nervous  effect  produced  upon,
a  mesmerized  subject,  without  a  sufficient  physical  cause  being
found.  Isolate  the  agent  and  the  subject  from  each  other,  and
no  impression  or  action  whatever  can  pass  from  one  to  the
other.

If  the  investigation  of  thought-transference  is  to  be  still  fur-
ther pursued  by  us,  it  may  be  useful  to  point  out  the  condi-
tions under  which  we  should  expect  it  to  be  found.  One  of
these  must  be  found  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  is  surrounded
by  a  crowd  watching  a  pyrotechnic  display.  Within  a  few
yards  of  him  there  are  a  hundred  people  who  simultaneously
receive  upon  their  minds  the  startling  impression  of  a  brilliant
rocket.  If  there  is  such  a  thing  as  telepathy,  then,  a  person
standing  in  the  middle  of  the  crowd,  with  his  eyes  closed  and  his
ears  filled  with  wax,  ought  to  know  just  when  the  rocket  appears,
by  a  mental  tremor  of  some  kind,  not  traceable  to  any  physical
agency.  I  suggest  this  as  one  very  simple  experiment  on  the
subject.

Let  us  take  another  case.  West  of  the  Mississippi  River
there  are  probably  several  hundred  thousand  persons  whose
chief  amusement  is  the  playing  of  a  game  of  cards,  in  which  a
knowledge  of  the  cards  which  another  person  right  in  front  of
him  is  looking  at,  or  even  the  power  to  make  a  probable  guess
on  the  subject,  would  lead  rapidly  to  success  and  fortune.  Yet
not  a  case  has  ever  been  known  to  arise  in  which  a  player  could
get  the  slighest  inkling  of  what  sort  of  a  hand  his  opponent  held
by  any  process  of  mind-reading.  Is  it  not  worth  our  while  to
institute  an  investigation  among  the  players  of  this  game  ?

The  question  may  arise  whether  the  non-occurrence  of  the
phenomenon  under  those  circumstances  where  we  should  most
suspect  it  is  not  due  to  the  rarity  of  some  special  power.  This
hypothesis  is  however  negatived  by  the  observations  of  our
parent  society,  already  mentioned.  We  have  seen  that  three
or  four  children  and  a  waiting-maid  were  found  in  a  single


82  Address  of  the  President.

family,  all  of  whom  could  name  cards  which  other  persons  had
simply  looked  at,  and  could  even  guess  a  number  which  another
person  thought  of.  Now,  if  the  power  were  really  rare,  what  is
the  probability  that  four  persons  possessing  it  would  be  found
in  a  single  family  ?  We  should  have  to  wander  among  the  in-
finities to  investigate  it.  Possibly  it  might  be  suggested  that
heredity  would  result  in  one  possessing  the  same  powers  that
others  did.  But  heredity  could  not  extend  to  the  waiting-maid
of  the  family,  unless  we  introduce  some  such  new  biological
hypothesis  as  the  absorption  of  one  person's  powers  by  another.
Not  only  were  four  or  five  of  the  persons  found  in  one  family,
but  in  other  cases  two  or  more  were  found  at  work  in  the  same
factory.  Now,  adopt  what  theory  we  may,  this  curious  group-
ing of  persons  endowed  with  the  power  prevents  us  from  re-
garding it  as  sporadic.  We  must  form  the  hypothesis,  that,
when  one  individual  possesses  it,  there  is  a  certain  chance  of  its
passing  to  another  individual  who  chances  to  be  an  inmate  of
the  same  family.  But,  if  we  adopt  this  hypothesis,  how  shall
we  prevent  it  from  spreading  through  the  whole  community  ?
In  fine,  what  rational  hypothesis  can  we  form  to  explain  every
thing?  If  we  grant  that  thought-transference  is  a  fact,  just
how  are  we  to  limit  it?  How  explain  its  apparent  absence
under  circumstances  where  we  should  most  suspect  it  ?  What
prevents  any  one  person  from  being  influenced  by  the  thoughts
and  feelings  of  the  whole  thousand  million  of  other  people  who
live  in  the  world?  In  the  absence  of  any  answer  by  the
Psychical  Society,  I  shall  suggest  one  :  The  intensity  of  the
effect  diminishes  very  rapidly  with  the  distance.

If  this  be  the  case,  it  should  increase  very  rapidly  as  the  dis-
tance diminishes  ;  and  of  this  no  evidence  has  been  found.  Nor
is  the  hypothesis  of  dependence  upon  distance  supported  by  all
the  facts.  In  some  of  the  most  striking  cases  on  record,  the
parties  were  separated  by  miles  ;  I  am  not  sure  but  continents
or  oceans  have  occasionally  intervened.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  not  only  has  no  theory  of  thought-
transference  been  constructed,  but  it  does  not  seem  possible
even  to  imagine  any  one  simple  theory,  or  set  of  general  laws,
which  will  explain  all  the  phenomena.  I  beg  leave  to  say  once
more,  that  what  we  want  is  a  statement  of  general  laws,  like


Address  of  the  President.  83

those  which  we  find  in  books  on  mechanics,  electricity,  magnet-
ism, or  physiology,  setting  forth  the  conditions  under  which
thought-transference  can  be  brought  about.  That  no  such
work  has  appeared,  or  been  attempted,  can,  it  seems  to  me,  be
accounted  for  only  by  the  fact  just  brought  out,  that  no  one  set
of  principles  can  be  formulated  that  will  cover  all  the  supposed
tacts.

When,  some  two  years  ago,  the  early  experiments  of  the  Eng-
lish psychical  society  were  made  known,  it  seemed  to  me  that
a  strong  case  was  made  out  for  a  new  law  of  nature  governing
the  transmission  of  thought,  or  some  form  of  mental  influence
from  person  to  person.  The  state  of  the  case  I  suppose  to  be
that  a  number  of  members  found  themselves  permanently  able
to  copy  drawings  without  other  guidance  than  the  thoughts  of
other  members  not  in  physical  contact  with  them.  Under  the
influence  of  this  possibility,  I  encouraged  the  formation  of  our
own  society,  and  accepted  membership  in  it.

Being  thus  interested  in  the  work,  my  first  act  was  very  natu-
rally to  enter  upon  a  more  critical  and  careful  study  of  the  work
of  the  parent  society.  I  soon  noticed  that  in  its  essential  fea-
tures it  differed  remarkably  from  what  I  had  supposed.  It  lost
the  character  of  generality  which  I  had  attributed  to  it.  As
the  result  of  the  circumstances  which  I  have  already  considered,
I  may  say  that  the  work  of  the  society  seems  to  me  to  have
almost  entirely  removed  any  ground  which  might  have  existed
for  believing  thought-transference  to  be  a  reality.  I  have  seen
nothing  in  our  own  work  to  change  that  conclusion.  Every
wide  consideration  which  occurs  to  me  leads  in  the  same  direc-
tion. We  are  not  dealing  primarily  with  a  question  of  quantity
and  degree,  but  with  one  of  yes  or  no.  Considered  in  ad-
vance of  experience,  it  may  be  an  open  question  whether  thought
in  its  very  nature  is  or  is  not  transferrable.  Whether  we  regard
thought  as  simply  the  working  of  our  own  organism,  or  regard
our  minds  as  inhabiting  our  nervous  systems,  it  may  be  true
in  either  case  that  our  minds  are  absolutely  incapable  of  exert-
ing an  actio  in  distans.  Now,  if  this  be  true  as  an  essential  qual-
ity of  mind,  then  the  very  expression  "  thought-transference  "
involves  an  impossibility.  But  granting  that  it  is  true,  and  that
thought  may  be  transferred,  then  reflect  upon  the  number  of


84  Address  of  the  President

people  who  surround  us,  and  the  infinity  of  the  conditions  under
which  thought  might  be  transferred.  How  is  it  that  with  such
ample  opportunities  of  experiment  extending  through  centuries,
and  such  industry  as  has  been  devoted  to  the  subject  here  and
in  England  through  the  last  two  years,  no  living  person  knows
any  more  about  the  conditions  of  transference  to-day  than  men
did  a  thousand  years  ago  ?

The  question  suggests  itself  whether  the  search  for  the
phenomena  under  present  circumstances  is  not  much  that  of
looking  for  a  kind  of  gold  which  shall  differ  in  density  from
ordinary  gold,  or  for  a  substance  of  unheard-of  specific  gravity.
We  may  advertise  for  specimens  of  such  things,  and  execute
many  weighings,  with  a  view  of  testing  claimants  to  our  atten-
tion. Yet  I  am  persuaded  that,  should  we  undertake  this,  the
unanimous  views  of  chemists  would  be  that  we  were  wasting
our  labor.  The  negative  evidence  that  no  gold  has  been  found
differing  much  in  specific  gravity  from  that  which  we  carry  in
our  pockets  is  conclusive  against  its  existence.

Whether  we  should  take  the  same  view  of  thought-transfer-
ence is  a  question  on  which  I  refrain  from  expressing  a  decided
opinion,  for  the  reason  that  no  such  opinion  is  necessary.  Even
if  there  is  no  real  thought-transference,  we  have  cases  of  appar-
ent thought-transference  to  investigate  and  explain,  which  may
lead  us  to  the  discovery  of  new  laws  of  mental  action.

An  illustration  of  the  line  of  research  here  indicated  may  not
be  out  of  place.  The  largest  collection  of  facts  made  by  our
parent  society  comprises  occurrences  of  the  following  general
character.  A  person,  generally  one  not  subject  to  hallucina-
tions, suddenly  receives  an  impression  the  cause  of  which  he
cannot  define.  Commonly  it  is  the  visual  image  of  some  absent
friend  or  relative  in  a  state  of  suffering,  or  the  voice  of  a  speaker
calling  aloud,  or  the  impression  a  pain  not  associated  with  any
physical  cause.  After  a  few  hours,  days,  or  weeks,  news  is
received  from  the  friend  that  something  had  happened  to  him
at  the  very  moment  the  impression  had  been  received,  bearing
too  close  relation  to  the  impression  for  a  mere  accidental  co-in-
cidence. Very  often  the  case  is  one  of  the  death  of  the  friend.
Sometimes  he  cried  aloud  in  pain,  and  used  the  very  words
which  the  other  heard.


Address  of  the  President.  85

Such  is  the  order  of  events  as  commonly  described ;  but,  if
described  as  they  actually  come  to  knowledge,  they  would  ap-
pear in  a  different  form.  The  experience  of  the  observer  would
be :  I  heard  that  my  friend  was  dead,  or  that  he  had  met  wifrh
an  accident  and  cried  aloud.  After  inquiring  when  the  death
or  accident  occurred,  I  remembered  that  about  that  time  I  heard
this  very  exclamation,  or  saw  his  image  before  my  eyes.

Now,  we  have  two  theories  on  which  this  may  be  explained.
It  may  be  that  there  was  a  real  transfer  from  the  friend  to  the
percipient ;  or  the  whole  recollection  may  have  been  the  work
of  the  percipient's  mind  at  the  time,  —  a  mere  illusion  of  the
memory.  My  own  experience  leads  me  to  believe  that  these
illusions  are  more  common  and  more  difficult  to  distinguish
from  the  reality  than  generally  supposed.  I  have  no  reason  to
consider  myself  in  any  unusual  degree  the  victim  of  illusions ;
yet  I  frequently  find  vague  impressions  in  my  mind  the  reality
of  which  I  am  unable  either  to  deny  or  affirm.  They  may  have
been  dreams,  and  they  may  have  been  occurrences.  I  fre-
quently have  a  dream  which  I  forget  all  about  until  a  day  or
two  afterwards,  when  perhaps  some  impression  produced  in  the
dream  is  brought  to  mind.  Having  totally  forgotten  that  I
had  any  dream  at  all,  I  am  often  at  a  loss  to  say  whether  the
impression  is  that  of  something  which  I  really  saw,  or  some-
thing which  I  dreamed  of.  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have
had  an  hallucination  in  my  waking  hours,  but  dream  halluci-
nations I  find  not  at  all  uncommon.  It  may  not  be  out  of
place  if  I  relate  one,  which,  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  a  year,
I  am  still  unable  to  classify  with  certainty  as  a  reality  or  illu-
sion.

I  dined  with  friends  at  a  hotel,  later  and  more  generously
than  was  my  custom,  and  retired  without  the  post-prandial  air-
ing necessary  in  my  case  to  sound  sleep.  The  window  of  my
room  in  the  hotel  was  directly  above  the  kitchen,  and  I  was
much  disturbed  by  noise  coming  from  that  quarter.  Some  time
in  the  night,  I  cannot  tell  when,  I  heard,  or  thought  I  heard,
a  window  opened  above  my  room,  and  the  voice  of  a  guest  call-
ing in  a  loud  voice  to  the  servants  below,  "  If  you  don't  stop
that  racket,  I  will  get  up  and  leave  the  hotel."  The  whole  im-
pression was  so  vivid  that  I  have  ever  since  been  in   doubt


86  Address  of  the  President.

whether  it  was  a  dream  or  a  reality,  with  perhaps  slight  proba-
bilities in  favor  of  its  being  a  dream.

I  believe  that  our  dream  life  and  our  imaginative  powers  are
more  potent  factors  in  the  production  of  supposed  extraordi-
nary phenomena  than  is  commonly  supposed.  Whatever  may
be  the  fate  of  the  theory  of  thought-transference,  the  phenom-
ena of  hypnotisms,  as  well  as  of  dreams,  illusions,  and  faults
of  memory,  are  all  before  us.  They  form  a  field  of  which  the
cultivation  has  only  commenced,  and  which  ought  to  prove
attractive  to  all.  I  even  venture  to  say,  that,  if  thought-trans-
ference is  real,  we  shall  establish  its  reality  more  speedily  by
leaving  it  out  of  consideration,  and  collecting  facts  for  study,
than  by  directing  our  attention  especially  to  it.


THE   NUMBER-HABIT.1


The  first  report  of  the  Thought-transference  Committee  discusses
the  results  of  the  experiments  of  a  number  of  persons  to  guess  a  digit
of  which  another  person  was  thinking.  In  one  series  of  guesses,  the
number  of  right  guesses  considerably  exceeded  the  probability  of
chance.  This  instance  of  possible  telepathy  was  designated  Case  E.
On  p.  33,  ante,  may  be  found  the  statement  that  the  case  was  to  be
further  studied.

This  has  been  clone,  and  has  led  to  the  result,  that  the  guesser  or
percipient  had  a  very  decided  system  of  guessing,  or  an  unconscious
number-habit,  which  he  was  following  all  the  while,  and  which  was
different  from  the  habit  of  numbers  of  the  agent.  The  two  minds
were,  therefore,  working  differently,  each  according  to  its  own  habits  :
hence  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  there  was  in  this  case  any  real
thought-transference ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  excess  of  right
guesses  was  due  to  any  thing  but  chance  coincidences.

The  form  of  the  experiments  was  particularly  favorable  to  the  exhi-
bition of  a  number-habit  in  the  percipient,  because  each  digit  appeared
once,  and  only  once,  in  the  series  from  which  he  was  to  guess.  If
the  guesses  were  made  entirely  by  chance,  then  each  digit  ought  to
appear  in  a  large  series  of  trials  an  almost  equal  number  of  times,
and  in  a  shorter  series  of  trials  an  approximately  equal  number  of
times.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  percipient  has  an  unconscious  pref-
erence for  certain  digits,  they  will  appear  in  the  record  in  excess ;

1  Presented  as  an  appendix  to  the  first  report  of  the  Thought-transference  Committee.


The  Number-Habit.  87

and  since  the  digits  are  written  down  without  the  percipient  seeing
the  record,  and  are  selected  while  the  mind  is  occupied  with  another
purpose  than  the  study  of  habit,  it  is  probable  that  such  preferences
as  the  records  contain  were  absolutely  unconscious.  Finally,  it  must
be  noted,  that  in  several  instances  one  thousand  or  more  digits  were
recorded  from  a  single  person,  and,  moreover,  in  separate  sets  of
one  hundred.  The  number  was  sufficiently  large  to  base  averages
upon.  The  division  into  sets  rendered  it  possible,  by  the  separate  tab-
ulation of  the  sets,  to  ascertain  whether  the  preferences  were  constant ;
i.e.,  truly  habitual.

To  facilitate  the  discussion,  one  of  the  sets  of  100  guesses  sent  to
the  committee  is  reproduced  here.  It  is  the  fifth  of  ten  sets, by  Miss
G.  B.     In  the  first  column  are  given  the  digits  to  be  guessed ;  on


6.

0

2

3

8

3

6

0

6

4

3

0.

3

1

4

5

2

2

0

7

3

4

1.

5

3

6

6

6

4

1

5

2

9

8.

6

6

5

1

4

9

4

3

7

0

9.

8

7

2

0

5

7

3

2

9

2

3.

4

2

0

3

9

3

6

8

5

8

4.

2

4

9

4

6

6

8

3

8

5

7.

1

8

7

5

7

8

2

4

6

7

5.

7

3

3

2

8

3

5

6

2

3

2.  6486549714

each  horizontal  line  are  given  the  records  of  the  attempts  to  guess  the
digit  at  the  beginning  of  that  line.  For  the  details  of  the  experiment,
see  these  Proceedings,  Part  I.,  p.  15.  In  the  above  set  are  one  hun-*
dred  digits  guessed.     Of  the  ten  digits  we  find

that  1234567890

is  guessed     5  12  15  13  10  14    9  10    6    6  times.

1  only  five  times,  but  3  fifteen  times.  If  we  go  farther,  and  tabulate
all  the  sets,  we  find  that  the  preferences  are  maintained  more  or  less
positively  throughout.  The  set  chosen  as  a  special  sample  was  se-
lected because  its  preferences  nearly  coincide  with  those  found  by
averaging  the  ten  sets.  The  following  table  shows  the  preferences  in
all  the  sets  of  this*  percipient :  —


88


The  Number-Habit.


Percipient,  Miss

G.  B.

Digits    .     .     .

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

Square

.     1

12

12

16

10

6

10

10

7

11

6

No.

times.

a

.     2

11

10

13

7

12

10

8

9

10

10

a

<<

<<

.     3

11

12

14

10

6

11

9

8

8

11

a

a

it

.    4

11

13

13

10

8

12

8

8

6

11

it

a

a

.     5

5

12

15

13

10

14

9

10

6

6

a

a

a

.     6

8

12

11

11

7

10

9

9

11

12

it

n

it

.    7

11

12

13

8

12

13

7

9

7

8

n

a

it

.     8

7

11

16

10

11

12

8

7

7

11

it

a

a

.    9

5

11

13

12

10

13

10

9

8

9

a

a

a

.     0

7
88

11
116

14

138

10
101

13

10

8

9

9

9
93

it

a

Totals

.     .     .

95

115

86

85

83

If  there  were  absolutely  no  disturbing  cause,  each  total  ought,  of
course,  to  be  exactly  one  hundred ;  instead  of  which  there  are  one
hundred  and  thirty-eight  3's  against  only  eighty-three  9's.  These
differences  are  not  due  to  single  excesses,  either  positive  or  negative,
but  to  the  more  or  less  constant  repetition  of  them  in  each  set.  The
number  of  times  a  given  digit  appears  in  a  single  square  is  extremely
variable,  which  is  of  course  to  be  expected  with  psychic  phenomena  ;
and  we  find  that  in  one  set  the  favorite  3  was  guessed  only  eleven
times,  the  same  number  that  the  neglected  9  appears  in  the  first  set.
»  But  it  will  be  noticed  that  each  number  has  its  characteristic  range  of
variations.  The  following  table  shows  this  ;  the  numbers  are  arranged
in  the  order  of  the  preferences,  as  indicated  by  the  totals  in  the  pre-
ceding table,  the  totals  being  given  in  the  second  line ;  the  third  line
gives  the  highest  number  of  times  the  digit  was  guessed  in  any  set,  the
fourth  line,  the  lowest  number  :  —


•  Digit

3

2

6

4

5

0

1

7

8

9

Total  guesses  ....

138

116

115

101

95

93

88

86

85

83

Highest  in  a  set   .     .     .

16

13

14

13

13

12

12

10

10

11

Lowest  in  a  set    .     .     .

11

10

10

8

7

6

5

7

7

6

From  this  table  it  is  evident  that  the  centre  of  variation  is  higher
throughout  for  the  favorite  numbers  than  for  the  neglected  ones.
The  range  of  variation  is  itself  variable,  and  doubtless,  also,  a  matter
of  habit ;  but  the  material  is  insufficient  for   studying  this  special


The  Number -Habit.


89


question  satisfactorily.  The  table  shows  conclusively,  that,  despite
the  variations  in  each  set,  the  preferences  are  really  maintained
throughout.  It  so  happens  that  in  this  table  the  smallest  numbers  in
a  set  for  the  three  favorites  are  the  same  as  the  highest  numbers  in  a
set  for  the  three  least-liked  digits.  The  order  of  preferences  is  singu-
lar :  it  was  not  anticipated  that  3  would  come  first,  nor  1  so  late  ;  but
these  peculiarities  are  general,  though  not  uniform.

It  seems  unnecessary  to  give  all  the  tables  in  detail :  two  are  there-
fore selected  to  illustrate  1,  a  set  of  preferences  quite  different  from
those  of  Miss  G.  B.  ;  and  2,  Case  E,  Mr.  C.  H.  B.

Percipient,  G.  W.  N.


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
9

0

8

Square  ....  1

10

7

13

11

11

11

10

10

<<

2

10

6

10

11

10

11

12

11

8

11

<(

3

6

11

9

9

12

13

9

10

12

9

a

4

4

7

12

10

9

16

14

9

10

9

a

5

5

7

11

13

11

11

15

13

10

4

a

6

6

9

13

10

14

11

12

10

9

6

a

7

7

9

11

9

13

12

10

10

10

9

a

8

7

9

10

12

13

10

11

8

11

9

a

9

3

10

13

15

13

10

11

10

9

6

a

10

4

9

8

14

14

11

12

10

10

8

Totals

62

84

110

114

120

116

116

101

98

79

In  this  series  5  is  the  favorite,  and  1  the  least  liked  ;  5  being  guessed

one  hundred  and  twenty  times,  nearly  twice  as  often  as  1,  sixty-two

times.     The  order  of  preference  is  5,  6,  7,  4,  3,  8,  9,  2,  0,  1.

We  turn  now  to  Case  E,  which  has  particular  interest  for  us  :  —

Percipient,  Mr.  C.  H.  B.


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

8

.  .  1

10

8

11

10

7

10

10

10

16

ii

.  .  2

10

10

12

11

10

9

10

10

9

9

ii

.  .  3

9

11

14

13

13

13

11

3

5

8

ii

12

7

12

12

9

10

12

11

9

6

ii

.  .  5

8

6

13

10

11

9

12

13

9

9

il

8

10

12

12

10

14

11

li

6

6

il

.  .  7

10

13

16

15

15

8

10

5

3

5

ii

.  .  8

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

ii

.  .  9

9

9

10

12

11

10

15

8

8

8

ii

.  .  10

11

8

12

12

10

8

11

9

10

85

9

78

Totals

97

92

122

117

106

101

112

90

90


The  Number -Habit.


In  this  series,  3  is  the  favorite,  and  9  the  least  liked ;  but  the
extremes  are  by  no  means  so  wide  asunder  as  in  the  previous  table.
The  order  of  preference  is  3,  2,  6,  4,  5,  0,  1,  7,  8,  9.  On  account  of
the  importance  of  Case  E,  the  following  table,  to  show  the  range
of  variation  of  each  digit  as  regards  its  frequency  in  single  sets
(squares) ,  is  added  :  —


3

16
10

4

7

5

6

1

12

8

2

13

8

8

9

o

Highest  in  a  set  .  .  .  .
Lowest  in  a  set   ....

15
10

15
10

15

7

14

8

13
3

1G

o
o

10
5

We  have  in  this  case,  also,  the  previously  noted  changes  in  the  centre
of  variation  ;  hence,  in  the  critical  "  case  E,"  the  mind  of  the  percipi-
ent was  following  its  own  bent.  Attention  may  be  directed  to  the
excessive  variation  in  C.  H.  B.'s  guessing  of  8's  and  9's,  whicli  is
without  a  parallel  in  our  remaining  cases.  The  agent  in  this  case
was  Miss  L.  L.  H.,  who  acted  in  a  set  of  trials  as  percipient,  with  the
following  result :  —

Digit 4        6        3        5        8        01279

occurs 121    118    117    107    105    102    96    88    75    71  times.

These  preferences  are  entirely  different  from  those  of  Mr.  C.  H.  B.,
just  given  above.     It  seems,  therefore,  impossible  to  believe  that  in
"Case  E,"  when  C.  H.  B.  was  percipient  and  L.  L.  H.  agent,  that
the  mental  number-habit  of  the  agent  affected  the  percipient.
The  following  table  summarizes  the  results  :  —


1

2

3

4

5

6

7
112

8

9

0  1

i
i

Percipient

C.  H.  B.  .

97

92

122

117

106

101

90  85

78  |

a

C.  H.  .  .

73  121

104

97  !  131

88

112

91  96

87|

%

a

W.  P.  P.  .

102  101

107

104

104

81

99

97  j  104

101  |

5

a

G.  B.  .  .

88  116

138

101

95

115

86

85 }  83

93!

a4

a

G.  W.  N. .

62  84

110  114

120

116

116

101 i  98

79  !

o

a

L.  L.  H.  .

96  1  88

117  121

107

118

75

105  71

102  |

H.  K.  C.  .
G.  C.  W.  .

85  116

111  111  122

116

89

82  94

74  |

05

11

10

9

12

9

11

11

11

12

4

at
Cf5

it

P.  N.  E.  .

38

35

43

41

49

45

46

45

33

25

P

re

n

F.  T.  .  .

83

129

103

123

116

143

104

106-

120

73

892

964

941

959

934

850

813  j  796

716

The  Number-Habit.


91


According  to  this  table  the  digits  are  to  be  ranked  thus :  —


3   5   4   6   2   7   8
964  959  941  934  892  850  823


1        0
735    716  times.


Digit

guessed    ....    964    959    941    934    892    850    823    796

It  should  be  remarked  that  3  does  not  always  come  first,* but  does
so  only  in  two  cases  out  of  ten ;  in  every  case,  however,  it  occupies
a  high  position.  Neither  do  1  and  0  always  come  last,  but  in  no
case  do  either  of  them  take  a  high  position.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  sort
of  general  conformity  between  the  persons  studied  as  to  their  number-
habit  ;  we  must  therefore  assume  that  there  is  some  general  reason
for  the  preferences,  as  well  as  special  reasons  to  explain  the  charac-
teristic individual  idiosyncrasies.

It  was  thought  that  a  choice  was  made  between  odd  and  even  num.
bers.  Each  person  has  his  or  her  habit ;  but  in  this  regard  the  prefer,
ences  are  about  evenly  balanced,  as  shown  by  the  table  :  —


Percipient.

Odd

Numbers.

Even
Numbers.

C.  H.  B

C.  H

W.  P.  P

G.  B

G.  W.  N

L.  L.  H

H.  K.  C

G.  C.  W

P.  N.  E

F.  T

522
516
516
490
506
466
501

478
484
484
510
494
534
499

Times.

u

ft

Si

a
a
a

<<
it

a

52
209
526

48
191
574

Totals

4,304

4,296

The  original  tabulations  were  made  by  sets  of  one  hundred,  and  in
every  instance  it  was  found  that  in  some  of  the  sets  of  each  series
the  preferences  were  reversed.  At  first,  this  was  puzzling,  since  the
preference  was  regarded  as  habitual ;  but  it  was  noticed  that  here  the
question  of  the  centre  of  variation  also  comes  in  as  the  determining
factor.  This  is  shown  by  all  the  tables.  Two  are  given  as  illustra-
tions ;  C.  H.  and  W.  P.  P.  are  selected,  as  the  values  of  the  totals  are
identical  in  the  two  series.


92


The  Number-Habit.


Percipient,  C

.  H.

Square.

•

Odd.

Even.

1

49

51

2

54

46

3

51

49

4

57

43

5

50

50

6

47

53

7

54

46

8

52

48

9

54

46

10

48

52

Totals,

516

484

Percipient,  W.

P.P.

Square.

Odd.

Even.

1

48

52

2

54

46

3

51

49

4

55

45

5

50

50

6

49

51

7

51

49

8

54

46

9

50

50

10

54

46

Totals,

516

484

Both  persons  have  a  decided  preference  for  odd  numbers,  but  both  in
some  sets  guess  an  excess  of  even  numbers :  but  with  C.  H.  the
odd  numbers  range  from  47  to  57,  the  even  numbers  from  43  to  53  ;
and  with  W.  P.  P.  the  odd  numbers  range  from  48  to  55,  the  even
numbers  from  45  to  52.  In  both  cases,  the  range  of  the  preferred  odd
numbers,  as  regards  their  frequency  in  a  set,  is  higher  than  for  the
even  numbers.  In  other  words,  the  centre  of  variation  is  higher  for
the  preferred  numbers.  And  the  fact  that  the  preferences  are  reversed
in  certain  sets  does  not  indicate  that  the  preferences  are  not  truly
habitual ;  for  instance,  the  less  liked  even  numbers  at  their  maximum
frequency  with  C.  H.  and  W.  P.  P.  occur  less  times  than  do  the  odd
numbers  at  their  maximum.

We  have  in  all  eighty-six  hundred  observations ;  therefore,  with  all
disturbing  influences  eliminated,  each  digit  ought  to  occur  eight  hun-
dred and  sixty  times  ;  in  reality


Digit

Occurs

Times.

3

964

=  860  +  104

5

959

=  860  +  99

4

941

=  860  +  81

6

934

=  860  +  74

2

892

=  860  +  32

7

850

=  S60  —  10

8

813

=  860  -  47

9

796

=  860  -  64

1

735

=  860  -  125

0

716

=  860  -  144

The  Number-Habit.


93


showing  that  7  is  the  most  impartially  treated,  and  that  the  ex-
treme dislikes  are  much  stronger  than  the  extreme  preferences.  On
the  other  hand,  the  lesser  preferences,  4,6,  and  2,  are  more  marked
than  the  lesser  dislikes,  7,  8,  9.  It  results  that  the  balance  is  kept ;
the  average  of  all  the  preferences  being  860  +  78,  of  all  the  dislikes
860—78.  This  exact  balance  is,  of  course,  involved  in  the  conditions
of  the  experiment.

Calculating  from  our  data,  if  ten  thousand  single  digits  be  written
down  in  random  order,  but  with  the  general  intention  of  putting
each  digit  down  the  same  number  of  times,  we  should  expect


Digit  12  3  4         5  6  7

to  occur     S5+  103+  112+  109+  110+  108+     98+


8  9  0

94+     92+     83+  times.


It  appears,  therefore,  that  every  person  concerned  in  the  experi-
ments had  their  personal  and  characteristic  number-habit,  which  they
adhered  to  quite  rigidly ;  and  we  conclude  that  their  mental  action
was  not  regulated  or  perceptibly  influenced  in  guessing  the  digits  by
the  thought  of  the  digit  in  the  mind  of  the  agent.  This  conclusion
applies  to  "  Case  E."

We  can,  however,  go  farther ;  for  in  Case  E  the  order  in  which  the
numbers  are  guessed  is  also  a  matter  of  habit,  presumably  uncon-
scious. Examination  of  the  original  record  showed  that  whenever  a
nine  or  eight  was  guessed,  that  the  digits  fell  off  on  either  side  of  it
in  a  striking  manner ;  thus  4,  8,  9,  7,  5,  3,  or  1,  4,  7,  8,  6,  2,  0.  A
complete  tabulation  was  made  and  the  averages  calculated  ;  all  the
7's,  8's,  and  9's  were  added  together  and  the  average  taken  ;  then  all
the  digits  next  before  these  same  7's,  8's,  and  9's  were  added  to-
gether and  the  average  taken  ;  then  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  digits
before  likewise  ;  next  the  averages  were  ascertained  for  the  digits
guessed  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  after  the  7's,  8's,  and  9's,
which  mark  the  centres  of  the  groups.  The  following  table  gives  the
results :  —


Fourth  digits  before      ....

Average  3.3

From  65

observations.

Third        "         "

.     ,

"         3.4

"      71

(<

Second      "         "

,     ,

"         4.2

"      79

a

First         "  •       "

.     ,

"         5.4

"      93

a

Central  digits  .     .     .

,     .

8.7

"     112

it

First          "      after

,

"         5.4

"     100

a

Second      "          "

>     .     .

4.4

"      91

it

Third        "         "

,     .

"         3.4

"      79

a

Fourth      "         "

.     .     .

"         2.8

"      70

it

94


The  Number-Habit.


We  see  that  the  habit  is  so  constant  that  it  is  plainly  shown  in  the
averages.  It  won  Id  be  still  more  marked  in  the  averages,  were  it  not
that  sometimes,  instead  of  guessing  through  the  whole  series,  —  i.e.,  up
to  9  or  8  and  down  again, —  C.  H.  B.  would  take  only  half  a  series  ;  for
instance,  go  up,  then  commence  low  after  the  9  and  go  up  again,  —  e.g.,
1,  5,  7,  9,  0,  2,  4,  6,  —  or  else  run  down,  and  then  beginning  with  a  9
go  down  again,  — e.g.,  6,  2,  1,  0,  9,  8,  7,  6,  5.  In  short,  C.  H.  B.'s
habit  was  to  guess  the  digits  by  skipping  irregularly  up  or  down  the
regular  series.

One's  first  thought  is  that  this  is  perfectly  natural  and  usual ;  but
on  the  contrary,  as  far  as  our  data  go,  it  seems  to  be  in  reality  very
unusual,  for  no  other  person  among  those  who  have  made  the  digit
tests  has  the  same  habit.  Their  guesses  were  tabulated  in  the  same
manner  as  just  explained  for  C.  H.  B.  The  following  table  gives  the
average  of  the  8's  and  9's,  and  of  the  numbers  guessed  before  them
and  after  them.


Digits

BEFORE

5

ID

So

Digits

AFTER.

Fourth.

Third.

Second.

First.

First.

Second.

Third.

Fourth.

C.  H.    .     .     .

4.1

3.8

4.5

5.0

8.9

4.6

4.0

4.0

3.6

W.  P.  P.

4.2

4.0

4.1

3.5

8.8

3.6

3.2

3.2

4.0

G.  B.    .

3.7

3.6

3.8

4.6

8.6

3.4

4.0

3.1

3.3

G.  W.  N.

4.4

3.1

4.1

4.8

8.8

i   4'1

2.0

4.3

4.2

L.  L.  H.

3.5

2.9

2.8

4.3

8.7

3.6

3.6

3.8

3.9

H.  K.  C.

4.2

3.6

4.5

4.3

8.7

4.0

3.2

3.9

3.9

G.  C.  W.

4.7

4.9

4.3

3.0

9.0

I    5.0

4.6

3.8

5.4

P.  N.  E.

4.5

4.9

4.8

5.5

9.4*

5.0

4.7

4.9

5.3

F.  T.    .

4.6

4.5

4.4

3.9

8.8

3.3

4.7

4.3

5.0

The  utmost  to  be  gathered  from  this  table  is,  that  the  numbers
guessed  just  before  or  after  an  8  or  a  9,  are  apt  to  be  a  little  higher
than  otherwise,  but  not  one  of  these  nine  persons  has  C.  H.  B.'s
habit  of  order  in  guessing.

The  facts  elucidated  in  this  article  are  unfavorable  to  the  idea  of
thought-transference  having  taken  place  in  any  of  the  experiments
with  digits.  We  have  learned  that  each  person  has  his  characteris-
tic and  personal  number-habit,  and  this  habit  regulates  his  guessing,
and  thus  becomes  evidence  of  a  very  positive  character  that  the
guessing  of  the  percipient  was  not  regulated  by  thoughts  of  digits
transferred  from  the  agent's  mind.     "  Case  E,"  which  might  have


*  In  this  case  10's  were  used  iustead  of  0's.


Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.  95

been  taken  as  a  possible  illustration  of  thought-transference,  is  found
to  exhibit  an  exceptionally  rigid  and  persistent  number-habit  in  the
percipient :  hence  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  large  number  of
right  guesses  was  the  outcome  of  coincidences  merely,  not  more
numerous  than,  according  to  the  theory  of  probabilities,  we  ought  to
expect  in  one  case  out  of  every  sixty  (approximately) .  Such  a  case
may  occur  at  the  beginning  as  well  as  at  the  end.  Professors  Pierce
and  Pickering  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  case  is  not  really
remarkable,  even  if  regarded  as  a  coincidence.

Although  the  laborious  digit-tests  undertaken  at  the  request  of  the
committee  have  proved  purely  negative  as  regards  thought-transfer-
ence, they  have  added  a  very  interesting  demonstration  of  the
minuteness  with  which  habit  plays  its  part  as  a  factor  in  our  mental
operations.  This  fact  has  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  demonstrated
before  so  perfectly  ;  and  we  may  therefore  consider  the  experiments
to  possess  a  positive  as  well  as  a  negative  value.

CHARLES  SEDGWICK  MINOT.


REPORT  OF  THE   COMMITTEE   ON  HYPNOTISM.

Many  hours  have  been  spent  in  work  upon  this  subject  by  the
members  of  the  committee,  for  the  most  part  singly.  Mr.  Cory  has
no  report  to  make  at  present.  Messrs.  James  and  Carnochan's
experiments  were  confined  almost  entirely  to  students  of  Harvard
College.  Out  of  between  fifty  or  sixty  of  these,  who  were  operated
on,  a  dozen,  more  or  less,  were  influenced  at  the  first  sitting,  being
a  proportion  of  about  one  in  five.  Two  men  were  so  much  better
subjects  than  the  rest,  that  they  ended  by  receiving  almost  exclusive
attention.

The  comparatively  small  amount  of  time  at  our  disposition  for
these  investigations,  and  the  variations  of  some  of  the  subjects  from
one  day  to  another,  necessitating  many  repetitions  of  the  same  experi-
ment, make  it  impossible  to  report  any  thing  definitive  this  year.  A
few  of  our  notes  may,  however,  be  of  interest,  although  nothing
essentially  novel  is  contained  therein.

The  need  of  "guiding  sensations"  for  voluntary  motion  was  proved
by  the  artificial  reproduction  of  a  rare  pathological  state.  In  two
persons  (one  of  them  being  the  Mrs.  P.  who  is  mentioned  in  the
report  on  mediumistic  phenomena)  an  arm  was  made  absolutely
anaesthetic,  whilst  retaining  its  muscular  contractility.     Under  these


96  Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.

circumstances,  the  subject  could  execute  a  commanded  movement, —
such  as  raising  the  arm,  clenching  the  fist,  writing  the  name,  etc.,  —
but  only  when  the  eyes  were  used  to  superintend.  With  closed  eyes
the  movements  were  feeble  and  ineffectual,  and  the  patient  quite
uncertain  whether  the  purpose  had  been  accomplished  or  not.  Pas-
sive movements  communicated  to  the  arm  and  hand  were  then  un-
recognized or  misunderstood.

Much  time  was  spent  in  a  quest  (as  yet  only  advanced  enough  to
show  how  far  from  simple  the  conditions  are)  of  what  the  psychical
modification  is  in  the  hypnotic  trance.  Is  the  anaesthesia,  for  ex-
ample, produced  by  suggestion,  due  to  an  abolition  of  sensation  or
an  abolition  of  M  apperception"?  Does  the  subject  not  feel?  oris
he  become  incapable  of  noticing  what  he  feels  ?  or  is  his  state  some-
thing more  peculiar  still  ?

That  the  sensorial  process1  occurs,  seems  proved  by  after-images.
Two  of  our  subjects  who  were  made  completely  blind  to  a  red  patch
laid  on  a  piece  of  paper  immediately  saw  a  bluish-green  patch  when
the  red  patch  was  removed. 2

That  the  process  of  apperception,  assimilation,  or  recognition  of
what  the  impression  is,  does  also  occur,  seems  proved  by  observa-
tions of  a  somewhat  similar  sort  on  the  same  two  subjects.  Make
a  stroke  on  paper  or  blackboard,  and  tell  the  subject  it  is  not  there,
and  he  will  see  nothing  but  the  clean  paper  or  board.  Next,  he  not
looking,  surround  the  original  stroke  with  other  strokes  exactly  like
it,  and  ask  him  what  he  sees.  He  will  point  out  one  by  one  all  the
new  strokes,  and  omit  the  original  one  every  time,  no  matter  how
numerous  the  new  strokes  may  be,  or  in  what  order  they  are  arranged.
Similarly,  if  the  original  single  stroke  to  which  he  is  blind  be  doubled
by  a  prism  of  sixteen  degrees  placed  before  one  of  his  eyes  (both
being  kept  open),  he  will  say  that  he  now  sees  one  stroke,  and  point
in  the  direction  in  which  the  image  seen  through  the  prism  lies.

Obviously,  then,  he  is  not  blind  to  the  kind  of  stroke  in  the  least.
He  is  blind  only  to  one  individual  stroke  of  that  kind  in  a  particular
position   on   the  board  or  paper,  —  that  is,  to  a  particular  complex

1  By  sensorial  I  do  not  necessarily  mean  retinal  exclusively.  M.  Binet,  in  his  excellent  little
Psychologie  du  RaUonnement,  considers  that  after-images  involve  cerebral  as  well  as  retinal
processes.  If,  namely,  the  right  eye  look  fixedly  at  a  colored  stripe  whilst  the  left  eye  is  closed,
the  left  eye  will  get  an  after-image  of  the  stripe  when  we  open  it  and  look  at  the  background,
closing  in  turn  the  right  eye.  A  student,  Mr.  R.  W.  Black,  to  whom  I  was  showing  the  experi-
ment, suggested  that  the  after-image  might  still  belong  to  the  shut  right  eye,  combining  its
darkened  field  of  view  with  the  open  left  eye's  brighter  one.  This  objection  to  Mr.  Binet's
interpretation  of  the  process  as  non-retinal  is,  at  least,  plausible.  I  have  as  yet  been  unable  to
devise  an  experimental  combination  for  deciding  conclusively  between  the  two  views.  —  W.  J.

2  That  this  was  not  due  to  suggestion  or  expectation,  seems  proved  by  its  not  invariably
taking  place  with  the  same  subject.


Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism,  97

object ;  and,  paradoxical  as  it  may  seem  to  say  so,  he  must  distin-
guish it  with  great  accuracy  from  others  like  it,  in  order  to  remain
blind  to  it  when  the  others  are  brought  near.  He  "  apperceives '  *
it,  as  a  preliminary  to  not  seeing  it  at  all ! *  How  to  conceive  of  this
state  of  mind,  is  not  easy.  It  would  be  much  simpler  to  understand
the  process,  if  adding  new  strokes  made  the  first  one  visible.  There
would  then  be  two  different  objects  apperceived  as  totals,  —  paper
with  one  stroke,  paper  with  two  strokes  ;  and,  blind  to  the  former,
he  would  see  all  that  was  in  the  latter,  because  he  would  have  apper-
ceived it  as  a  different  total  in  the  first  instance.

A  process  of  this  sort  occurs  sometimes  (not  always)  when  the  new
strokes,  instead  of  being  mere  repetitions  of  the  original  one,  are
lines  which  combine  with  it  into  a  total  object,  say,  a  human  face.
The  subject  of  the  trance  then  may  regain  his  sight  of  the  line  to
which  he  had  previously  been  blind,  by  seeing  it  as  part  of  the  facea

When  by  a  prism  before  one  eye  a  previously  invisible  line  has
been  made  visible  to  that  eye,  and  the  other  eye  is  closed  or  screened,
its  closure  makes  no  difference  ;  the  line  still  remains  visible.  But  if
then  the  prism  is  removed,  the  line  will  disappear  even  to  the  eye
which  a  moment  ago  saw  it,  and  both  eyes  will  revert  to  their  ori-
ginal blind  state.2

We  have,  then,  to  deal  in  these  cases  neither  with  a  sensorial  anaes-
thesia, nor  with  a  mere  failure  to  notice,  but  with  something  much
more  complex ;  namely,  an  active  counting  out  and  positive  exclusion
of  certain  objects.  It  is  as  when  one  "cuts"  an  acquaintance,
"  ignores  "  a  claim,  or  "refuses  to  be  influenced "  by  a  consideration
of  whose  existence  one  remains  aware.  This,  at  least,  expresses  a
provisional  hypothesis  which  may  reveal  new  facts  by  suggesting  new
observations  to  test  its  truth.

The  delicacy  of  discrimination  shown  in  recognizing  the  invisible
line  is  often  very  great.  The  extraordinary  mixture,  in  the  hypnotic
trance,  of  preternatural  refinement  of  discrimination  with  the  grossest
insensibility,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  condition.
A  blank  sheet  of  paper  with  machine-cut  edges,  without  water-mark
or  any  thing  which  could  lead  to  the  recognition  of  one  side  or  edge
from  the  other,  is  shown  to  the  subject,  with  the  statement  that  it  is
a  photograph  of  a  well-known  face.  As  soon  as  he  distinctly  sees
the  photograph  upon  its  surface,  he  is  told  that  it  will  float  off  from

1  M.  Ch.  Fere  was,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  first  to  make  this  remark.

2  The  phenomenon  is  described  as  it  most  frequently  happens.  There  have  been  some  ex-
ceptions, and  there  are  some  curious  variations  in  ihe  visibility  of  the  finger  with  which  the
subject  points  out  the  line  he  sees  when  he  looks  at  it  with  both  eyes  open  and  the  prism  before
one ;  but  these  we  reserve  for  further  study.


98  Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.

the  paper,  make  a  voyage  round  the  walls  of  the  room,  and  then
return  to  the  paper  again.  During  this  imaginary  performance,  be
sees  it  successively  on  the  various  regions  of  the  wall ;  but  if  the
paper  is  meanwhile  secretly  turned  over,  and  handed  to  him  upside
down,  or  with  its  under  surface  on  top,  he  instantly  recognizes  the
change,  and,  seeing  the  portrait  in  the  altered  position  of  the  paper,
turns  the  latter  about  "  to  get  the  portrait  right."  Here,  then,  is  an
hallucination,  which,  in  traversing  the  room,  can  conquer  the  most
discrepant  backgrounds,  but  which  peculiarities  in  the  look  of  a  sheet
of  paper,  perceivable  by  no  normal  eye,  can  turn  upside  down  !  Sheets
of  paper  absolutely  indistinguishable  by  the  bystanders,  or  by  the
subject  himself  when  awake,  are  identified  in  trance,  no  matter  how
much  they  may  be  shuffled  and  mixed  together,  by  the  imaginary
pictures  they  are  supposed  to  bear.  The  hallucination  is  presumably
determined  by  minute  peculiarities  in  the  paper,  and  yet  it  negates
completely  the  paper's  most  flagrant  characteristic,  which  is  the  blank-
ness  of  its  surface.1  We  have  no  comment  to  make  on  the  psychic
condition  here,  except  to  suggest  its  complexity,  and  its  analogy  to
the  psychic  blindness  previously  described.  Both  states  imply  a
preliminary  process  of  discrimination  and  identification  of  the  object
really  present,  followed  by  its  apperception  or  conception  in  falsified
form.  The  conception  is  what  the  subject  believes,  and  on  it  he  acts.
To  what  degree  it  carries  actual  sensorial  brain-processes  with  it,  is  a
matter  for  future  research.  That  it  can  carry  them  is  evident ;  for,
as  we  have  verified,  the  hallucination  of  a  colored  patch  on  a  real
white  ground  will  sometimes  be  followed  by  a  negative  after-image
when  the  gaze  is  transferred  to  another  place.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  when  subjects  are  asked  to  trace  their  hallucinations  with  a
pencil,  or  even  to  describe  them  minutely,  they  often  show  a  vague-
ness and  uncertainty  which  their  previous  expressions  and  actions
would  hardly  have  led  one  to  expect.

Another  very  simple  observation  shows  the  delicacy  of  visual  dis-
crimination in  the  trance  state.  If  a  sheet  of  ruled  foolscap  paper,
or  a  paper  with  a  fine  monotonous  ornamental  pattern  printed  on  it,  be
shown  to  the  subject,  and  one  of  the  ruled  lines  or  elements  of  the
pattern  be  pointed  to  for  an  instant,  and  the  paper  immediately
removed,  he  will  then  almost  alwa}7s,  when  after  a  short  interval  the
paper  is  presented  to  him  again,  pick  out  the  indicated  line  or  element

1  This  reminds  us  a  little  of  the  state  of  mind  in  those  perceptions  called  by  Aubert  "  secon-
dare Urtheilstauschungen."  The  moon,  e.  g.,  appears  to  most  people  small  through  a  telescope.
The  instrument  enlarges  all  its  details  so  that  it  seems  near,  —  so  near  that  we  apparently  think
its  retinal  image  ought  to  be  larger  if  it  were  the  same  moon.  Ergo,  we  deem  it  a  smaller  moon.
In  other  words,  our  conclusion  turns  round  and  destroys  its  own  premises.


Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.  99

with  infallible  correctness.  The  operator,  meanwhile,  has  either  to
keep  his  eye  fixed  upon  it,  or  to  make  sure  of  its  position  by  count-
ing, in  order  not  to  lose  its  place.

This  puts  us  on  the  track  of  a  distinction  between  the  normal  and
the  trance  mode  of  perception,  which  partly  explains  the  latter.  The
evolution  of  man's  mind  is  altogether  in  the  analytic  direction.  He
deals  with  objects  by  picking  out  their  "  essential  "  character,  tra-
cing its  consequences,  and  ignoring  other  features.  He  remembers  a
house  in  a  street  by  the  one  little  inconspicuous  detail  of  its  number,
very  likely  observing  nothing  else  about  it ;  and  similarly  he  retains
the  line  on  the  foolscap  paper  by  not  dispersing  his  attention  over  the
sheet,  but  counting  the  number  of  lines  between  the  one  selected  and
the  nearest  edge.  The  number  thus  obtained  is  a  permanent  part
of  the  mind's  possession,  and  is  obviously  for  practical  purposes  more
exact  than  any  reminiscence  of  the  "  general  look  "  of  the  line  in  its
place  would  be.

The  trance-subject,  however,  surrenders  himself  to  the  general
look.  He  disperses  his  attention  impartially  over  the  sheet.  The
place  of  the  particular  line  touched  is  part  of  a  u  general  effect "
which  he  gets  in  its  entirety,  and  which  would  be  distorted  if  an-
other line  were  touched  instead.  This  general  effect  is  lost  upon
the  normal  looker-on,  bent  as  he  is  on  concentration,  analysis,  and
emphasis.  What  wonder,  then,  that,  under  these  experimental  condi-
tions, the  trance-subject  excels  him  in  touching  the  right  line  again  ?
If  he  has  time  given  him  to  count  the  line,  he  will  excel  the  trance-
subject  ;  but,  if  the  time  be  too  short  to  count,  he  will  best  succeed
by  following  the  trance  method,  abstaining  from  analysis,  and  being
guided  by  the  "  general  look  "  of  the  line's  place  on  the  sheet.  One
is  surprised  at  one's  success  in  this  the  moment  one  gives  up  one's
habitually  analytic  state  of  mind.

Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  we  have  in  this  dispersion  of  the  atten-
tion and  subjection  to  the  "  general  effect"  something  like  a  relapse
into  the  state  of  mind  of  brutes?  The  trance-subject  never  gives
any  other  reason  for  his  optical  discriminations,  save  that  it  "looks
so."  So  a  man,  on  a  road  once  traversed  inattentively  before,  takes
a  certain  turn  for  no  reason  except  that  he  feels  as  if  it  must  be  right.
He  is  guided  by  a  sum  of  impressions,  not  one  of  which  is  emphatic
or  distinguished  from  the  rest,  not  one  of  which  is  essential,  not  one
of  which  is  conceived,  but  all  of  which  together  drive  him  to  a  con-
clusion to  which  nothing  but  that  sum-total  leads.  Are  not  some
of  the  wonderful  discriminations  of  animals  explicable  in  the  same
way?     The  cow  finds  her  own  stanchions   in   the   long   stable,  the


100  Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.

horse  stops  at  the  house  he  has  once  stopped  at  in  the  monotonous
street,  because  no  other  stanchions,  no  other  house,  yield  impartially
all  the  impressions  of  the  previous  experience.  The  man,  however,
by  seeking  to  make  some  one  impression  characteristic  and  essential,
prevents  the  rest  from  having  their  effect.  So  that,  if  the  (for  him)
essential  feature  be  forgotten  or  changed,  he  is  too  apt  to  be  thrown
out  altogether.  The  brute  or  the  trance-subject  may  then  seem  to
outstrip  him  in  sagacity.

It  ought  to  be  said,  that,  in  trying  to  verify  in  other  ways  this
hypothesis  of  the  trance-subject's  non- analytic  state  of  mind,  we
have  met  with  exceptions  which  invite  to  further  study.  Certain  it  is
that,  when  expressly  stimulated  thereto,  trance-subjects  will  reason
and  analyze  acutely.  We  therefore  publish  the  above  notes  as  sug-
gestions to  inquiry  rather  than  as  records  of  results.

The  habitual  psychic  stagnancy  of  the  trance-subject  is  shown  by
another  simple  test.  If  a  lot  of  dots  or  strokes  on  a  piece  of  paper
be  exhibited  for  a  moment  to  a  person  in  normal  condition,  with  the
request  that  he  say  how  many  are  there,  he  will  find  that  they
break  into  groups  in  his  mind's  eye,  and  that  whilst  he  is  analyzing
and  counting  one  group  the  others  dissolve.  In  short,  the  impression
made  by  the  dots  changes  rapidly  into  something  else.  In  the  trance-
subject,  on  the  contrary,  it  seems  to  stick;  and,  if  the  dots  did  not
much  exceed  twenty,  our  patients  counted  them  off  in  their  mind's  eye
with  ease.1

This  is  all  we  can  say  at  present  of  the  hypnotic  subject's  mental
state,  —  a  topic  whose  investigation  will  tax  the  wit,  but  certainly
reward  the  industry,  of  the  most  ingenious  psychologist  who  may
devote  himself  to  its  elucidation.

There  was  no  sign  of  any  sort  of  clairvoyance  in  either  of  the  two
advanced  subjects  above  mentioned,  nor,  as  tested  by  card  guessing,
in  Mrs.  P.,  the  medium,  when  in  the  hypnotic  condition.  A  very
good  student-subject,  discovered  by  one  of  his  comrades,  was
reported,  on  what  seemed  not  bad  evidence,  to  have  named  in  his
trance  objects  hidden  from  his  sight ;  but,  in  the  two  sittings  we  had
with  him,  nothing  of  the  sort  occurred.  Indeed,  on  the  second  of
these  occasions,  he  was  witli  difficulty  kept  entranced  at  all.

The  only  quite  mysterious  case  of  perception  we  found  was  with

1  The  stagnancy  of  miud  is  also  shown  by  the  tranquil  way  in  which  the  most  incongruous
suggestions  are  adopted.  A  large  silk  handkerchief  was  made  invisible  by  suggestion  to  one  of
our  subjects,  and  then  thrown  over  the  body  of  a  gentleman  so  as  to  hide  all  between  his  head
and  his  knees.  Naturally,  as  it  was  opaque  as  well  as  invisible,  it  made  invisible  whatever  it
covered.  "Is  C.  still  in  the  room?"  the  subject  was  then  asked.  "His  head  is  here,"  was
the  reply,  made  in  a  perfectly  indifferent  tone :  "  I  don't  know  where  his  body  is."


Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism.  101

another  subject,  who  in  either  six  or  seven  different  trials  picked  out
from  a  heap  of  silver  and  copper  change,,  consisting  of  from  fourteen
to  twenty-two  pieces,  the  one  coin  which  had  been  contributed  by  his
operator  to  the  heap.  He  never  made  a  false  guess  on  the  evenings
when  these  successes  occurred  ;  and  the  only  reason  he  could  give  for
his  choice  was  either  that  the  coin  felt  as  if  it  were  the  right  one,  or
that  it  "  felt  heavy."  The  coins  were  of  course  arranged  out  of  his
sight ;  and  in  some  of  the  later  trials,  though  not  in  the  whole
series,  express  care  was  taken  to  see  whether  he  might  not  have
been  guided  to  his  choice  by  the  right  coin  being  warmer  than  the
rest,  but  with  a  negative  result.  On  one  evening  he  altogether  failed
in  this  experiment.  With  handkerchiefs  he  was  less  uniformly  suc-
cessful. We  shall  continue  these  experiments,  so  as  to  ascertain,  if
possible,  the  nature  of  the  clew  which  determined  the  subject's
choice.

A  direct  difference  in  the  effects  of  upward  and  downward  passes,
independent  of  suggestion  or  expectation,  has  always  been  part  of  the
orthodox  "magnetic"  creed.  But  the  recent  flood  of  "scientific"
literature  on  the  subject  is  almost  mute  on  this  point.  Dr.  W.  K.
Mitchell  of  Philadelphia,  a  contemporary  of  Braid,  whose  caution,
clearness,  and  cool  head  ought  ere  now  to  have  secured  for  him
a  prominent  name  in  the  history  of  hypnotism,1  admitted  that  the
different  effects  of  upward  and  downward  passes  were  the  only
sign  of  a  direct  physical  influence  of  operator  upon  subject  which
he  was  able  to  find.  Our  own  experiments  verified  the  difference  in
question  in  cases  too  numerous  to  be  plausibly  ascribed  to  accident.
The  young  men  upon  whom  the  passes  were  made  knew  nothing  of
what  we  were  seeking  to  test,  and  as  often  as  not  answered  wrongly
when  asked  later  if  they  knew  the  direction  in  which  the  passes
had  been  made.  Yet  in  five  or  six  individuals,  upward  passes,  the
first  time  they  were  tried,  awoke  the  patient,  or  restored  his  hand,
arm,  etc.,  to  its  natural  state,  whilst  downward  passes  had  a  pre-
cisel}'  opposite  effect.  It  is  a  curious  thing  to  see  the  face  of  a  man
whose  eyes  and  mouth  have  been  shut  tight  by  suggestion,  and  over
whose  face  the  operator  makes  passes  in  an  upward  direction  on  the
right  side,  whilst  he  makes  downward  passes  on  the  left.  On  being
told  to  open  their  eyes  and  whistle,  two  or  three  such  patients  have
opened  upon  us  only  the  right  eye,  and  whistled  out  of  the  right
corner  of  their  mouth.  Others  showed  no  difference  whatever  in
their  reaction  to  the  different  passes.  The  matter  must  be  prose-
cuted further.     Obviously,  so  long  as   it   is   under  dispute,  experi-

1  See  his  Five  Essays,  edited  by  Dr.  S.  Weir  Mitchell,  Philadelphia.


102       Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

ments,  to  prove  any  thing,  must  be   made  with   ignorant   subjects,
and  must  succeed  the  first  time  they  are  tried.

Besides  the  observations  we  have  recorded,  we  verified  most  of  the
now  classical  and  familiar  phenomena  of  trance.  A  few  curious
observations  on  the  rapport  between  operator  and  subject,  and  on
the  influence  of  magnets,  had  better  be  treated  as  coincidences  for
the  present,  because  not  found  in  the  subject  at  different  times.
Our  experience  has  impressed  upon  us  the  variability  of  the  same
subject's  trance  from  one  day  to  another.  It  may  occur  that  a
phenomenon  met  with  one  day,  but  not  repeated,  and  therefore  ac-
counted a  mere  coincidence,  is  really  due  to  a  particular  phase  of
the  trance,  realized  on  that  occasion,  but  never  again  when  sought
for.  To  decide  definitely  between  these  alternatives,  in  the  case  of
any  special  phenomenon,  would  obviously  require  many  sittings  and
consume  much  time.

WILLIAM  JAMES.
GOUVERNEUR  M.   CARNOCHAN.


REPORT   OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  MEDIUMISTIC

PHENOMENA.

The  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena  has  no  definitely  con-
cluded piece  of  work  to  offer.  An  account  of  what  has  been  done
during  the  year,  however,  with  a  few  reflections,  may  not  be  out
of  place.

Mr.  Glendower  Evans's  untimely  death,  and  Mr.  T.  W.  Higgin-
son's  resignation,  reduced  the  committee  to  two  members,  —  Mr.
M.  J.  Savage  and  Dr.  W.  N.  Bullard.  The  undersigned,  who  had
resigned,  joined  the  committee  again  in  March.  We  held  no  formal
meetings  as  a  committee,  but  each  did  what  work  he  had  opportunity
for.  Mr.  Savage's  departure  for  Europe  lias  made  a  report  from  him
impossible,  although  he  spent  many  hours  in  the  service,  with  results
winch  it  is  hoped  may  some  day  be  completed  and  see  the  light.  Dr.
Bullard  has  no  report  to  make.

My  own  time  was  chiefly  divided  between  two  mediums, — one  a
trance-medium,  whom,  at  her  request,  I  shall  call  Mrs.  P.  ;  the  other,
Miss  Helen  Berry,  whose  public  "materializing"  manifestations  are
reputed  to  be  among  the  best  of  their  class.

Concerning  Miss  Berry,  there  is  little  to  say.  Test  conditions
against  fraud  are  not  habitually  offered  at  her  seances.      On  one


Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.        108

occasion  it  was  granted  to  Mr.  Savage  to  sit  behind  the  cabinet,
others  being  in  front,  whilst  I  explored  it  after  the  medium's  entrance,
and  found  no  confederate  concealed.  A  trap-door  seemed  out  of  the
question.  In  a  minute  two  forms  emerged  from  the  cabinet.  But
this  was  our  first  sitting,  and  for  certain  reasons  we  cannot  call  the
experiment  satisfactory  until  we  have  an  opportunity  of  taking  part
in  it  again.  The  real  test  of  the  Berry's  genuineness  is  supposed  to
be  the  resemblance  of  the  forms  to  deceased  friends  of  the  sitters,
and  the  character  of  what  they  say.  A  large  amount  of  testimony
can  be  collected  from  sitters  as  to  the  unmistakable  identity  of  the
forms  with  their  dead  wives,  husbands,  brothers,  etc.

I  visited  twelve  seances,  and  took  with  me,  or  sent,  personal  friends
enough  to  have,  in  all,  first-hand  reports  of  thirty-five  visits,  embra-
cing sixteen  or  seventeen  seances.  No  spirit  form  came  directly  to
any  one  of  us,  so  we  offer  no  opinion  regarding  the  phenomena.

To  turn  to  the  much  simpler  and  more  satisfactory  case  of  Mrs.  P.
This  lady  can  at  will  pass  into  a  trance  condition,  in  which  she  is
4 '  controlled  "  by  a  power  purporting  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  French
doctor,  who  serves  as  intermediary  between  the  sitter  and  deceased
friends.  This  is  the  ordinary  type  of  trance-mediumship  at  the
present  day.  I  have  myself  witnessed  a  dozen  of  her  trances,  and
have  testimony  at  first  hand  from  twenty-five  sitters,  all  but  one
of  whom  were  virtually  introduced  to  Mrs.  P.  by  myself.

Of  five  of  the  sittings  we  have  verbatim  stenographic  reports.
Twelve  of  the  sitters,  who  in  most  cases  sat  singly,  got  nothing
from  the  medium  but  unknown  names  or  trivial  talk..  Four  of.  these
were  members  of  the  society,  and  of  their  sittings  verbatim  reports
were  taken.

Fifteen  of  the  sitters  were  surprised  at  the  communications  they
received,  names  and  facts  being  mentioned  at  the  first  interview  which
it  seemed  improbable  should  have  been  known  to  the  medium  in  a
normal  way.  The  probability  that  she  possessed  no  clew,  as-  to  the
sitter's  identity,  was,  I  believe,  in  each  and  all  of  these  fifteen  eases,
sufficient.  But  of  only  one  of  them  is  there  a  stenographs  report ;
so  that,  unfortunately  for  the  medium,  the  evidence  in  her  favor  is,
although  more  abundant,  less  exact  in  quality  than  some  of  that
which  will  be  counted  against  her.

Of  these  fifteen  sitters,  five,  all  ladies,  were  blood  relatives,  and
two  (I  *myself  being  one),  were  men  connected  by  marriage  with  the
family  to  which  they  belonged.  Two  other  connections  of  this,  family
are  included  in  the  twelve  who  got  nothing.  The  medium  showed  a
most  startling  intimacy  with  this  family's  affairs,  talking  of  many


104        Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

matters  known  to  no  one  outside,  and  which  gossip  could  not  possibly
have  conveyed  to  her  ears.  The  details  would  prove  nothing  to  the
reader,  unless  printed  in  extenso,  with  full  notes  by  the  sitters.  It
reverts,  after  all,  to  personal  conviction.  My  own  conviction  is  not
evidence,  but  it  seems  fitting  to  record  it.  I  am  persuaded  of  the
medium's  honesty,  and  of  the  genuineness  of  her  trance ;  and
although  at  first  disposed  to  think  that  the  "hits"  she  made  were
either  lucky  coincidences,  or  the  result  of  knowledge  on  her  part  of
who  the  sitter  was  and  of  his  or  her  family  affairs,  I  now  believe  her
to  be  in  possession  of  a  power  as  yet  unexplained.

The  most  promising  way  of  investigating  phenomena  like  this  seems
to  be  that  of  learning  a  great  deal  about  one  "Subject,"  who,  of
course,  ought  to  be  a  good  specimen  of  the  class.  Hitherto  we  have
heard  a  little  about  a  great  many  Subjects.  Stenographic  reports
are  expensive,  but  they  seem  indispensable  for  a  conclusive  dis-
cussion of  the  facts.  They  do  away  with  doubts  about  the  veracity
of  the  sitter's  memory  ;  and  they  enable  us  to  make  a  comparison  of
different  sittings,  which  without  them  is  hardly  possible  at  all.  Ques-
tions arise  as  to  the  irrelevant  names  and  facts  which  almost  every
sitting  to  some  extent  contains.  Are  they  improvisations  of  the
moment?  Are  they  in  themselves  right  and  coherent,  but  addressed
to  the  wrong  sitter?  Or  are  they  vestiges  of  former  sittings,  now
emerging  as  part  of  the  automatism  of  the  medium's  brain  ?  A  read-
ing of  the  stenographic  reports  already  taken  makes  it  probable  that,
for  some  of  them  at  least,  this  last  explanation  is  correct.  "  Spirits  "
originally  appearing  to  me  have  appeared  in  the  sittings  of  others  who
knew  nothing  either  of  their  persons  or  their  names.

What  science  wants  is  a  context  to  make  the  trance-phenomena
continuous  with  other  physiological  and  psychological  facts.  Curious
to  ascertain  whether  there  were  continuity  between  the  medium-
trance  and  the  ordinary  hypnotic  trance,  I  made  some  observations
ad  hoc  upon  Mrs.  P.  My  first  two  attempts  to  hypnotize  her  were
unsuccessful.  Between  the  second  time  and  the  third,  I  suggested  to
her  "Control"  in  the  medium-trance  that  he  should  make  her  a  mes-
meric subject  for  me.  He  agreed.  (A  suggestion  of  this  sort  made
by  the  operator  in  one  hypnotic  trance  would  probably  have  some
effect  on  the  next.)  She  became  partially  hypnotized  on  the  third
trial ;  but  the  effect  was  so  slight  that  I  ascribe  it  rather  to  the
effect  of  repetition  than  to  the  suggestion  made.  By  the  fifth  trial
she  had  become  a  pretty  good  hypnotic  subject,  as  far  as  muscular
phenomena  and  automatic  imitations  of  speech  and  gesture  go ;  but
I  could  not  affect  her  consciousness,  or  otherwise  get  her  beyond  this


Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.        105

point.  Her  condition  in  this  semi-hypnosis  is  very  different  from  her
medium-trance.  The  latter  is  characterized  by  great  muscular  unrest,
even  her  ears  moving  vigorously  in  a  wa}'  impossible  to  her  in  her
waking  state.  But  in  hypnosis  her  muscular  relaxation  and  weak-
ness are  extreme.  She  often  makes  several  efforts  to  speak  ere  her
voice  becomes  audible ;  and  to  get  a  strong  contraction  of  the  hand,
for  example,  express  manipulation  and  suggestion  must  be  practised.
The  automatic  imitations  I  spoke  of  are  in  the  first  instance  very
weak,  and  only  become  strong  after  repetition.  Her  pupils  contract
in  the  medium-trance.  Suggestions  to  the  "  Control  "  that  he  should
make  her  recollect  after  the  trance  what  she  had  been  saying  were
accepted,  but  had  no  result.  In  the  hypnotic-trance  such  a  sugges-
tion will  often  make  the  patient  remember  all  that  has  happened.

No  sign  of  thought-transference  —  as  tested  by  card  and  diagram-
guessing —  has  been  found  in  her,  either  in  the  hypnotic  condition
just  described,  or  immediately  after  it ;  although  her  "Control"  in
the  medium-trance  has  said  that  he  would  bring  them  about.  So  far
as  tried  (only  twice),  no  right  guessing  of  cards  in  the  medium-trance.
She  was  twice  tried  with  epistolary  letters  in  the  medium -trance,  —
ouce  indicating  the  contents  in  a  way  rather  surprising  to  the  sitter  ;
once  failing.  In  her  normal -waking  state  she  made  one  hundred
and  twenty-seven  guesses  at  playing-cards  looked  at  by  me,  —  I
sometimes  touching  her,  sometimes  not.  Suit  right  (first  guess)
thirty-eight  times,  —  an  excess  of  only  six  over  the  "probable"
number  of  thirty-two,  —  obviously  affording  no  distinct  evidence  of
thought-transference.  Trials  of  the  "willing  game,"  and  attempts
at  automatic  writing,  gave  similarly  negative  results.  So  far  as  the
evidence  goes,  then,  her  medium-trance  seems  an  isolated  feature  in
her  psychology.  This  would  of  itself  be  an  important  result  if  it
could  be  established  and  generalized,  but  the  record  is  obviously  too
imperfect  for  confident  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  it  in  any  direc-
tion. Being  compelled  by  other  work  to  abandon  the  subject  for  the
present,  these  notes  are  published  merely  as  a  suggestion  of  lines  of
inquiry  which  others  may  be  better  fitted  than  myself  to  carry  out.

If  a  good  trance-subject  could  be  obtained  for  the  society  at  the
outset  of  her  or  his  career,  and  kept  from  doing  miscellaneous  work
until  patiently  and  thoroughly  observed  and  experimented  on,  with
stenographic  reports  of  trances,  and  as  much  attention  paid  to  fail-
ures and  errors  as  to  successes,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the
results  would  in  any  event  be  of  scientific  value,  and  would  be  worth
the  somewhat  high  expense  which  they  necessarily  would  entail.  If
the  friends  of  spiritualism  would  contribute  money  for  the  thorough


106  Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transfe7*ence.

carrying  out  of  any  such  scheme,  they  would  probably  do  as  much  as
by  any  one  thing  could  be  done,  to  bring  about  the  "recognition"
of  trance-mediumship  by  scientific  men.

As  for  the  other  kinds  of  mediumistic  phenomena,  I  have  during
the  past  year  been  very  much  struck  by  the  volume  of  evidence  which
can  be  collected  in  their  favor.  But  the  mere  volume  of  evidence  is
of  no  account  unless  it  can  be  proved  that  the  evidence  is  likely  to
be  of  the  ordinary  human  sort,  bad  and  good  mixed  together  in  the
usual  proportion.  If  it  is  possible  that  it  is  unusually  bad  in  quality,
the  quantity  of  it  is  of  little  account.  Now,  that  there  are  reasons
for  believing  its  quality  to  be  in  these  matters  below  the  average,
no  one  familiar  with  the  facts  can  doubt.  Only  the  establishment
of  one  or  two  absolutely  and  coercively  proven  cases  —  of  material-
ization, for  example  —  will  show  that  the  hearsay  evidence  for  that
phenomenon  may  be  mixed.  And  only  then  can  the  volume  of  evi-
dence already  extant  on  the  subject  be  taken  into  account  by  one
who  has  no  direct  personal  experience  on  which  to  rely.  The  ordi-
nary disbeliever  rules  out  all  hearsay  evidence  in  advance.  The
believer  accepts  far  too  much  of  it,  because  he  knows  that  some  of
it  is  good.  The  committee  of  the  society  should  first  devote  itself  to
the  very  exact  and  complete  study  of  a  few  particular  cases.  These
may  consume  much  labor  and  time.  But  if,  after  studying  them,  it
should  reach  favorable  conclusions,  it  would  do  vastly  more  to  make
the  vaguer  testimony  already  extant  influential  with  the  society  as  a
whole,  than  it  could  do  by  discussing  such  testimony  now.

WILLIAM  JAMES.


REPORT   OF  THE   COMMITTEE   ON   THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE.

In  the  first  number  of  the  society's  Proceedings  (p.  45)  will  be
found  Circular  No.  5,  issued  by  this  committee,  with  the  object  of
ascertaining  whether  thought-transference  might  not  be  more  active
in  relation  to  conceptions  of  geometric  form  and  arrangement  than  it
appeared  to  be  in  relation  to  ideas  of  color  and  number  already  inves-
tigated. Blanks  D  and  E  were  issued  with  this  circular  to  facilitate
the  recording  of  experiments  with  the  card  face  test  and  the  diagram
test  respectively.  The  results  obtained  with  the  card  face  test  are
shown  in  Table  I.


Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transference.  107


Table  I.      RETURNS  OF  BLANK  D,

CARD-FACE  TEST.


No.

Agent.

Percip.

Right.

No.

Agent.

Percip.

Right.

1

M.  P.  W.

A.  W.

15

22

G.  S.  F.

L.  L.  8.

14

2

<<

u

13

23

<<

Mrs.  G.  S.  F.

6

3

«<

<<

10

24

u

M.  E.  R.

9

4

<<

<<

7

25

((

<(

12

5

A.  W.

M.  P.  W.

11

26

((

0.  M.  B.

9

6

{<

«<

9

27

«

tt

8

7

M.  B.  C.

P.  E.  C.

9

28

c<

<t

11

8

P.  E.  C.

M.  B.  C.

7

29

l<

(<

7

9

H.  K.  C.

P.  E.  C.

9

30

cc

<(

11

10

F.  A.  0.

E.  T.  0.

10

31

(<

E.  L.  S.

14

11

F.  A.  O.

E.  T.  0.

10

32

((

<<

10

12

F.  A.  0.

E.  T.  0.

6

33

((

«(

17

13

L.  D.  T.

C.  R.  N.

6

34

<<

«c

11

14

C.  R.  N.

L.  D.  T.

14

35

W.  J.  A.

A.  H.  B.

6

15

C.  B.

A.  A.  W.

17

36

A.  H.  B.

L.  A.  B.

11

16

A.  A.  W.

C.  B.

8

37

A.  H.  B.

W.  J.  A.

13

17

A.  A.  W.

L.  M.

12

38

<(

t<

10

18

E.  L.  S.

S.  M.  B.

8

39

M.  A.C.

C.  T.  B.

10

19

S.  M.  B.

E.  L.  S.

10

40

W.  H.  P.

E.  T.  B.*

5

20

G-.  S.  F.

L.  W.

10

41

G.  C.  S.

Miss  S.

22

21

M.  E.  R.

Mrs.  R.H.L.

12

*  In  this  set  only  fifty  trials  were  made.


It  will  be  seen  that  forty-one  returns  of  Blank  D  were  made,  each
one  (except  No.  40)  giving  the  result  of  a  hundred  trials.  In  the
fourth  column  of  the  table  is  given  the  number  of  successful  guesses
in  each  set  of  a  hundred  trials.

These  figures,  in  all  cases  except  No.  41,  vary  between  6  and  17,  a
range  which,  in  view  of  the  probabilities  set  forth  in  Table  VI.  (p.
25  of  these  Proceedings),  will  excite  no  surprise.  In  No.  41  alone  is
the  number  of  right  guesses  (22)  large  enough  to  attract  attention.
In  this  case  the  agent  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard  College  and  a  prin-
cipal of  an  academy  in  the  State  of  New  York,  and  the  percipient  a
young  lady  in  excellent  health  and  about  twenty-two  years  of  age.
The  agent  sends  the  following  account  of  the  experiment.

4 '  I  enclose  the  results  of  a  trial  made  of  the  card  test  in  two  suc-
cessive evenings.  .  .  .  One  interesting  point,  as  we  were  pursuing
the  experiment,  was  that,  though  neither  the  young  lady  nor  myself
had  before  tried  any  thing  in  any  wise  similar,  I  observed  that  she
became  a  good  deal  interested  as  we  went  on  ;  and  when  she  was
about  to  give  what  turned  out  to  be  a  correct  answer,  it  seemed  as
though,  by  her  triumphant  tone,  she  were  sure  she  was  right  even  -
before  I  announced  the  fact.  .  .  .  Several  times,  when  the  correct
answer  was  given,  the  percipient  would  add  in  the  same  breath  the  I
color  and  the  spot,  and  again  often  give  the  answer  in  alternates  (one
of  them  proving  correct) ,  as  though  she  could  not  give  one  precisely.
It  would  often  seem,  and  she  herself  said,  that,  after  looking  intently
at  me  and  in  the  direction  of  the  pack  (held  always  so  that  the  per-


108  Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.

cipient  could  not  possibly  see  the  face) ,  she  would  look  away,  and
then  seem  to  see,  especially  when  right  or  nearly  right,  as  though
projected  on  the  retina,  the  card  with  its  number."

The  result  of  this  experiment  is  so  remarkable  that  it  seems  desir-
able to  present  it  in  detail.

Table  II.     BLANK  D.     CARD-FACE  TEST  No.  41.


P.

A.

P.

A.

P-

A.

P.

A.

P.

A.

P.

A.

6

6

6or3t

7

1

9

9

4

1

2

3

2

lor  3

6

2

4*

4

1

1

4

1

7

3

1

3  '

3

2

7

3

4

5

1

3

2

1

1

1

4

2

6  or  4*

6

2  or  3

3

4  or  6

1

4

2

8

5*

5

8

10

5

3

10

7

2  or  7

4

8

2*

2

6*

6

8

10

6

5

4*

4

3

4

5

7

8or3f

1

1  or  2

3

2

3

3

2

8

6

7  or  8

8

7*

4

9

2

9

7

8  or  9

7

3

4

3

1

3

7

2

1

5

6

7

5

4  or  5

5

1

2

2  or  10

3

1

3

2  or  3

1

3

3

2

3

8  or  4

6

3

7

4

5

3  or  6

7

1

6

5

4

3

6

6f

6

9

4

3*

3

5

6

7

1

3

8

3

6

4*

4

7

3

1

4

5

6

9

4

10or5f

5

3

3

4*

4

4

3

6

3

7t

7

1

1

6

10

9

7

8

10

lor9t

9

l      6*

6

3

3

5*

3

8t

8

5

9

1  or  2

1

10f

6

3  or  4

6

1

*  In  these  cases,  the  suit,  as  well  as  the  color,  was  correctly  given.
t  In  these  cases,  the  color  of  the  card  was  correctly  given.

An  examination  of  this  table  shows  that  twenty-two  times  in  a
hundred  trials  the  number  of  the  card  cut  was  correctly  given.  In
nineteen  other  cases  the  answer  was  given  in  alternates,  and  in  nine
of  these  cases  one  of  the  numbers  thus  given  was  correct.  It  further
appears,  that  in  twenty  instances  the  color  of  the  card,  and  in  twelve
cases  the  suit  as  well  as  the  color,  were  correctly  given.  These  state-
ments as  to  suit  and  color  were,  except  in  five  instances,  made  in
cases  where  the  number  was  also  correctly  given.

The  probability  of  as  many  as  twenty-two  right  guesses  being
made  by  chance  is  shown  by  the  above-mentioned  table  to  be  less
than  one  in  a  thousand  ;  and  the  correct  guesses  'of  suit  and  color,  and
those  in  the  cases  of  alternates,  still  further  increase  the  probability
that  something  else  beside  chance  was  concerned  in  bringing  about
this  result.

The  case,  indeed,  has  the  appearance  of  being  one  of  "thought-
transference  "  of  the  kind  reported  by  the  English  society ;  but  the
committee  feel  that  a  decided  opinion  cannot  be  expressed  until
further  experiments  by  the  same  agent  and  percipient  have  been
made  under  more  stringent  conditions.  Unfortunately  the  agent  and
percipient  no  longer  live  in  the  same  city,  and  a  continuation  of  the
experiments  is  therefore  for  the  present  impossible.  It  is  worthy  of
note,  that  in  this  experiment  the  agent  was  "  conscious  of  considerable


Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.  109


exertion  in  concentrating  his  mind  steadily,  and  excluding  every  thing
but  the  card  drawn,"  while  the  percipient  was  conscious  of  no  special
mental  effort.

The  t;  triumphant  tone  "  noted  above  suggests  an  additional  condi-
tion which  should  not  be  overlooked  in  such  experiments  as  these.
When  the  percipient  feels  a  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  certain  of
the  guesses,  this  fact  should  be  noted  in  each  case,  provided  that  it
can  be  done  before  the  result  is  verified.  This  record  may  be  made
by  the  percipient,  or  by  a  third  person  present  as  a  witness.  If
among  these  guesses,  the  proportion  which  proves  to  be  correct  per-
sistently exceeds  what  the  theory  of  probabilities  would  indicate,  we
may  infer  the  presence  of  some  other  agency  than  chance.


Table  III.

RETURNS  OF  BLANK  E.

No.

Agent.

Percip.

Right.

No.

Agent.

Percip.

Right.

1

W.  J.

M.  C.

0

15

0.  B.  F.

W.  L.  P.

1

2

H.  P.B.

E.  W.  P.

0

16

H.  P.  B.

H.  I.  B.

2

3

J.  J.  P.

G.  W.  M.

0

17

H.  I.  B.

C.  C.  D.

1

4

C.  C.  A.

H.  C.  A.

2

18

P.  E.  C.

H.  K.  C.

1

5

G.  S.  F.

E.  L.  S.

1

19

T.  C.  B.

J.  S.  M.

3

6

CO.

M.  E.  C.

1

20

H.  P.  B.

M.  C.     '

2

7

H.  C.  A.

R.A.

2

21

W.J.

E.  W.  P.

1

8

C.  C.

A.  C.

2

22

E.  W.  P.

W.J.

0

9

G.  S.  F.

M.  E.  R.

1

23

E.  H.  H.

Mrs.E.H.H.

2

10

«<

tl

1

24

<<

<<

0

11

«i

<«

2

25

(<

ii

2

12

<<

R.  H.  L.

3

26

i<

it

2

13

A.  H.  B.

W.  J.  A.

2

27

<<

ii

1

14

W.  L.  P.

0.  B.  F.

1

36

13.3  per  cent  of  the  answers  were  right.

The  returns  of  Blank  E  were  fifty-one  in  number.  Of  these,
twenty-seven  showed  but  slight  evidence  of  thought-transference,  as
will  be  seen  by  Table  III.,  where  the  number  of  right  guesses  in
each  set  of  ten  trials  is  given  in  the  fourth  column.  It  will  be
noticed,  that  of  the  twenty-seven  cases  there  are

22  in  which  the  number  of  right  guesses  exceeds  0


12

2


According  to  the  above-mentioned  table  of  probabilities,  these  num-
bers would  be  17.6,  7.1,  and  1.9  respectively.  Such  a  result,  if
found  to  be  constant  with  a  larger  number  of  observations,  would  be
regarded  as  favorable  to  the  theory  of  thought-transference.

The  twenty-four  remaining  returns  of  Blank  E  were  all  made  by  a
single  percipient,  and  were  forwarded  by  a  member  of  the  council
who  was  himself  the  agent.  Some  of  these  returns  were  so  remark-
able in  their  character,  that  it  has  been  thought  best  to  append  to  this
report  a  description  of  them  in  the  words  of  the  agent  himself.     (See


110  Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transference.

appendix.)  It  will  be  seen  that  the  agent,  Mr.  William  H.  Pick-
ering, considers  that  by  these  experiments  the  reality  of  thought-
transference  has  been  proved  as  completely  as  is  possible  by  a  single
pair  of  observers.  The  committee  regret  extremely  that  it  has  been
found  impossible  to  repeat  these  experiments  under  conditions  which
would  justify  them  in  expressing  an  opinion  based  upon  personal
observation  of  the  phenomena.

In  addition  to  these  replies  to  the  circulars  issued,  the  committee
have  to  report  the  result  of  a  few  experiments  made  by  members  of
the  society  with  the  free  drawing  test.

In  these  experiments,  the  percipients  were  a  lady  living  in  the  sub-
urbs of  Boston,  whom  we  will  designate  as  Mrs.  T.,  and  her  nephew,
a  boy  of  ten  years  of  age,  whom  we  will  call  R.  C.  The  agents  were,
in  most  of  the  experiments,  Professor  Palmer  of  Harvard  College  and
the  chairman  of  this  committee.  The  percipient  was  blindfolded,
and  seated  with  the  back  against  a  small  table  at  which  the  agents
were  seated.  The  agents  each  held  a  hand  of  the  percipient,  and
their  other  hands  were  joined  across  the  table.  On  the  table  behind
the  percipient,  and  between  the  agents,  was  the  paper  bearing  the
original  drawing,  which  had  been  made  generally  by  one  of  the  agents
in  another  room,  or  in  a  distant  part  of  the  same  room,  so  that  the
noise  of  the  pencil  in  making  the  drawing  could  not  possibly  guide
the  percipient.  The  agents  fixed  their  attention  on  the  drawing  in
front  of  them ;  and,  after  a  short  time,  the  percipient  removed  the
bandage,  and  with  a  pencil  and  paper,  placed  on  another  table,
attempted  to  reproduce  the  drawing  thought  of  by  the  agents.

Experiments  were  made  in  this  way  on  two  successive  evenings,
resulting  in  one  success  out  of  fourteen  trials  with  Mrs.  T.,  and  two
successes  out  of  eleven  trials  with  R.  C.  -

Although  the  successes  in  these  experiments  were  perhaps  not  more
numerous  than  could  be  accounted  for  by  chance,  yet  there  was  in  the
case  of  R.  C.  a  circumstance  attending  one  of  the  successful  efforts
which  deserves  mention.  In  the  seventh  trial,  on  the  evening  of  Nov.
2,  after  sitting  a  short  time  in  the  manner  above  described,  holding
the  hands  of  the  agents,  the  precipient  suddenly  dropped  them,  ex-
claiming, "  I  saw  something  come  right  up  then!"  He  then  seized
a  pencil  and  drew  the  correct  figure,  —  a  heart.  On  being  questioned
as  to  his  sensations,  he  replied  that  he  tried  to  "think  of  nothing,"
in  which  attempt  he  was  at  first  not  successful ;  but  when  he  had  suc-
ceeded in  banishing  all  thought,  a  visual  image  of  a  heart,  in  black
and  white,  seemed  to  rise  before  him.

It  will  be  seen  from  this  report,  that  some  cases  have  been  brought


Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transference.  Ill

to  the  notice  of  the  committee  which  seem  to  indicate,  that,  under  cer-
tain circumstances,  the  transference  of  a  conception  of  geometric  form
from  one  mind  to  another  may  take  place  without  the  use  of  the  ordi-
nary channels  of  sensation.  But  these  cases  are  at  present  merely
suggestions  for  further  inquiry,  and  are  not  in  themselves  sufficient  to
establish  the  reality  of  thought-transference  as  a  psychological  phe-
nomenon. To  establish  this  reality,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  ob-
servations, which,  by  their  number  and  the  conditions  under  which  they
are  made,  shall  eliminate  not  only  chance,  but  all  other  recognized
causes,  as  an  explanation.  To  this  end  it  is  very  important  to  investi-
gate the  conditions  which  seem  to  favor  or  hinder  the  production  of  the
phenomenon,  in  order,  by  controlling  these  conditions,  to  increase  the
chances  of  successful  observations.  It  is  evident  that  very  little  pro-
gress has  been  made  in  this  direction.  The  only  condition  which  can
be  suggested  as  possibly  favorable  to  thought-transference  appears  to
be  a  certain  vacuity  of  mind.  At  least  two  individuals  have  used  the
words,  "  thinking  of  nothing,"  or  their  equivalents,  in  describing
their  mental  condition  at  the  time  of  an  apparently  successful  experi-
ment in  thought-transference.  Another  percipient  has  spoken  of  the
unfavorable  effect  of  a  conscious  mental  effort  to  read  the  thoughts  of
the  agent.  The  mind,  she  says,  must  be  kept  in  a  passive  state.
If  this  absence  of  conscious  thought  is  really  an  essential  condition
of  thought-transference,  the  great  rarity  of  the  phenomenon,  both  in
the  normal  and  in  the  hypnotic  state,  is  easily  explained ;  and  our
attention  must  henceforth  be  directed  to  ascertaining  by  what  means
this  form  of  cerebral  activity  may  be  held  in  check,  a  problem  which
lies  within  the  domain  of  experimental  physiology.  It  is  possible  that
pharmacology  may  throw  some  light  on  the  question  ;  for  it  is  by  no
means  impossible  that  a  drug  may  be  discovered  which  will  act  upon
those  cerebral  centres  whose  activity  is  associated  with  conscious
thought,  in  the  same  way  that  sulphuric  ether  acts  on  the  centres  con-
nected with  the  perception  of  painful  impressions  upon  the  nerves.

As  a  working  hypothesis,  which  may  be  of  possible  use  in  guiding
research,  but  which  we  by  no  means  put  forth  at  present  as  a  theory
which  we  are  inclined  to  adopt,  we  may  conceive  that  impressions
from  the  minds  of  those  about  us  are  continually  reaching  our  own
minds  by  channels  distinct  from  those  of  the  senses,  but  that  the
forms  of  cerebral  activity  thus  set  up  are  so  very  feeble  in  comparison
with  those  which  depend,  directly  or  indirectly,  upon  influences  reach-
ing us  through  the  ordinary  sensory  mechanism,  that  the  former  can
never  rise  into  consciousness  unless  the  latter  are  held  in  abeyance.
A  phenomenon  analogous  to  the  one  suggested  in  this  hypothesis  pre-


112  Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transference.

sents  itself  in  connection  with  the  sense  of  sight.  The  fixed  stars  are
continually  shining  upon  us  by  clay  as  well  as  by  night,  but  the  more
intense  stimulation  of  the  retina  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  blinds  us  to
the  feeble  impressions  produced  by  the  light  of  the  stars ;  and  it  is
only  when  the  sunbeams  are  withdrawn,  that  we  become  conscious  of
the  existence  of  the  stellar  universe.  In  a  similar  way,  we  may  con-
ceive that  it  may  be  necessary  that  ordinary  cerebral  activity  should
be  suspended  in  order  that  we  may  become  conscious  of  the  feeble
influences  passing  between  mind  and  mind  without  the  aid  of  the
usual  channels  of  sensation.

The  difficulties  which  attend  the  prosecution  of  this  research  are
numerous.  In  the  first  place,  cases  which  suggest  the  possibility  that
thought-transference  may  be  a  genuine  phenomenon  seem  to  be  ex-
ceedingly rare.  Only  three  or  four  such  cases  have  been  reported
to  the  committee  since  they  began  their  researches.  In  the  second
place,  persons  who  appear  to  possess  this  power  manifest  it  in  the
most  capricious  way,  as  is  well  shown  in  the  case  of  the  percipient
described  by  Mr.  Pickering.  In  the  third  place,  there  is,  on  the  part
of  some  intelligent  people,  an  unwillingness  to  engage  in  investiga-
tions of  this  sort,  arising,  apparently,  from  a  certain  vague  dread  of
some  mental  injury  likely  to  follow  such  experiments.  This  feeling,
when  expressed,  will  of  course  tend  to  discourage  those  wTho  have
given  any  indication  of  possessing  the  power  of  thought-transference
from  undertaking  a  systematic  study  of  the  phenomenon.

In  spite  of  these  difficulties,  the  committee  hope  that  individuals
may  yet  be  found  who  will  manifest  the  power  under  conditions  which
may  permit  a  satisfactory  investigation  to  be  made.  To  this  end  an
advertisement  has  been  inserted  in  a  paper  published  in  the  interests
of  spiritualism,  requesting  that  names  of  individuals  possessing  the
power  of  mind-reading  may  be  sent  to  the  committee..  In  this  way
it  is  hoped  that  material  for  study  ,may  be  collected  in  sufficient
amount  to  justify  a  definite  conclusion  with  regard  to  this  important
subject.

H.  P.  BOWDITCH,  Chairman,

EDWARD  C.  PICKERING,

WM.   WATSON,

EDWIN  H.  HALL,

CHARLES  SEDGWICK  MINOT,

C.  C.  JACKSON,

J.  M.  PEIRCE,

Boston,  May,  1886.


Committee  on
Thought-transference.


APPENDIX.


EXPERIMENTS   ON  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

The  experiments  described  below  were  made  with  a  young  lady,
and^  although  not  as  numerous  as  could  be  desired,  seem  to  confirm
the  accuracy  of  the  results  arrived  at  by  the  English  Society  of  Psy-
chical Research.  Our  earlier  experiments  have  already  been  de-
scribed in  the  first  number  of  the  "  Proceedings  "  and  in  "  Science,' '
July  3,  1885.  Encouraged  by  these  results,  we  continued  our  experi-
ments the  following  autumn,  comforming  our  methods  to  the  direc-
tions given  in  Circulars  Nos.  4  and  5  of  the  Thought  Transference
Committee.  The  results  of  these  experiments  may  be  perhaps  best
exhibited  by  adopting  the  tabular  form.  Only  three  of  the  tests
were  tried.


TESTS  FOR  OBTAINING  THE  REALITY  OF  THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE.


Date.

(1)  Color  Test.

(4)  Card-face  Test.

(5)  Diagram  Test.

Guesses.

Right.

Guesses.

Right.

Guesses.

Right.

Sept.  1

Sept.  2

Sept.  4
Sept.  14

50
50
50
50

.200

50
50

100

50
50
50

150

35
23
32
29

119

28
28

56

21
30
23

10
10
10

30

10
10

20

2
0
0

2

1
2

3

10
10
10
10
10

50

10
10

10
10

20

5
3

6

7(8?)
5

26

0
0

0
0

0

450

249

50

5

80

26

114


Experiments  on  Thought- Transference.


The  experiments  on  the  diagram  test  were  continued  last  spring
with  the  following  results.


Date.

GUESSES.

Right.

Date.

Guesses.

Right.

Date.

Guesses.

Right.

Mar.  20

10

0

Mar.  21.

10

2

Apr.  26.

10

1

10

3

10

0

10

2

10

2

10

2

10

3

10

3

10

1

10

0

10

1

10

3

10

2

10

1

50

8

50

8

60

10

Guesses,  160.   Eight,  26.

On  a  consideration  of  the  above  figures  it  will  become  evident  that
on  Sept.  1  there  were  strong  indications  of  thought-transference  both
in  the  color  and  diagram  tests  ;  the  probabilities  that  the  results  could
have  been  due  to  mere  accident  being  respectively  in  the  color  test
(Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  No.  1,  Appendix  B,  Table  III.)  as  3,  as  760,
as  32,  and  as  161  are  to  1,000.  In  the  diagram  test  (Appendix  B,
Table  V.)  the  probabilities  that  the  results  could  have  been  due  to
chance  are  as  1,  as  69,  as  0,  as  0,  and  as  1  are  to  1,000.  In  the
third  and  fourth  cases  the  possibilities  of  accident  are  so  small  as  not
to  be  included  in  the  table.  Combining  these  results  together,  we  get
a  ratio  such  that  the  possibility  of  accident  is  thrown  entirely  out  of
the  question.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  experiments  tried  on  Sept.  2,  4,  and  14,
there  is  no  evidence  of  thought-transference  whatever ;  and,  in  all
probability,  whatever  coincidences  were  obtained  were  due  to  chance.
In  the  experiments  of  March  20  and  21,  and  April  26,  about  an  equal
percentage  of  the  results  were  correct  on  each  day ;  and  combining
the  results  so  as  to  take  first  the  first  hundred  guesses  together,  and
then  the  last  hundred,  by  Table  VI.  we  find  the  probabilities  of  the
results  being  due  to  mere  accident  are  about  as  72  and  as  39  are  to
1,000.

In  these  experiments  I  usually  sat  behind  the  percipient,  at  a  dis-
tance of  about  a  yard  ;  so  that  I  could  readily  look  over  her  shoulder,
and,  as  it  were,  guide  her  pencil  by  my  eye.  I  had  the  ten  figures
(Proceedings,  p.  47)  before  me,  drawn  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  and
selected  them  at  random,  taking  care  to  have  no  method  in  my  selec


Experiments  on  Thought- Transference.  115

tions,  such  as  taking  alternate  ones  or  employing  other  artificial  sys-
tems. She  did  not  look  at  me,  but  let  her  eyes  wander  freely  about
the  room  ;  and  when  drawing,  as  was  natural,  they  were  fixed  upon
the  paper.  She  was  generally  told  when  her  drawing  was  correct.
Sometimes  others  were  present  with  us,  and  sometimes  not.  Usually
they  were  not  interested  in  our  proceedings  ;  though  on  the  first  day,
when  our  best  results  were  obtained,  I  think  there  were  two  or  three
interested  spectators.  That  they  gave  no  physical  assistance,  both
the  percipient  and  myself  are  confident.  Whether  their  minds  aided
mine  or  not,  I  do  not  know  ;  but  I  think  that  they  would  have  been
more  likely  to  confuse  than  assist  the  percipient.

On  April  24  she  made  twenty  drawings,  with  Professor  E.  C.
Pickering  as  agent,  but  only  one  of  them  was  correct.

I  have  tested  in  all  about  a  dozen  different  persons  for  evidences  of
thought-transference ;  but  though  in  one  or  two  instances  I  have
thought  I  detected  traces  of  the  capacity,  the  tests  were  too  few  to
draw  any  satisfactory  conclusions  from  them.  It  seems  to  me  that
the  free  drawing  test  (No.  6)  is  best  adapted  to  preliminary  test-
ing, and  is  more  likely  to  succeed  than  the  card  or  number  tests.
The  forms  in  general  produce  a  stronger  impression  upon  the  mind
than  either  colors  or  numbers.  When  employing  the  diagram  test
(No.  5),  it  seems  to  me  better  in  future  to  use  only  five  of  the
simpler  figures,  instead  of  as  many  as  ten.  A  large  number  confuses
the  percipient,  while  a  small  number  involves  so  many  tests  in  order
to  obtain  a  satisfactory  result  that  it  tires  him  out.

An  examination  of  the  results  of  our  experiments  seems  to  indicate
that  on  four  days  out  of  the  seven  on  which  trials  were  made,  the
percipient  was  able  to  obtain  results  in  guessing  which  certainly
could  not  have  been  due  to  mere  chance.  This  explanation  is,  I
think,  therefore  thrown  completely  out  of  the  question.  As  the
young  lady  is  a  near  relative  of  mine,  I  am  sure  that  the  results
are  genuine  ;  and  as  I  exercised  no  physical  influence  over  her  that
either  we  or  anybody  else  could  detect,  I  think  that  thought-trans-
ference is  as  good  a  name  for  the  phenomenon  as  any,  until  some
logical  explanation  of  it  has  been  discovered.  In  this  sense  of
the  word  (unperceived  physical  or  mental  connection),  I  think  we
have  proved  the  reality  of  thought-transference  as  completely  as
it  is  possible  for  a  single  pair  of  observers  to  do ;  and  it  now  only
remains  for  a  sufficient  number  of  other  people  to  show  that  they
can  obtain  the  same  results,  in  order  to  have  the  reality  of  the  phe-
nomenon admitted  as  one  of  the  well-ascertained  facts  of  human
experience.


116  On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.

This  done,  the  next  step  will  be  to  obtain  some  rational  explanation
of  the  phenomenon,  and  to  this  end  my  future  experiments  in  this
field  will  be  directed.

WM.   H.   PICKERING.


ON  THE  EXISTENCE   OF  A  MAGNETIC   SENSE.

By  JOSEPH  JASTROW,  Ph.D.,  and  GEORGE  F.  H.  NUTTALL,  M.D.

HISTORICAL.

Since  the  day  when  Thales,  about  twenty-four  hundred  years  ago,
rubbed  a  piece  of  amber  on  silk  and  found  that  it  attracted  light
particles,  the  phenomena  associated  with  the  word  "  magnetism"
have  always  been  regarded  with  feelings  of  mystery  and  wonder.
Thales  himself  is  said  to  have  explained  it  by  assuming  that  the  soul
of  the  amber  was  disturbed,  and  withdrew  to  attach  to  itself  the  par-
ticles from  without.  Later  philosophers  made  good  use  of  the  magnet
as  an  illustration  of  action  at  a  distance,  by  means  of  a  living  force,
itself  invisible,  immaterial.  To  this  day  the  magnet  is  one  of  the
most  interesting  objects  of  curiosity  to  children ;  and  the  notion  of
force  is  represented,  in  the  minds  of  many  persons,  by  the  picture
of  the  magnet  drawing  a  bit  of  iron.  The  mystery  was  very  much
deepened  by  the  discovery  of  the  magnetic  needle,  with  its  constant
indication  towards  the  north.

But  no  very  serious  harm  was  done  until  the  notion  was  transferred
from  physics  to  biology.  Soon  after  Gilbert's  inauguration  of  mag-
netism as  a  science,  one  astrologer  after  another  called  upon  this
great  and  mysterious  power  as  the  source  of  his  inspiration  and  his
lore.  Paracelsus  ascribed  to  man  a  double  magnetism,  —  one,  for  his
moral  and  intellectual  faculties,  whose  source  was  in  the  planets ;  the
other,  for  his  organic  functions,  coming  from  the  elements  of  matter.
Kircher,  a  Jesuit  doctor,  invented  the  name  "  animal  magnetism"
for  phenomena  not  essentially  different  from  those  which  made  the
fame  of  Mesmer.  Antoine  Mesmer  announced  a  series  of  remarkable
cures  by  a  power  given  only  to  himself.  His  success  was  veiy  limited
until  he  explained  it  by  a  theory.  This  theory  assumed  the  existence
of  a  universal  fluid,  with  properties  analogous  to  those  of  the  magnet.
It  exhibited  poles  which  could  be  connected,  inverted,  destroyed,  and
enforced.  It  affected  the  animal  body,  and  put  it  in  reciprocal  rela-
tion with  the  heavenly  bodies.  It  was  an  "  animal  magnetism."
This  slender  analogy  was  sufficient  to  introduce  a  confusion  with
regard  to  a  series  of  neurotic  phenomena  from  which  the  world  at


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.  117

large  has  not  even  yet  fully  recovered.  The  argument  was  this :
Magnetism  is  a  mysterious  force  of  which  we  know  little  ;  these
hypnotic  phenomena  are  mysterious  and  little  intelligible ;  ergo,  they
are  the  same  thing.

In  the  experiments  of  Baron  Reichenbach,  a  serious  attempt  at  a
scientific  investigation  of  the  effect  of  a  magnet  on  the  human  body
was  made.  He  began  by  observing  that  a  magnet,  when  passed  close
to  the  person  of  many  healthy  men  and  women,  caused  peculiar,  not
easily  describable  sensations.  They  "were  analogous  to  sensations
resulting  from  gentle  breaths  of  air,  or  like  pricking  or  creeping.
About  one  in  fifteen  or  twenty,  and  often  three  or  four  in  that  num-
ber, were  found  sensitive.  In  one  case  of  twenty-two  young  ladies
at  a  seminary,  no  less  than  eighteen  felt  the  passes  of  the  magnet.
While  some  of  his  subjects  were  healthy  men,  most  of  them  were  of
the  female  sex,  and  of  sedentary  habits,  with  more  or  less  decided
tendencies  to  neurotic  manifestations.  He  next  found  a  special  set
of  sensitives,  who  saw  flames  issuing  from  the  poles  of  a  magnet  in  a
perfectly  dark  room.  A  very  suspicious  fact  recorded  is  that  some
of  his  sensitives  saw  the  light  equally  well  when  the  armature  was
closed.  He  succeeded  in  photographing  this  magnetic  light,  and  used
great  ingenuity  in  ascribing  a  common  cause  for  it  and  the  aurora
borealis.  He  also  found  subjects  whose  hands  and  other  parts  of
their  bodies  were  attracted  by  a  strong  magnet ;  and  yet  the  hand
itself  did  not  attract  iron  filings,  even  when  the  body  was  in  direct
connection  with  a  magnet.  Some  of  his  subjects  claimed  to  be  able
to  magnetize  needles  by  holding  them  in  their  hands ;  but  a  careful
test  showed  that  their  pretensions  were  groundless.  Still  more  curi-
ously, objects  once  magnetized  attracted  the  hands  of  some  of  his
subjects  ;  and  even  objects  that  were  not  magnetized  (when  the  sub-
jects thought  that  they  were)  had  the  same  effect.  He  then  thought
he  discovered  that  all  the  bodies  that  had  this  magnet-like  effect  had
crystalline  properties,  and  was  led  to  a  peculiar  theory  about  crystals
and  the  human  body  and  his  famous  "  od  "  hypothesis.  Reichenbach's
book  impresses  one  as  a  sincere  but  useless  piece  of  work.  At  the
most  essential  points  his  evidence  is  faulty,  and  the  (account  of)  the
conditions  hopelessly  defective.  A  modern  reader,  with  a  knowledge
of  the  exquisite  shrewdness  and  exalted  sensibility  that  stands  at
the  command  of  a  slightly  hysterical  girl,  cannot  fail  to  see  that  the
opportunities  for  having  the  expected  result  suggested  or  guessed
were  many,  and  that  with  the  suggestion  once  made  the  rest  follows
readily  enough.

The  provision   for  Reichenbach  committees   in   our  societies   for


118  On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.

psychic  research  has  given  these  researches  a  new  life.  The  com-
mittee of  the  English  society  have  published  a  few  notes ;  and  their
chairman,  Professor  Barrett,  has  expressed  himself  in  several  publi-
cations with  regard  to  the  results  reached.  They  complied  with  the
conditions  suggested  by  Reichenbach,  and  used  much  more  powerful
magnets.  Their  results  were  entirely  negative  until  the  three  young
men  who  had  proved  themselves  so  useful  in  the  department  of
thought-transference  were  called  upon.  Apparently,  of  forty- five
persons  tested,  these  three  alone  felt  any  effect  of  the  magnet.  The
sensation  was  described  as  peculiar  and  unpleasant ;  reached  its  maxi-
mum in  from  fifteen  to  twenty  seconds,  and  then  died  down  slowly.
When  one  of  the  subjects  was  complaining  of  facial  neuralgia,  his
sensibility  was  improved.  The  sensations  were  most  distinct  on  the
forehead.  The  committee  records  that  one  of  their  subjects  was
asked  to  walk  up  to  an  electro-magnet  and  tell  whether  the  current
was  turned  on  or  off.  He  answered  correctly  ten  out  of  twelve  times.
These  same  subjects  also  saw  the  flames  issuing  from  the  magnet  in
an  absolutely  dark  room  ;  but  all  attempts  to  photograph  the  light
with  the  most  delicate  plate  were  futile.  The  general  verdict  of  the
committee  is,  that  certain  sensitives  are  variously  affected  by  the  pres-
ence of  a  magnet.  They  also  mention  in  this  connection  the  alleged
fact,  that  many  persons  cannot  enjoy  a  good  night's  rest  unless
the  bed  is  placed  in  a  definite  position  with  regard  to  the  points  of  the
compass.  The  only  criticism  to  be  passed  upon  this  report  is  to  point
out  the  suspicious  peculiarity,  that  just  the  same  three  persons  who
were  good  "  thought- transferrers  "  were  magnetic  sensitives;  and
that  (as  will  be  seen  later)  the  precautions  against  a  knowledge  of  the
condition  of  the  magnet  by  other  means  were  not  sufficiently  rigid.

Before  these  experiments  were  made,  Sir  William  Thompson  had
tried  the  effect  of  putting  one's  head  between  the  poles  of  a  powerful
magnet,  and  describes  the  result  as  no  less  than  wonderful.  The
wonder  of  it  was  that  nothing  happened.  He  thinks  it  would  be  very
strange  if  no  magnetic  sensibility  existed,  and  urges  a  careful  series
of  experiments  upon  the  question.

More  recently,  two  French  observers  describe  some  very  remark-
able effects  produced  by  the  magnet  upon  hypnotic  subjects.  When
such  subjects  have  re-acted  to  the  suggestion  that  one-half  the  body  is
affected  in  a  certain  way  (e.g.,  one  arm  is  insensitive),  the  applica-
tion of  a  maguet  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  body  will  cause  the  effect
to  leave  the  first  side  of  the  body  and  go  to  the  other  (i.  e.,  the  other
arm  will  be  the  insensitive  one).  They  call  this  psychic  "trans-
fert."      They    "transfer"    sensaiions,    motions,    memories,    pains,


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.  119

paralyses,  etc.  They  also  describe  a  more  complicated  phenomena
produced  by  the  magnet,  in  which  the  effect  suffers  a  repeated  varia-
tion from  one  side  to  another.  This  they  call  "psychic  polarization."
Dr.  Bernheim  has  repeated  these  experiments,  and  always  with  a
negative  result  when  the  patient  was  ignorant  of  the  expected  result.
As  soon  as  he  said  something  about  the  effect  to  his  assistant,  in  the
presence  of  the  subject,  the  "  transfert "  took  place  with  great  regu-
larity. Indeed,  the  substitution  of  a  bit  of  wood  or  chalk,  hidden  by
a  cloth,  acted  quite  as  well  as  a  magnet  after  the  patient  had  been  told
that  a  magnet  was  under  the  cloth.1  He  insists  strongly  upon  the
necessity  of  experimenting  with  subjects  who  have  never  assisted  at,
or  have  seen,  similar  phenomena.  By  allowing  a  subject  to  see  the
effect  of  a  magnet  upon  another,  he  was  always  sure  of  a  similar
effect  upon  herself  the  next  day.  Dr.  Bernheim  shows  what  keen
observers  these  sensitives  are,  and  believes  that  unconscious  sugges-
tion is  the  clew  to  the  whole  question.

A  magnet  has  also  been  employed  by  several  observers  for  putting
subjects  into  the  hypnotic  condition.  M.  Ochorowicz  has  invented  a
little  instrument,  —  the  hypnoscope,  —  which  is  simply  a  hollow  mag-
net to  be  placed  on  the  finger,  and  for  which  he  claims  the  power  of
detecting  hypnotic  subjects.  All  hypnotizable  persons  will  feel  a
peculiar  sensation  when  the  hypnoscope  is  adjusted.  It  is  not  at  all
improbable  that  persons  with  sufficient  command  over  their  imagina-
tion to  feel  a  sensation  from  the  hypnoscope  will  be  of  that  neurotic
temperament  so  common  in  hypnotic  subjects.

Finally,  the  mere  mention  of  the  host  of  cures  and  wonders  ascribed
to  magnetic  influences  will  conclude  this  somewhat  sad  record  of  the
history  of  one  of  the  border- lands  of  science.

METHOD    AND    APPARATUS.

In  view  of  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  the  question  as  to  the  exist-
ence of  a  magnetic  sense,  it  was  thought  desirable  to  make  a  rigid
test  upon  normal  healthy  subjects.  Especial  attention  was  to  be
given  to  the  method,  to  the  elimination  of  coincidences,  and  to  the
possible  sources  of  error.  After  many  preliminary  attempts,  we
decided  upon  the  following  as  the  most  satisfactory  form  of  experi-
menting :  —

A  large,  massive  electro-magnet,  whose  base  measured  three  feet
in  length,  was  tipped  on  its  side,  and  supported  on  a  raised  platform

1  One  of  the  present  writers  has  seen  this  experiment  repeated,  with  the  same  result.  MM.
Binet  and  Fere,  the  French  writers  above  referred  to,  say  the  effect  does  not  follow  if  a  wooden
"  magnet"  is  used.    It  is  possible  that  the  subject  was  aware  of  the  intended  deception.


120  On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.

resting  upon  two  adjoining  tables.  A  space  was  left  between  the
two  tables  large  enough  for  the  subject  to  insert  his  body  in  a  sitting
posture.  The  coils  of  the  magnet  were  each  nine  and  one-half
inches  in  length,  and  fifteen  and  one-half  inches  in  circumference.
The  core  was  hollow,  and  measured  seven-eighths  of  an  inch  (inside)
in  diameter.  The  distance  between  the  poles  was  just  large  enough
for  the  subject  to  insert  his  head,  and  have  his  forehead  nearly  touch-
ing in  front,  and  the  back  of  the  head  nearly  touching  behind ;  i.  e.,
about  eight  inches.  The  subject  was  seated  in  a  chair,  in  a  normal,
upright,  and  fairly  comfortable  position.  When  the  current  was
turned  on,  the  magnet  was  magnetized  to  saturation,  and  attracted
the  blade  of  a  chisel  so  firmly  that  it  took  a  violent  effort  with  both
hands  to  wrench  it  off.  Two  sets  of  pole-pieces  were  used, — one,
one  and  one-eighth  inches  in  diameter ;  the  other  tapering  down  to  a
blunt  point.  There  would  be  a  stronger  magnetic  field  in  the  imme-
diate vicinity  of  the  pointed  poles,  but  no  difference  in  the  effect  was
perceived.  The  subject — that  is,  the  person  to  be  experimented
upon  —  and  the  magnet  were  on  the  third  floor  of  a  tall  building.  In
a  room  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  same  building,  resting  upon  a  pier
built  of  masonry,  was  a  gramme  dynamo  machine,  to  be  turned  by
the  hand,  and  thus  to  generate  the  current.  It  was  connected  with
the  magnet  by  heavy  insulated  wires  running  out  of  the  windows
along  the  wall  of  the  building,1  and  in  through  a  window  on  the  third
floor  to  the  magnet.  The  operator  was  stationed  in  the  room  with
the  dynamo,  and  communicated  with  the  subject  by  a  system  of  elec-
tric signals  at  his  side.  Otherwise  they  were  completely  isolated  from
one  another,  with  over  thirty  feet  and  two  heavy  floors  between
them.

The  method  employed  at  first  was  the  following  one :  When  the
subject  was  all  ready,  and  had  placed  his  head  in  position  between
the  two  poles  of  the  magnet,  he  telegraphed  two  clicks,  signifying
"ready."  The  operator  had  previously  signalled  "ready"  by  the
same  sign.  Then,  after  a  brief  interval,  the  subject  signalled  one
click,  to  mean  "change."  Immediately  upon  receiving  this  signal,
the  operator  did  one  of  two  things  :  (1)  He  turned  the  dynamo,  and
sent  the  current  through  the  magnet,  if  he  had  not  begun  turning  it
when  the  subject  signalled  "ready"  ;  or  (2)  he  opened  the  key  and
broke  the  current,  if  he  had  been  turning  it  since  the  signal  "  ready  "
was  received;  i.e.,  in  either  case  he  changed  the.  condition  of  the
magnet.      He  was  guided  in  his  choice  between  (1)  and  (2)   by  a


1  The  experiments  were  made  in  the  psychophysical  laboratory  of  Johns  Ilopkius  Univer-
sity, Baltimore.


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense,  121

chance  arrangement  of  pluses  and  minuses  on  his  record-slip.  After
an  interval  of  from  fifteen  to  sixty  seconds,  —  i.e.,  long  enough  to
fully  appreciate  the  sensory  effect  of  the  change,  —  the  subject  again
telegraphed  "change,"  whereupon  the  operator  restored  the  magnet
to  its  original  condition.  After  appreciating  the  effect  of  the  second
change,  the  subject  telegraphed  three  clicks,  to  mean  that  the  obser-
vation was  finished.  The  operator  then  queried  "ready?"  and  the
answer  was  given,  and  the  procedure  repeated  as  before.  The  obser-
vations were  made  in  sets  of  ten  each ;  and,  as  a  rule,  five  such  sets
were  taken  at  one  sitting.  The  operator,  as  already  mentioned,  had
a  record-slip  on  which  were  written  five  pluses  and  five  minuses,  in
an  order  determined  by  the  throw  of  a  die  or  other  chance  arrange-
ment. The  subject  recorded  his  judgment  as  to  whether  the  first
change  had  been  one  from  magnetization  to  demagnetization,  and  the
second  change  the  reverse,  or  vice  versa,  by  placing  a  red  card  in  the
first  case,  or  a  black  one  in  the  second,  upon  a  determined  pack.  He
recorded  at  the  close  of  each  observation,  and  kept  his  cards  in  sets
of  ten  each.  At  the  end  of  five  sets,  —  i.  e.,  of  fifty  observations,  —
the  operator  went  up-stairs,  and  compared  his  record  of  what  had
really  been  going  on  with  the  successive  judgments  of  the  subject,
counting  off  the  number  of  correct  answers.  The  method  was  a  very
expeditious,  and,  after  a  little  drill  in  the  signals,  a  very  easy  one.

Denoting  the  condition  of  the  current's  being  turned  on  by  -f>  and
of  its  being  turned  off  by  — ,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  subject  had  to

decide  whether  the  series  of  operations  (1)  -\ (-  or   (2)  — | —

had  been  going  on.  He  knew  that  it  was  always  one  or  the  other,
and  so,  by  mere  guessing,  one-half  of  his  answers  would  be  correct.
He  also  knew  that  in  each  set  of  ten  observations  there  were  five  of
each  kind  of  operation  ;  but  this  simply  checked  the  too  great  pre-
ponderance of  any  one  kind  of  answer.  Moreover,  his  opportunities
for  judging  were  extremely  favorable.  The  sensation  could  prob-
ably be  most  readily  detected  at  the  moment  when  the  magnet  became
magnetized  or  demagnetized.  This  moment  was  under  the  control
of  the  subject,  and  thus  the  maximum  amount  of  attention  was  in-
sured. The  duration  of  the  action  of  the  magnet  was  also  under  his
control ;  and  he  had  two  opportunities  of  getting  the  effect  of  an
alteration  in  the  condition  of  the  magnet  in  each  observation.  The
question  then  simply  resolved  itself  into  this  :  If  the  number  of  cor-
rect judgments  were  sensibly  more  than  one-half  of  the  total  number
of  judgments,  then  a  sensibility  for  a  magnetic  field  existed,  and  the
amount  of  this  excess  measured  the  degree  of  such  sensibility ;  if  the
number  of  correct  answers  differed  from  half  the  number  of  answers


122


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.


only  by  an  amount,  such  as  would  occur  by  the  action  of  chance  in
a  limited  number  of  trials,  then  no  such  sensibility  existed.1


RESULTS.


At  first  we  two  in  turn  acted  as  operator  and  as  subject.  Four
hundred  observations  on  each  of  us  were  taken  on  six  days,  the  result
of  which  is  embodied  in  the  following  table.


Date.

No.  of

Sets.

No.  OF
Errors.

Deviation
from  y2
No.  of

Answers.

Date.

No.  OF

Sets.

No.  OF
Errors.

Deviation
from  l/2
No.  of

Answers.

Feb.  24

"     25
"      26
"     27
March  4
"       5

5
5

8
7

10
5

19
22
39
37
40
14

-6
-3
-1
+2
-10
-11

Feb.  24
"  25
"  26
"     27

March  4
"       5

5
3

9

8

10

5

28
16
38
40
53
17

+3
+  1

-7

0

+3

-8

Subject,  Dr.  Jastrow.

Subject,  Dr.  Nuttall.

If  we  consider  the  results  of  the  first  four  days'  experiments,  we
find  that  in  two  hundred  and  fifty  observations  one  hundred  and
seventeen  errors  were  made  by  one  subject,  and  one  hundred  and
twenty-two  by  the  other.  These  small  deviations  would  hardly  excite
any  suspicion  were  it  not  that  at  times  we  seemed  to  be  able  to  detect
the  noise  resulting  from  the  turning  of  the  dynamo.  The  sound
must  have  been  conducted  along  the  wires  to  the  magnet.  In  fact,
we  had  made  several  attempts  to  remedy  this  defect,  but  we  had  no
guaranty  of  our  success.  On  the  last  two  days,  however,  a  new
complication  arose,  which,  added  to  the  old  one,  at  last  forced  us  to
a  change  in  the  method  of  experimenting.  At  each  closing  and
opening  of  the  key,  thus  magnetizing  and  demagnetizing  the  magnet,
a  faint  but  yet  audible  molecular  crepitation  occurs.  The  sound  pro-
duced is  a  very  dull,  rather  sudden  click.  The  effect  is  well  known
to  physicists,  and  is  the  more  marked,  the  larger  the  magnet,  the  more
powerful  the  current,  and  the  more  sudden  the  magnetization  and  de-
magnetization. Moreover,  the  click  accompanying  demagnetization
was  much  more  distinct  than  that  accompanying  magnetization  ;  in

1  It  should  be  added,  that  the  subject  was  required  to  decide  one  way  or  the  other  each  time.
No  such  answers  as  "  doubtful  "  were  allowed.  Very  seldom  was  there  any,  even  the  slightest,
confidence  in  the  correctness  of  one's  answers;  but  one  had  to  force  the  judgment  by  a  distinct
effort  to  give  a  decision.


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.


123


fact,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  we  ever  clearly  heard  the  latter.  At
auy  rate,  this  indication  of  the  movements  of  the  operator  (together
probably  with  the  sound  of  the  dynamo)  were  recognized  by  one  of
us  on  the  fifth  day  of  experimenting,  and  by  the  other  on  the  sixth
day.  The  sound  was  not  heard,  at  least  consciously,  every  time,  but
sufficiently  often  for  the  one  subject  to  answer  correctly  ninety-five
times  in  one  hundred  and  fifty  observations,  and  the  other  thirty-
three  times  in  fifty  observations.

It  was  not  at  all  impossible  that  unconscious  indications  might  be
utilized  for  detecting  the  condition  of  the  magnet.1  The  strangeness
attending  the  whole  experiment  probably  prevented  our  noticing  ihe
click  before.  "Whenever  we  felt  an  unusual  confidence  in  the  correct-
ness of  our  judgments,  we  recorded  that  fact  at  once.  A  reference  to
the  accompanying  table  will  show,  that,  of  the  first  two  hundred  and
fifty  judgments,  only  two  were  recorded  as  confident  by  one  subject,
and  but  one  by  the  other.  On  the  last  two  days  twenty  such  judg-
ments were  recorded  by  one  subject,  of  which  eighteen  were  correct ;
and  eight  by  the  other  subject,  of  which  seven  were  correct.  The
indications  conveyed  by  the  click  (and  the  noise  of  turning)  thus
came  into  consciousness  towards  the  end  of  the  series  of  experiments.
This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  judg-
ments given  with  confidence  were  correct,  than  of  the  judgments
without  that  mark.


ATE.

No.  OF
Observa-
tions.

No.  or
Confident.       Correct.

No.  OF
Confident.       Correct.

Subject,  J.  J.

Subject,  G.  X.

First  four  days,

March  4  .     .     .

"     5.    .    .

250

100

50

2                      1
12                     11

8                     7

1  1

2  1
6                      6

We  now  attacked  the  problem  of  getting  rid  of  the  noise  of  the
dynamo  and  the  molecular  clicks.  We  finally  succeeded  by  using
the  following  device.  To  prevent  the  sound  vibrations  from  being
conducted  along  the  wires,  the  wires  were  cut,  and  one  end  of  each
was  inserted  into  a  mercury  cup,  while  the  other  was  clamped  in  a
binding  screw  connected  with  the  cup.  The  wires  hung  freely  in  the
mercury,  and  received  only  a  very  small  share  of  the  sound  vibrations
from  it.     Two  such  pieces  of  apparatus  were  inserted  in  the  circuit ;


1  On  this  point,  see  a  paper  on  Small  Differences  of  Sensations,  by  C.  S.  Peirce.  and  J.
Jastrow.    Memoirs  of  the  .National  Academy,  vol.  iii.


124


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.


one  in  the  room  on  the  ground  floor  just  after  the  wires  left  the
dynamo,1  and  the  other  on  the  outside  sill  of  the  window,  as  the
wires  passed  the  second  floor  of  the  building.  In  this  way,  with
even  a  more  rapid  turning  of  the  dynamo  than  was  necessary,  not  the
slightest  sound  could  be  heard  when  the  maximum  attention  was
specially  directed  to  the  detection  of  it.

We  avoided  the  click  accompanying  demagnetization  by  a  change
in  our  method.  By  the  new  method,  at  the  beginning  of  the  experi-
ment the  magnet  was  always  in  a  condition  of  demagnetization  ;  at
the  signal  "change,"  the  operator  either  (1)  allowed  the  magnet  to
remain  as  it  was,  or  (2)  he  turned  the  dynamo  and  magnetized  it.
The  second  change  was  entirely  omitted.  Then  the  subject  had  to
choose  between  (1)  —  —  or  (2)—  -}-  ;  and,  as  before,  the  chances  of
a  correct  guess  were  exactly  one-half.  The  conditions  for  judging
were  less  favorable,  but  hardly  appreciably  so.  The  new  method  was
more  expeditious,  thus  avoiding  fatigue,  and  was  simpler.

The  almost  inaudible  click  accompanying  magnetization  was
avoided  by  always  keeping  the  key  closed,  and  by  turning  the*  dynamo
at  first  slowly,  then  with  gradually  increasing  speed,  thus  eliminating
the  suddenness  of  the  operation.

After  assuring  ourselves  of  the  reliability  of  this  method,  we  con-
tinued the  experiments  upon  ourselves  and  upon  eight  students,
young  men  in  good  health,  with  the  following  result :  —


No.  OF
Observa-
tions,

Deviation  from

Subject.

No.  OF
Errors.

the  No.  op  An-
swers correct
by  chance.

J.  J.

550

264

-11

G.N.

550

263

-12

M.  S.

150

74

-1

C.  B.

100

50

0

C.  H.

100

53

+3

D.  B.

100

53

+3

M.  C.

100

56

+6

W.  B.

100

47

-3

E.  S.

100

49

-1

H.  N.

100

50

0

This  table  shows  that  in  not  one  of  the  ten  subjects  was  there  any

1  Here  the  additional  precaution  was  taken  of  suspending  the  wires  which  dipped  into  the
mercury  from  the  ceiliug  by  line  Bilk  threads  steadied  by  attached  weights.


On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.


125


decided  sensibility  for  a  magnetic  field.  Deviation  from  the  number
of  correct  judgments  by  mere  guesswork  occurred  in  both  directions,
and  were  on  the  average  only  4.2%  of  that  number.  Altogether,
nine  hundred  and  fifty-nine  errors  were  made,  while  chance  would
make  nine  hundred  and  seventy-five  errors.1

In  the  case  of  the  first  two  subjects,  we  continued  to  record  the
judgments  to  which  some  confidence  was  attached.  But  while  in  the
former  method  almost  all  such  judgments  were  correct,  now  of  forty-
two  confident  judgments,  only  twenty-three  were  correct  in  one  sub-
ject ;  and  of  fifteen,  nine  were  correct  in  the  other  subject.  In  other
words,  the  confidence  was  apparently  not  due  to  any  sensation  con-
nected with  the  condition  of  the  magnet.

CONCLUSION.

We  conclude,  then,  that  our  experiments,  as  far  as  they  go,  fail  to
reveal  any  sensibility  for  a  magnetic  fi eld.  This  does  not  absolutely
exclude  the  possibility  of  such  a  sensibility  as  a  morbid  phenomenon,
but  it  weakens  the  probability  of  such  a  thing,  because  faint  traces
of  almost  all  abnormal  manifestations  are  usually  obtainable  in  nor-
mal subjects.  It  is  true  that  at  times  we  had  peculiar  sensations  in
the  head,  which  can  best  be  compared  to  the  startling  sensation  one
experiences  when  entering  an  overheated  room  ;  but  these  sensations
were  very  probably  due  to  the  excessive  strain  on  the  attention,  and
they  occurred  when  the  operator  did  not  interfere  with  the  magnet  as
well  as  when  he  magnetized  it.  Moreover,  it  is  probable  that  these
sensations  influenced  our  selection  of  certain  judgments  as  confident,
and,  as  has  been  seen,  such  judgments  are  not  more  apt  to  be  correct
than  others.

It  was  intended  to  put  hypnotic  subjects  both  in  their  normal  and

1  Since  the  subject  knew  that  in  reality  as  many  of  one  kind  of  experiments  would  occur  as
of  the  other,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  almost  every  one  showed  a  slight  preference  for  one
kind  of  answer  above  the  other;  but,  in  all,  these  preferences  balanced  one  another.  So,  too,  the
proportion  of  correct  answers  in  each  kind  of  operation  is  the  same.

There  is  another  method  of  deciding  whether  the  answers  are  due  to  guesswork  or  not.  It
consists  in  comparing  the  theoretical  number  of  sets  with  each  number  of  errors  from  0  to  10,
as  determined  by  the  theory  of  combinations,  with  the  actual  number  as  is  done  in  the  accom-
panying table.  Considering  the  limited  number  of  observations,  the  correspondence  is  as  close
as  could  be  expected.


0

7

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Theoretical  .    .    .

0.2
1

1.9
1

8.6
9

22.9

27

40.0
42

48.0
44

40.0
41

22.9
18

8.6
9

1.9
3

0.2
0

126  On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense.

hypnotic  conditions  to  a  similar  test,  but  no  opportunities  offered
themselves  while  the  apparatus  was  in  position.  Such  experiments
would  be  very  desirable.

Although  the  authors  regard  the  many  wonderful  phenomena
ascribed  to  the  influence  of  the  magnet  as  not  due  to  that  source,
they  do  not  pretend  to  explain  all  such  alleged  phenomena,  but
believe  that  they  are  eventually  explainable  on  the  basis  of  our  knowl-
edge of  morbid  psychology  and  physiology.

Apart  from  the  general  negative  conclusion,  attention  is  called  to
the  following  points  :  —

(1)  That  a  rigid  scientific  method  is  necessary  to  establish  any
result ;

(2)  That  the  effect  of  chance  was  accurately  eliminated ;

(3)  That  subtle  indications  of  what  is  going  on  were  possible  even
when  the  subject  and  operator  were  completely  isolated  ;  and  that,  as
precautions  against  such  indications  were  taken,  the  results  lost  their
apparently  positive  character ;

(4)  That  in  experimenting  with  morbid  subjects  the  conditions  and
precautions  must  be  still  more  rigid ;

(5)  That  indications  of  which  the  subject  may  be  utterly  uncon-
scious may  nevertheless  be  used  as  a  basis  for  forming  the  judg-
ment.

LITERATURE.

For  a  general  account  of  the  history  of  the  question  :  "  Magnetisme
et  Hypnotisme."     Dr.  A.  Cullerre.     pp.  1-92.     Paris,  1886.
The  following  special  works  are  referred  to  :  —

1.  "  Physico-Physiological  Researches  on  the  Dynamics  of  Mag-
netism in  their  Relations  to  Vital  Force,"  By  Baron  Charles  vori
Reichenbach.  Translated  by  John  Ashburner.  London,  1850  and
1851.

2.  "Proceedings  of  the  English  Society  for  Psychic  Research."
Vol.  i.,  pp.  56-60,  99-101,  230-238  ;  and  references  there  given.

3.  "Nature,"  March  6,  1884.  "The  Six  Gateways  of  Knowl-
edge."    By  Sir  William  Thompson.

4.  Binet  et  Fere.  Transfert  Psychique.  "  Revue  Philosophique,"
January,  1885.

5.  Binet  et  F6re.  Polarization  Psychique.  "Revue  Philoso-
phique,"    March,  1885.

6.  Dr.  Bernheim.  Reply  to  above.  "Revue  Philosophique,"
March,  1885.

7.  "  Der  Magnetische  Sinn,"  by  W.  F.  Barrett,  in  "  Sphinx,"
April,  1886.


Research  on  ReichenbacK  s  Flames.  127


A  RESEARCH  ON  THE   REALITY  OF  REICHENBACH'S

FLAMES.

In  the  experiment  described  below,  an  electro-magnet  was  em-
ployed, with  coils  measuring  eight  inches  long  by  five  in  diameter,
and  with  the  pole  pieces  about  half  an  inch  apart.  It  was  placed  in
a  dark  room,  the  walls,  floor,  and  ceiling  of  which  were  painted  black,
and  all  the  cracks  covered  with  rubber  cloth,  so  that  not  a  ray  of
light  entered.  A  powerful  current  was  passed  through  the  coils  of
the  magnet  from  a  two-light  Brush  dynamo.  After  sitting  for  half  an
hour  iu  absolute  darkness,  a  faint  greenish  light  was  seen  in  front  of
the  observer's  eyes.  But  it  was  found  that  this  was  quite  independent
of  the  magnet,  and  that  it  did  not  disappear  when  a  screen  was  placed
between  the  magnet  and  his  eyes.  When  the  current  through  the
coils  was  made  or  broken  by  an  assistant,  no  perceptible  effect  was
produced.  A  person  totally  unacquainted  with  physiological  optics
might  readily  mistake  the  subjective  phenomenon  for  an  objective
reality ;  but  the  simplest  tests,  properly  applied,  would  distinguish
between  the  two.  There  was  a  very  powerful  permanent  horse-shoe
magnet  in  the  dark  room,  but  no  glow  could  be  seen  in  connection
with  it.

In  the  above  described  experiment,  as  I  was  the  only  percipient
tested,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  my  eyesight  is  unusually  good  in
the  dark,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  I  can  see  eleven  Pleiades  with
the  naked  eye,  where  many  people  see  only  six.  If  the  flames,  there-
fore, were  visible  to  all  persons  with  more  or  less  distinctness,  and
were  not  exclusively  a  nervous  phenomenon,  I  certainly  should  have
made  a  good  subject.  As,  however,  no  flames  were  seen,  and  the
apparatus  employed  was  fully  as  powerful,  if  not  more  so,  than  that
used  by  the  English  society,  the  experiment  seems  to  confirm  the  view,
that,  even  under  the  most  favorable  conditions,  the  flames,  if  they
exist  at  all,  produce  no  effect  whatever  on  the  senses  of  a  normally
constituted  person.

WM.  H.  PICKERING.


128  Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,


PRELIMINARY    REPORT    OF    THE    COMMITTEE    ON
APPARITIONS   AND   HAUNTED   HOUSES.

This  committee  has  entered  upon  its  task  with  the  purpose  of  col-
lecting and  criticising  stories  that  may  prove  to  be  current  concerning
the  topics  committed  to  its  charge,  and  with  the  intention  of  enga-
ging in  any  other  practicable  investigations  that  may  seem  to  be  re-
quired by  the  nature  of  these  topics.  A  brief  statement  of  the  spirit
in  which  the  committee  intends  to  work  may  prove  useful  at  this
point.  In  the  first  place,  no  immediate  or  in  any  wise  sensational
results  can  be  guaranteed,  or  need  be  demanded  in  this  research.  The
committee  feels  its  work  to  be  auxiliary  to  that  of  other  committees,
and  will  have  done  well  if  it  shall  make  a  careful  and  critical  record
of  a  considerable  number  of  characteristic  narratives,  and  a  proper
examination  of  the  discoverable  evidences  for  the  truth  of  these
narratives.  In  the  second  place,  should  the  committee  receive,  in
answer  to  the  accompanying  circular,  evidences  of  the  occurrence  of
so-called  apparitions,  and  evidences  also  of  the  attainment  of  such
information  through  these  apparitions  as  was  capable  of  objective
verification  by  the  persons  concerned,  and  should  these  evidences  in
any  case  successfully  bear  a  rigid  historical  scrutiny,  the  committee
would  then  feel  itself  prepared  to  examine  whether  thought-transfer-
ence, or  some  like  hypothetical  or  verifiable  process,  could  be  used  to
give  a  natural  explanation  for  the  occurrences  in  question.  In  the
third  place,  wherever  the  stories  that  reach  us  prove  to  be  incapable
of  such  verification,  they  may  still  be  very  useful  from  many  points
of  view.  Stories  of  apparitions,  honestly  and  precisely  told,  are,
even  as  mere  stories,  valuable  evidences  of  current  beliefs^  of  current
tendencies  to  explain  or  to  interpret  strange  experiences,  and  of  the
whole  popular  temperament.  The  committee  wishes,  for  instance,  to
know  whether  narratives  of  apparitions  are  as  frequently  to  be  found
among  Americans  as  the  English  society  has  discovered  them  to  be
found  among  Englishmen,  whether  age,  sex,  occupation,  or  other  con-
ditions affect  their  frequency,  and  what  character  they  usually  assume
in  this  day  and  country.  The  far-reaching  interest  of  similar  inves-
tigations in  other  branches  of  descriptive  psychology  leads  the  com-
mittee to  hope  that  the  present  research,  if  long  enough  continued,
may  lead,  if  to  nothing  more  marvellous,  then  at  least  to  a  little
better  comprehension  of  the  psychology  of  the  American  people.

But,  yet  further,  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  they  work,  all  the  members


Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions.  129

of  the  committee  earnestly  and  especially  desire  to  avoid  a  priori
assumptions  and  unscientific  prejudices  of  every  sort,  and  to  receive
and  examine  in  a  spirit  of  cautious  frankness  whatever  information
may  be  put  into  their  hands.  They  seriously  request  the  active  co-
operation of  the  members  of  the  society  in  securing  them  answers
to  the  accompanying  circular ;  since  without  many  answers,  and  full
ones  at  that,  little  can  be  done  to  accomplish  any  of  the  objects
with  which  the  committee  has  been  formed.

In  its  work  thus  far,  the  committee  has  actually  received  a  consid-
erable number  of  interesting  and  valuable  replies  to  its  circular,  but
is  not  as  yet  prepared  to  make  any  final  report  of  any  definite  or
general  results  of  its  investigation.

JOSIAH  ROYCE,  Chairman.


CIRCULAR    No.    6.

COMMITTEE  ON  APPARITIONS  AND  HAUNTED  HOUSES.

Request  for  Information.

The  undersigned,  constituting  the  Committee  appointed  by  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  the  investigation  of  Apparitions
and  Haunted  Houses,  issue  the  present  circular  to  invite  communica-
tions from  persons  who  may  be  able  to  help  them  in  an  examination
of  the  phenomena  that  fall  within  their  province.

I.  They  particularly  desire  information  regarding  supposed  cases
of  Apparitions  of  Absent  or  Deceased  Persons.  It  is  well  known
that,  from  time  to  time,  there  are  related  or  published  accounts  of
people  who  are  said  to  have  seen,  as  present,  persons  who  were  at  the
time  actually  either  absent  or  dead.  As  a  proof  of  the  genuineness
of  these  appearances,  the  accounts  frequently  add  that  the  persons
who  have  had  these  experiences  have  learned,  through  them,  about
some  otherwise  unknown  facts,  afterwards  verified  ;  such,  for  instance,
as  death  or  illness  or  some  other  calamity  which  has  actually  hap-
pened, at  or  near  the  time  of  the  apparition  itself,  to  the  distant  per-
son whose  appearance  is  narrated.  Other  proofs  of  the  reality  and
significance  of  the  supposed  apparitions  are  sometimes  narrated.

The  Committee  wishes  to  collect  accounts,  from  trustworthy
sources,  of  all  such  alleged  occurrences,  as  well  as  accounts  of  other
similar  personal  experiences  which  may  have  been  striking  enough
for  the  persons  concerned  to  remember,  or  perhaps  record.  Such
accounts  the  Committee  proposes  to  collate  and  examine,  with  a  view


130  Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions.

to  drawing  such  conclusions  from  them  as  may  seem  proper  and
warranted.  In  order  that  the  results,  if  any  are  reached,  may  have
value,  the  Committee,  while  not  wishing  to  exclude  any  information
likely  to  be  useful,  will  be  especially  glad  to  hear  directly  from  the
persons  themselves  who  have  had  the  experiences  in  question,  with
such  further  information  as  will  enable  the  Committee  to  verify  the
accounts  given,  whether  by  the  accounts  of  other  witnesses,  by
the  use  of  documents,  or  by  means  of  other  collateral  testimony.  Per-
sons who  have  information  bearing  on  the  matters  before  the  Com-
mittee may  find  the  following  questions  useful  guides  in  stating  their
evidence.  Such  answers  as  can  be  furnished,  in  any  case,  should  be
given  as  explicitly  as  possible,  in  the  communications  addressed  to
the  Committee.

QUESTIONS.

1.  To  whom  and  when  did  the  experience  in  question  occur?
What  was  his  (or  her)  age,  nationality,  and  occupation ;  and  what
was  his  (or  her)  state  of  health  or  of  mind  at  the  time  of  the  appari-
tion ?    At  what  hour  of  the  day  did  it  appear,  and  at  what  place  ?

2.  Had  the  narrator  of  the  experience  in  question  ever  had  hal-
lucinations, or  seen  apparitions  before,  or  has  such  an  occurrence
ever  happened  since  ?  If  so,  describe  these  other  experiences,  giving
their  time  and  place,  and  compare  or  contrast  them  with  the  one  in
question.

3.  Does  the  narrator  believe  in  ghosts?  Or  has  he,  before  this
experience,  believed  iu  apparitions  of  any  sort,  as  probable  sources
of  knowledge  about  absent  or  dead  persons  ?

4.  To  what  senses  did  the  apparition  appeal?  If  it  appeared
clearly  to  the  eye,  describe  the  color,  the  form,  place,  apparent  dis-
tance, size,  clearness,  the  length  of  time  of  endurance,  and  all  other
remembered  qualities  of  the  object  seen.  Was  it  "  as  large  as  life,"
i.e.,  as  large  as  the  person  or  thing  supposed  to  have  been  seen  would
naturally  have  appeared?  Were  the  other  objects  present  at  the
time  (such  as  the  real  wall,  or  a  real  table  or  chair)  visible  through
it?  Did  it  stand  still,  or  move  about?  Did  it  remain  clear,  or  come
and  go?  Could  it  be  touched?  Was  it  seen  in  the  darkness,  or  in
the  light?  If  the  experience  in  question  was  not  something  seen,  but
something  heard  or  felt,  describe  it  as  clearly  as  possible,  and  in  a
similarly  definite  manner,  laying  stress  on  whatever  may  show  exactly
what  was  experienced.

5.  If  the  apparition  seemed  to  give  warning,  or  other  knowledge,
of  any  future  or  distant  fact,  did  the  narrator  relate  the  incident  to
any  one,  or  give  notice  of  the  warning  conveyed,  before  he  was  able


Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions.  131

to  verify  the  facts  supposed  to  have  been  revealed  ?  Did  he  record
these  facts  before  he  verified  them,  or  before  he  could  verify  them?
If  so,  is  the  record  now  extant,  or  can  it  be  placed  for  examination
in  the  hands  of  the  Committee?  What  other  persons  have  heard  of
this  apparition?  How  soon  did  they  hear  of  it?  Can  they  now  be
communicated  with?  What  are  their  addresses?  If  possible,  trans-
mit their  accounts  at  the  same  time  with  the  narrative  of  the  one  who
actually  experienced  the  apparition  in  question.  If  two  or  more  had
the  experience  in  common,  their  names  and  separate  narratives  should
be  given.     If  this  is  not  possible,  give  their  names  and  addresses.

These  questions  are  not  meant  to  cover  all  the  ground  in  every
case,  but  only  to  indicate  the  information  desired  by  the  Committee,
and  the  most  helpful  sorts  of  information.  In  dealing  with  all  these
accounts,  the  Committee  will  be  governed  by  no  pre-conceived  theory
or  prejudice.  They  wish  simply  to  hear  and  examine  the  facts,  and
to  draw  therefrom  whatever  conclusions  may  prove  to  be  warranted
by  the  evidence.  To  this  end  they  invite  friendly  co-operation  from
all  well-disposed  persons.

Correspondents  may  feel  assured  that  their  communications  will
be  treated  as  thoroughly  confidential  by  the  Committee  when  specially
requested  so  to  treat  them.

II.  The  Committee  may  be  able  to  devote  a  somewhat  limited
time  to  the  personal  examination  of  the  phenomena  connected  with
so-called  haunted  houses,  and  will  be  glad  to  hear  of  such  phenomena
from  persons  in  the  vicinity  of  this  city.  The  fullest  details  are
requested  from  all  who  may  offer  information  on  this  topic.

Communications  may  be  addressed  to  any  member  of  the  Com-
mittee.

JOSIAH   ROYCE,    Chairman,
Cambridge,  Mass.

MORTON   PRINCE,  M.D.,  Secretary,
Boston,  Mass.

T.   W.   HIGGINSON,

Cambridge,  Mass.

J.    C.    ROPES,

40  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
F.   E.   ABBOT,

Cambridge,  Mass.
ROLAND   THAXTER,

98  Pinckney  Street,  Boston,  Mass.
WOODWARD   HUDSON,

Concord,  Mass.


PKOCEEDINGS


OP    THE


L    D


pea!


I.


Vol.  I.


DECEMBER,   1887.


No.  3.


MEETINGS   OF   THE   SOCIETY.

Boston,  June  15,  1886.

Fifth  meeting  of  the  Society.

Thirty-four  persons  present.  Professor  E.  C.  Pickering  in  the
chair.

Record  of  the  previous  meeting  (Jan.  12,  1886)  read  and  ap-
proved.

Election  of  Associate  Members.  •

Professor  Bowditch  read  the  report1  of  the  Thought-Transference
Committee,  and  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering  presented  a  report i  on  some
experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  The  subject  was  then  dis-
cussed by  Drs.  Minot,  Prince,  James  Putnam,  and  by  Professors
Pickering  and  Watson.

Dr.  Minot  then  read  a  paper1  "  On  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic
Sense"  by  Drs.  Jastrow  and  Nuttall,  of  Johns  Hopkins  University.
Dr.  Minot  also  read  the  report1  of  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering  on  the
Reiehenbach  Phenomena.

Professor  Royce  reported  x  for  the  Committee  on  Apparitions  and
Haunted  Houses.

Professor  Bowditch  read  a  letter  which  narrated  certain  strange
occurrences  which  had  come  under  the  notice  of  the  writer.

Professor  James  reported J  for  the  Committee  on  Hypnotism,  and
also  for  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

E.    G.   GARDINER,  Secretary.

Boston,  Jan.  11,  1887.
Sixth  meeting  (annual)  of  the  Society.

One  hundred  and  fifty  persons  present.  Professor  Bowditch  in
the    chair.


1  See  Proceedings,  No.  2.


134  *  Meetings  of  the  Society.

Record  of  the  previous  meeting  (June  15,  1886)  read  and  ap-
proved .

The  Treasurer's  report  was  read.  Mr.  C.  C.  Jackson  and  Mr.
John  C.  Ropes  were  appointed  Auditors.

Voted,  that  the  words  "  from  its  number"  be  struck  out  of  Article
II.  Section  2  of  the  Constitution,  and  that  to  Article  IT.  be  added  a
Section  5,  which  shall  read:  "  The  President  shall  be  a  member  of
the  Council."

The  members  named  in  the  following  list  were  elected  to  the
Council  for  three  years  :  —

H.  P.  Bowditch,  C.  S.  Minot,

E.  G.  Gardiner,  Simon  Newcomb,

C.  C.  Jackson,  W.  H.  Pickering,

Morton  Prince.

List  of  persons  elected  Associate  Members  by  the  Council  since
the  previous  meeting  of  the  Society  was  read.

Reports  of  the  chairmen  of  the  different  committees  were  read.

Examples  of  simulated  Thought-Transference  were  shown  by  Dr.
Minot  and  Mr.  Cory.  Mr.  Montague  gave  an  interesting  exhibition
of  Muscle-reading,  and  the  subject  was  discussed  by  Professors
Bowditch  and  James,  Mr.  W.  H.  Pickering,  and  others.

Professor  James  read  a  paper  on  "  Sensations  from  Amputated
Limbs."

The  chairman  called  attention  to  a  circular  about  to  be  sent  to
Members  and  Associates,  asking  for  subscriptions  to  be  sent  to  a
fund  to  be  used  to  pay  the  salary  of  a  permanent  Secretary,  and
also  to  defray  the  expenses  of  investigations.  The  chairman  an-
nounced that  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  of  London,  had  been  elected
as  Secretary  by  the  Council,  and  that  Mr.  Hodgson  had  cabled  that
he  would  accept  the  position.

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

E.  G.  GARDINER,  Secretary.

Boston,  May  12,  1887.

Seventh  meeting  of  the  Society.

Eighty-eight  persons  present.     Professor  Bowditch  in  the  chair.

Record  of  the  previous  meeting  (Jan.  11,  1887)  read  and  ap-
proved.

List  of  persons  elected  Associates  by  the  Council  since  the  pre-
vious meeting  of  the  Society  was  read.

Dr.  E.  G.  Gardiner  then  resigned  his  place  as  Secretary  to  Mr.
Richard  Hodgson.


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  135

Dr.  C.  S.  Minot  read  selections  from  a  paper  by  Miss  Alice
Fletcher  upon  "  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omaha  Tribe  of  In-
dians," and  made  some  remarks,  showing  the  applications  of  Misg
Fletcher's  paper  to  the  work  of  the  Society,  urging  that  for  any
thorough  study  of  our  phantasms  the  investigations  must  be  ex-
tended to  those  of  other  races,  and  the  researches  be  conducted  so
far  as  possible  from  an  ethnic  stand-point.

The  chairman  commented  on  the  characteristics  exhibited  by  the
alleged  ghosts  of  the  Omahas,  which  were  audible  rather  than  Visi-
ble, and  so  distinguished  from  the  alleged  ghosts  of  the  more  civil-
ized white  races,  where  the  contrary  seemed  to  be  the  case.

The  Secretary  then  gave  an  account  of  the  methods  and  results
of  the  investigations  of  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
and  afterwards  replied  to  a  question  put  by  Professor  James.

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

RICHARD  HODGSON,  Secretary.


THE   SUPERNATURAL    AMONG   THE    OMAHA   TRIBE   OF

INDIANS.

BY    ALICE    C.    FLETCHER.

To  comprehend  the  ideas  of  a  people  concerning  the  preternatural
and  the  manifestations  of  the  supernatural  among  them,  it  is  needful
to  know  something  of  their  beliefs  relating  to  the  origin  and  the  future
of  mankind  ;  their  notions  pertaining  to  the  natural  world  and  their
religious  ceremonies.

A  clearly-defined  cosmogony  does  not  exist  among  the  Omaha  tribe
of  Indians.     M}'ths  tell  of  water  animals  being  engaged  in  forming*
the  earth,  but  how  water  was  created,  or  how  life  began,  is  left  in-
definite.

The  general  belief  of  the  Omaha  Indians  is,  that  in  some  way  man
has  been  developed  from  animals.  How  this  came  about  no  myth
and  no  man  give  any  explanation.  No  story  exists  where  a  man  is
born  of  an  animal ;  yet,  as  the  life  of  man  depends  upon  the  animal  as
food,  so  in  some  mysterious  manner  the  two  are  bound  together  in
the  general  continuity  that  pervades  the  universe.  *

In  the  myth  telling  of  the  birth  of  woman  a  younger  brother  is  made
the  medium  ;  a  strange  thorn  pierces  his  foot,  he  extracts  it,  and
wraps  it  in  coverings  of  skin.  When  the  older  brothers  return  home
they  are  startled  by  hearing  a  crying,  and  upon  examination  of  the
bundle  from  which  the  sound  proceeds,  they  find  to  their  astonishment


136  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

a  baby  in  the  place  of  the  thorn.  The  infant  rapidly  becomes  a
woman ;  all  the  animals  obey  her  call,  and  she  enriches  her  brothers
by  her  skill  and  industry.

The  myths  seem  to  indicate  a  linking  together  of  all  forms  of  life
throughout  nature.  The  various  animals  are  endowed  with  speech,
and  address  each  other  by  terms  of  relationship,  and  are  so  addressed
by  man.  The  beaver,  eagle,  and  others  are  called  grandfather  or
grandmother,  the  titles  of  respect ;  tout  in  the  various  myths  these
terms  are  not  always  applied  to  the  same  animal.

The  otter  seems  to  be  connected  with  the  supernatural.  Its  skin  is
twisted  about  the  neck  of  a  man  in  order  to  promote  the  swoon  which
will  bring  prophetic  vision.  Its  skin  is  used  in  the  sacred  society
when  a  part  of  the  ceremony  consists  in  the  simulation  of  death.  In
the  myth  telling  of  the  introduction  of  death  the  otter  was  sent  as  a
decoy  to  bring  about  that  event.  'The  story  is  of  a  mythical  person
named  Ha-hea-ga,  who  had  a  younger  brother.  (It  is  noticeable  that
here  again  it  is  a  3'ounger  brother  who  introduces  the  new  experience.)
One  da}',  Ha-hea-ga  warns  his  brother  of  the  approach  of  some  mys-
terious impending  trouble,  and  urges  him  not  to  venture  forth  from  the
tent.  Ha-hea-ga  goes  out  as  usual  to  hunt,  and  returns  after  a  time
to  find  his  brother  missing.  He  follows  the  footprints  of  the  youth
until  they  lead  to  the  water  and  out  on  the  ice,  to  where  there  is  a
hole  ;  there  they  disappear,  together  with  the  marks  of  an  otter,  which
had  evidently  enticed  the  brother  into  danger.  The  myth  describes
the  grief  of  Ha-hea-ga,  the  present  streams  of  the  country  being  formed
bv  his  tears.  He  goes  among  the  animals  seeking  for  tidings.  At
times  he  becomes  enraged  and  kills  those  who  show  no  sympathy,  but
he  rewards  those  that  help  him.  At  last  he  discovers  the  abode  of  the
strange  water-monsters  that  have  caused  his  brother's  death,  and  by
stratagem  kills  them,  and  secures  all  that  remains  of  his  brother,  —  his
skin.  Ha-hea-ga  constructs  a  sweat-lodge,  using  serpents  instead  of
boughs  ;  they  thrust  their  tails  into  the  ground  and  twist  their  necks
together  to  make  the  frame- work  for  the  coverings.  Ha-hea-ga
gathers  stones,  and  appeals  to  their  ancient  life  for  help ;  he  puts
them  in  the  fire,  calling  on  this  power  for  assistance  ;  he  invokes  the
aid  of  water,  as  he  pours  it  on  the  heated  stones.  This  he  does  in
the  sweat-lodge,  having  with  him  his  brother's  skin.  As  the  steam
rises,  amid  prayerful  songs,  the  brother  stirs.  Four  times  Ha-hea-
ga  goes  through  these  ceremonies  before  the  3-outh  responds  to  the
appeals  to  return  once  more  to  life  ;  at  last  he  says,  "  Ah,  my  brother,
why  do  you  this?  Death  is  far  better."  And  Ha-hea-ga,  filled  with
chagrin,  turns  his  brother  into  a  stone,  and  himself  becomes  a  wolf ;
but  death  had  entered  the  world.


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  137

#

The  Omahas  believe  that  after  death  the  spirit  travels  four  days
seeking  for  the  path  that  leads  to  the  home  of  the  dead.  To  find
this  road  is  not  so  hard  for  an  adult,  but  a  child  experiences  much
difficulty.  The  path  is  visible  to  us  as  the  "  milky  way."  To
assist  the  dead  as  they  wander  forth,  a  fire  is  kept  burning  at  the
grave  during  four  nights ;  by  that  time  it  is  supposed  that  the  path
is  reached.  The  spirit  then  passes  on  to  where  the  way  divides ;  at
this  fork  an  old  man  sits  ;  he  wears  in  his  hair  the  sacred  downy
eagle  feather  and  is  clad  in  a  skin  robe,  the  hair  outside,  the  head
of  the  animal  resting  on  the  left  arm,  the  tail  on  the  right ;  the  robe
is  always  worn  in  this  manner  on  occasions  of  solemnity.  As  the
spirit  reaches  the  place  where  the  old  man  sits,  he  looks  and  smiles
at  those  whose  lives  have  been  in  accordance  with  the  Indian  ideal ;
that  is,  men  valiant,  faithful  to  friends,  relentless  to  foes,  just,
slow  to  quarrel,  unfailing  in  hospitality,  and  exact  in  all  ceremonia
observances.  To  such  a  spirit  the  old  man  points  the  direction
to  be  taken,  indicating  the  short  branch  of  the  "  milky  way."  The
spirit  passes  on,  obeying  the  sign  ;  no  word  is  spoken  by  either.
Those  whose  lives  have  not  been  worthy,  travel  on,  unheeding  the
muffled  figure,  and  are  unnoticed  by  him  ;  these  do  not  turn  aside
toward  the  short  way,  but  continue  over  the  zenith  and  wander
on  endless^,  always  alone,  and  with  increasing  sorrowfulness  of
heart.

A  suicide  ceases  to  exist :  for  him  there  is  no  hereafter.
Heaven  is  thought  to  be  a  place  like  this  world,  having  mountains,
streams,  valleys,  prairies,  and  woods  filled  with  game  and  beautiful
with  verdure.  The  vocations  are  the  same  as  here  ;  the  men  hunt,
the  women  weave,  the  children  play.  Each  one  enters  heaven  as
he  left  this  world ;  the  adult  is  still  an  adult,  the  child  a  child.
Friends  welcome  each  other  and  relations  are  reunited.  Enmities
are  at  an  end.  Sickness  and  hunger  are  not  suffered  there;  but
sorrow  comes  when  the  second  death  sunders  those  who  are  dear  to
each  other.  There  is  said  to  be  a  succession  of  heavens,  each  one
better  than  the  preceding.  How  many  of  these  heavens  there  are,
no  one  could  state  to  me.  Each  succeeding  heaven  is  reached  as  was
the  first,  the  person  dying  in  the  heaven  where  he  may  be,  and  enter-
ing the  next  above  him  ;  those  whom  he  has  left  behind,  wailing
over  his  departure.

The  knowledge  of  the  hereafter  seems  to  have  been  received  by
visions  coming  to  persons  in  a  swoon.  Those  having  such  visions
declare  they  remain  several  days  where  the  dead  live,  but  are  finally
forced  to  return  from  loneliness  ;  for,  although  they  see  their  friends
and  watch  them  at  their  occupations,  these  will  not  speak  to  the


138  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

new-comer,  and  ignore  his  presence ;  even  the  animals  fail  to  take
cognizance  of  the  visitor.

According  to  the  cosmography  of  the  Omahas  the  earth  is  a  vast
plain,  broken  l>}r  mountains,  valleys,  rivers,  and  lakes;  the  heavens,
a  great  canopy,  held  up  by  the  four  winds.  The  sun  travels
across  the  sky  from  east  to  west,  and  returns  by  way  of  the  north,
passing  below  the  rim  of  the  earth,  the  aurora  being  the  light
thrown  up  during  this  passage.  The  moon  follows  the  course  of  the
sun,  and  is  made  new  every  month ;  the  period  between  the  death  of
the  old  and  the  birth  of  the  new  i3  marked  by  a  storm,  which  comes
to  cover  the  generation  of  the  moon.  The  stars  are  seen  to  move,
and  the  stationary  north  star  is  used  as  a  guide  on  journeys.  No
explanation  is  given  of  the  difference  between  the  stars.  Thunder
and  lightning  come  from  a  strange,  undefined  being  in  the  form  of  a
bird.  The  flapping  of  its  wings  makes  the  thunder,  and  the  winking  of
its  eyes  the  heat-lightning.  It  hurls  on  men  the  thunderbolts,  and
feeds  upon  the  compass-plant  (silphium  lucimatum).

In  the  sacred  ceremonies  the  earth,  winds,  sun,  and  the  thunder
are  commemorated  by  certain  symbols  peculiar  to  each  of  the  fore-
going.

The  annual  festival  of  Thanksgiving  always  took  place  when  the
tribe  were  within  a  few  days'  march  of  their  permanent  village,  on
their  return  from  the  summer  tribal  hunt,  which  was  always  con-
ducted under  rigid  rules  and  ceremonies.  At  a  certain  part  of  the
^-^  proceedings,  this  figure  is  marked  u^on  the  ground,  and  within
(      )    its   limits    the  earth  is  mellowed  and  made  fine.      Some  say

*-J  the  form  typifies  the  fireplace,  but  many  agree  that  it  is  an
emblem  of  thankfulness,  recognizing  the  earth  as  the  giver  of  food,
the  sustainer  of  life,  and  that  whereon  the  home  is  founded.  The
ground  plan  of  the  earth  lodge,  the  permanent  dwellings  of  the  tribe,
gives  the  same  outline  ;  the  circle  being  the  lodge,  the  projection,  the
entrance.  When  a  man  is  about  to  prophesy  concerning  the  success
of  a  party  going  forth  to  another  tribe  to  perform  the  ceremonies
connected  with  the  sacred  peace-pipes,  this  figure  is  drawn  upon  the
ground.  In  the  distance  beyond  this  outline  the  man  sees  prefigured
the  manner  of  reception  awaiting  the  party  and  the  gifts  that  will  be
brought  forth.  These  gifts  are  used  to  assist  the  poor,  and  at  the
same  time  they  bring  honors  to  the  donor  in  his  tribe  and  home.  I
have  seen  this  same  figure  cut  in  the  earth  to  the  depth  of  three
inches,  upon  a  high  bluff  overlooking  the  surrounding  country.  My
compass  showed  the  projection  to  face  due  east ;  so  does  the  open-
ing of  the  lodge  and  tent.  The  figure  was  kept  clear  of  weeds  and
underbrush  by  some  secret  hand.     Such  excavations  were  said  to  be


The  Supernatural  among  ike  Omahas.  139

made  in   accordance  with  visions  or  dreams   that  represented   the
earth.  f

The  four  winds '  are  recognized  when  the  hair  of  a  child  is  cut  for
the  first  time  by  the  old  man  whose  duty  it  is  to  perform  the  cere-
mony. He  lifts  the  child  from*  its  feet  and  turns  it  slowly  around
four  times,  letting  the  child's  feet  touch  the  ground  at  each  of  the
four  quarters,  in  honor  of  the  four  winds.  After  that  the  child  is
urged  forward  a  few  steps,  and  has  thus  entered  upon  the  path  of
life.  When  a  pipe  is  smoked  ceremonially  it  is  lifted  to  the  four
quarters.  The  rattles  and  tobacco-pouch  which  accompan}'  the
sacred  peace-pipes  have  painted  around  them  a  green
band  with  four  projecting  lines.  The  same  device  is
tattooed  upon  the  breast  and  back  of  a  young  girl,  whose
father  has  acquired  certain  honors  derived  through  these
pipes.

In  these  same  ceremonies  the  sun  is  symbolized  by  a  small  blue
spot  tattooed  on  the  forehead  of  the  girl  who  has  the  mark  of  the
four  winds  put  upon  her.  A  circle  is  painted  in  red  upon  the  breasts
of  two  men,  whose  duty  it  is  to  take  a  certain  part  in  the  ceremonies
connected  with  the  pipes.  The  sun  is  also  typified  in  the  streamers
on  the  sacred  peace-pipes,  and  by  the  head  of  the  large  red-headed
woodpecker.

When  the  first  thunder  is  heard  in  the  spring,  members  of  certain
gentes,  which  possess  a  peculiar  pack,  filled  with  the  skins  of  certain
birds,  open  their  pack  and  chant  the  sacred  songs  pertaining  to  it.

*  These  packs  are  used  on  the  occasion  when  a  warrior  recounts  his
deeds,  in  order  to  secure  the  right  to  count  his  honors.  At  a  signal
from  the  master  of  ceremonies  the  man  ceases  his  narrative,  and
lets  fall  from  his  hand,  which  is  extended  over  the  pack,  a  small
reed  ;  if  he  has  spoken  truthfully,  the  reed  rests  upon  the  pack ;  but
if  he  has  boasted  or  falsified,  it  rolls  to  the  ground.  The  skins
within  the  pack  represent  the  observing  power  of  the  birds  during
life.  These  fly  over  the  country,  watching  all  the  events  that  are
taking  place.  By  this  omniscience  they  are  supposed  to  be  fitted  to
judge  of  the  veracity  of  men  when  narrating  their  deeds.

The  penalty  for  sacrilegious  acts,  such  as  neglect  by  those  in
charge  of  the  articles  belonging  to  the  sacred  tent  of  war,  which
include  one  of  these  bird-packs,  is  that  the  offender  will  be  struck  by


1  For  the  further  elaboration  of  these  and  kindred  ceremonies  see  several  papers  of  mine  pub-
lished in  the  Sixteenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Peabody  Museum  of  American  Archaeology  and
Ethnology,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1884.

2  For  an  account  of  the  sacred  tent  of  war  containing  one  of  these  honor-packs,  see  Eighteenth
Report  of  the  Peabody  Museum,  page  411, 1886.


140  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

lightning.  A  similar  punishment  will  fall  on  those  who  neglect  to
do  their  share  in  the  great  tribal  ceremonies. §  A  man  who  is  struck
by  lightning  is  buried  just  as  he  falls  ;  if  he  is  thrown  on  his  face  he  is
suffered  so  to  lie.  No  man  would  dare  touch  one  who  had  been  thus
killed.  Over  such  a  one  the  customary  mound  is  not  raised;  the
ground  is  left  flat  and  unmarked.  These  ceremonies  and  penalties,
as  well  as  the  myths,  give  evidence  that  thunder  and  certain  birds
are  allies.  The  Instasunda  gens,  which,  from  its  name,  —  the  flash-
ing eye,  — as  well  as  from  the  names  bestowed  upon  the  members  of
this  gens,  and  some  of  the  ceremonies  peculiar  to  it,  refers  to  thunder
and  lightning,  and  has  for  its  symbol  and  taboo  worms  and  insects.

The  ten  gentes  into  which  the  Omaha  tribe  is  divided  have  each
an  animal  symbol,  and  the  members  of  a  gens  do  not  touch  the
animal,  or  certain  portions  of  it,  that  is  mythically  connected  with
that  gens.  For  example  :  the  Waeginsta  gens  has  the  elk  :  members
of  the  gens  do  not  touch  the  male  elk,  under  pain  of  penalties  which
would  follow  supernaturally,  as  sores  on  the  mouth  or  eyes,  or  a  per-
manent mottling  of  the  skin  with  white  spots.  This  gens  has  a  series
of  names  referring  to  the  elk.  When  a  child's  hair  is  cut  for  the
first  time,  at  three  years  of  age,  it  is  trimmed  in  a  manner  to  sym-
bolize the  elk.

A  person  is  born  into  his  gens,  and  he  cannot  change  it  or  escape
its  limitations  ;  but  he  is  not  supposed  to  receive  any  benefit  from
the  animal  connected  with  his  gens  or  name,  because  of  his  birth-
place. Animals,  however,  are  supposed  to  be  able  to  help  men ;  but
this  help  comes  through  visions  or  dreams,  and  is  entirely  independent
of  the  symbol  of  the  gens  or  the  name  of  the  man.

Medicines  are  sometimes  revealed  by  animals,  as  well  as  the  modes
of  application.  The  buffalo  is  thought  to  have  remarkable  recupera-
tive power,  and  this  animal  made  known  to  a  certain  man  a  root
useful  to  heal  wounds.  A  society  of  men  exists  who  are  instructed
traditionally  concerning  this  horb  and  how  to  use  it.  The  men  who
dream  of  the  buffalo,  on  occasions  of  importance  or  danger  recall
their  vision,  and  put  a  band  of  black  earth  across  their  mouth  from
cheek  to  cheek,  and  a  willow  twig  in  their  scalp-lock.  The  band  of
black  typifies  the  nosing  of  the  buffalo  in  the  earth,  and  the  twig  the
root  thrown  up  which  has  the  healing  power.

There  are  men  in  the  tribe  who  spend  much  of  their  time  in  seek-
ing by  fasts  and  other  rites  to  have  visions,  and  a  few  persons  become
adepts  in  obtaining  them.  Their  dreams  are  supposed  to  have  a
peculiar  hold  upon  the  supernatural,  and  there  are  those  among  them
who  profess  to  have  constant  dealings  with  the  spirits  of  animals  and
men.


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  141

The  Omahas  believe  that  animals  have  great  recuperative  power ;
they  are  known  to  live  after  being  badly  wounded,  and  are  seen  to
breathe  upon  and  lick  the  wound  ;  therefore  there  mu^t  be  a  peculiar
virtue  in  the  breath  and  saliva  of  the  animals.  Consequently,  if  a
man  dreams  of  an  animal  and  it  comes  near  and  speaks  to  him,  and
its  breath  is  felt  by  the  man,  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  animal  —  its
tenacity  of  life,  speed,  courage,  or  whatever  may  be  its  character-
istics —  are  transmitted  to  the  dreamer,  after  he  has  performed  certain
rites,  and  procured  something  belonging  to  the  object  seen  in  the
vision.  He  may  also,  in  some  mysterious  way,  take  on  the  form  of
his  animal  visitant  four  times,  and  may  reverently  recall  the  vision  in
times  of  danger  or  necessity,  relying  upon  the  peculiar  powers  of  the
animal  being  given  him  for  succor  or  success.  For  instance  :  a
youth  dreams  of  an  elk  ;  he  must  observe  certain  rules  in  speaking
of  his  dream  ;  he  must  make  a  collar  with  a  fringe  of  hair  from  the
dewlap  of  the  elk,  and  a  whistle  from  one  of  its  bones.  By  certain
ceremonies  and  gifts  he  may  join  the  society  of  those  who  have  had
dreams  of  the  elk.  This  animal  is  noted  for  its  speed,  which  enables
it  to  escape  from  its  pursuers,  and  the  man  who  dreams  of  an  elk  is
supposed  to  be  endowed  thereby  with  the  means  to  procure  this
quality  from  the  elk.  Should  this  man  be  challenged  to  a  race  or
find  himself  in  danger  he  must  put  on  his  collar  of  elk  hair,  place
the  whistle  in  his  mouth,  and  call  reverently  upon  his  past  vision  for
aid  ;  his  memory  of  the  dream  thus  becomes  a  present  reality,  and
helps  him  to  victory  or  escape.

All  persons  having  similar  dreams  are  affiliated,  and  as  some  have
the  power  to  transform  themselves  four  different  times  into  the
animal  or  bird  that  appeared  in  visions,  it  is.  said  that  these  men
visit  cognate  tribes  in  this  guise.  On  their  journey  they  stop  to  rest ;
if  they  stop  on  a  rock  they  leave  the  impress  of  their  feet.  Those
who  are  birds  place  their  feet  where  other  supernatural  birds  have
rested  ;  those  who  are  animals  put  their  feet  in  the  tracks  left  by
kindred  visitants  ;  and  in  the  course  of  time  these  footprints  deepen
by  use.  There  are  man}'  rocks  pointed  out  where  these  impressions
are  to  be  seen  ;  one  near  Ponca  City  has  on  it  many  markings,  caused,
it  is  said,  by  these  transformed  men  resting  here  when  passing  be-
tween the  Ponca  and  Omaha  tribes.  These  metamorphosed  beings
sometimes  have  running  and  flying  matches,  to.  test  their  strength
received  by  visions  ;  on  these  occasions,  if  one  should  leap  over,  or  fly
over,  another,  the  one  so  passed  over  would  speedily  die.

A  similar  notion  seems  to  prevail  among  the  people.  When  persons
are  taking  a  bath  in  the  sweat-lodge  some  one  is  stationed  outside  to
prevent  anything  passing  over  the  lodge,  lest  this  bring  sickness  or


142  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

death  to  one  inside.  If  a  dog  climbs  upon  the  roof  of  an  earth-
lodge,  and  through  the  central  opening  for  the  smoke,  chances  to  look
down  upon  the  persons  below,  the  animal  must  be  killed,  in  order  to  pre-
vent a  death  occurring  among  the  number  present.  A  story  is  told  of  an
old  man  who  had  been  gifted  with  visions.  One  day  as  he  was  trav-
elling \vitli  some  hunters  he  fell  behind  to  rest ;  as  he  sat  motionless,
a  pursued  deer  in  its  flight  jumped  over  him.  The  old  man  was  not
able  to  rise  quickly  enough  to  destroy  the  deer,  so  he  exclaimed  to
the  retreating  animal,  wt  Once  I  was  young;  then  I  would  have  killed
you  ;  now  I  permit  you  to  jump  over  me  !  "  The  old  man  thought
his  end  near,  on  account  of  his  years,  and  was  incensed  at  one  who  he
supposed  had  turned  himself  into  a  deer  to  thus  shorten  another's
life.  Young  men  throw  one  leg  over  a  little  child  and  say,  "  Now
you  will  grow  no  more  !  "  A  gun  is  rendered  useless  if  it  is  stepped
over,  particularly  by  a  woman.

There  are  other  omens  of  death.  The  sick,  when  about  to  die,
see  their  deceased  relatives,  who  bid  the  dying  ones  to  hasten
and  join  them.  To  dream  of  seeing  a  person  moving  about  whose
feet  do  not  touch  the  ground  is  the  precursor  of  that  person's
death.  If  the  one  dreamed  of  is  warned  of  such  a  dream,  and
he  will  make  a  sweat-lodge  and  bathe  therein  while  one  of  the
men  gifted  with  visions  sings  the  sacred  songs,  the  coming  death
may  be  averted.  Death  can  also  be  prevented  by  the  person  so
dreamed  of  pouring  hot  water  before  the  door  of  his  lodge  every
morning  for  four  days.  To  accidentally  touch  any  of  the  sacred
tribal  articles,  or  to  be  neglectful  of  respect  toward  them,  brings  the
transgressor  into  danger  of  death  or  grave  disaster,  which  can  be
averted  by  sprinkling  hot  water  with  a  spray  of  artemisia  over  the
offender's  person.  If  a  horse  shies  at  a  person  it  is  because  the  ani-
mal sees  or  smells  blood  belonging  to  the  man,  who  is  thereby  warned
of  approaching  death.  He  can  avert  this  by  an  ablution  in  the  sweat-
lodge,  or  by  making  the  oblation  of  hot  water  upon  the  ground.

The  word  for  ghost  in  the  Omaha  language  is  "  Wa-na-he,"  a  trans-
parent body.  Among  this  tribe  ghosts  are  more  frequently  heard
than  seen.  One  is  liable  to  hear  them  at  an}*  time,  but  particularly  at
night,  that  being  the  ghost's  favorite  hour  for  visiting  the  living,
although  the  visits  are  not  confined  to  that  part  of  the  day.  The
presence  of  a  ghost  is  made  known  by  a  whistling  sound.  I  have
seen  old  and  young  start  when  I  whistled,  thinking  it  was  a  ghost.  I
do  not  recall  any  Indians  whistling,  as  do  white  men  and  boys.  This
abstinence  may  be  caused  by  the  notion  that  ghosts  whistle,  therefore
men  should  not ;  or  it  may  be  because  the  Indian  music  does  not  easily
lend  itself  to  such  cadences  as  can  be  whistled  ;  or  it  may  follow  from


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  143

physical  reasons :  the  lips  of  the  Indian  are  less  flexible  than  those  of
a  people  speaking  a  language  which  demands  more  use  of  the  labial
muscles,  and,  as  a  consequence,  whistling  is  a  more  difficult  accom-
plishment. The  little,  whirling  eddies  of  wind,  raising  the  dust  in  a
column,  so  frequently  seen  on  the  prairie  or  on  the  beaten  trail,  are
said  to  be  ghosts,  who  are  thus  detected  as  they  travel  over  the
country.

When  a  man  is  murdered,  the  ghost  of  the  murdered  man  pursues
the  man-slayer  until  the  act  is  avenged  or  the  man  has  atoned  for  his
violent  deed,  or  else  has  fulfilled  the  conditions  and  the  term  of  his
punishment.  While  the  ghost  of  the  murdered  pursues  the  offender,
the  waving  of  any  garment  worn  by  the  man  brings  added  discomfort
to  the  ghost,  and,  if  the  man  receives  punishment,  during  the  four  years
of  his  exile  he  is  forbidden  to  speak  aloud  or  to  move  rapidly,  lest  he
disturb  the  air  and  vex  the  ghost  of  his  victim.

At  one  time  the  tribe  mov  ed  out  on  their  annual  hunt  in  the  sum-
mer. For  days  the  people  travelled,  but  no  buffalo  were  to  be  seen.
By-and-b}T  the  provisions  which  they  had  taken  from  their  village
were  all  used,  and  the  children  began  to  crjr  with  hunger.  The  run-
ners were  sent  out  far  and  wide,  but  no  game  was  found.  Because  of
weakness  the  tribe  could  travel  but  a  short  distance,  and  finally  they
carried  the  grass  of  one  camp  to  another,  and  used  it  over  and  over
for  their  bedding,  as  they  were  too  feeble  to  cut  grass  at  each  camp.
The  older  men  and  the  leaders  protested  against  this  act,  as  to  carry
straw  from  camp  to  camp  was  a  forerunner  of  famine.  At  last  one
of  the  men,  who  was  gifted  with  the  power  of  visions,  Sha-gje-ska,
being  called  on  to  tell  why  the  tribe  was  thus  bereft  of  food,  declared
kt  I  see  the  ghost  of  the  man  murdered  by  Ma-chu-num-ba  following
the  camp.  He  walks  yonder,  with  bowed  head,  as  if  in  great  grief."
Then  the  tribe  knew  that  the  wind  which  attended  the  ghost  blew
toward  the  game,  causing  it  to  scent  the  people  and  to  flee  before
them,  and  they  blamed  Ma-chu-num-ba  and  his  sons  for  presuming
to  join  the  hunt  when  their  misdeeds  were  unpunished.  The  offend-
ers were  sent  back,  and  soon  the  people  were  able  to  obtain  food.

Other  tales  are  told  of  ghosts  following  the  wrong-doer,  and,
although  the  people  had  provisions,  every  one  was  unsatisfied  and
hungry  even  after  he  had  eaten.  The  presence  of  the  ghost  took  the
taste  and  nourishment  out  of  the  food,  leaving  the  people  weak.

The  story  is  told  that  one  day  a  woman  made  Um-ba-gthe.  This
dish  is  composed  of  a  stiff  mush  of  corn  and  beans  ;  it  is  always
made  overnight,  and  the  next  day  sliced  and  eaten  cold.  That  night
her  husband  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  company  of  strange  men,  ghosts,
enter  his  lodge,  each  one  bearing  a  dish.     They  seated  themselves,


144  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

and  had  a  feast  off  the  Um-ba-gthe.  Next  morning  the  husband
bade  his  wife  throw  away  the  food,  as  the  ghosts  had  meddled  with
it.  The  next  time  the  wife  made  Um-ba-gthe  the  husband  placed  a
knife  over  the  pot  containing  it,  and  that  night  he  dreamed  again  of
the  same  company  of  ghosts  coming  with  their  dishes  to  feast  on  the
favorite  food,  but,  finding  a  knife  over  it,  they  were  unable  to  touch  it
and  went  away  disappointed.  When  eatables  are  left  overnight  a
knife  is  placed  on  the  pot  or  dish ;  this  prevents  ghosts  from  med-
dling with  the  contents,  for  one  must  never  eat  anything  a  ghost  has
touched.

Ghosts  are  supposed  to  hover  about  the  places  formerly  occupied  by
them,  and  to  return  to  their  old  hunting-grounds  and  villages.  One
fall  Sin-de-ha-ha  was  hunting  in  company  with  several  men.  Even-
ing came  on,  and  they  put  their  horses  out  to  graze,  and  made  camp
in  a  grove.  It  was  a  bright  starlight  night.  After  they  had  lain
down  to  sleep  they  heard  footsteps  and  the  cracking  of  twigs,  as  if
these  caught  in  the  hair  of  the  robes  worn  by  those  walking.  Sin-
de-ha-ha  and  his  companions  picked  up  their  bows  and  arrows  and
stealthily  followed  the  footsteps,  which  moved  faster  and  faster  in  the
direction  of  the  horses.  As  the  hunters  drew  near  the  grazing-ground
they  saw  little  whirlwinds  of  dust  travel  towards  the  horses,  and  as
soon  as  these  reached  the  animals,  they  snorted,  then,  tossing  their
heads,  began  to  run.  The  men  followed  hard  after  them,  but  the
horses  were  soon  far  out  of  sight,  and  the  baffled  hunters  returned  to
camp  to  await  the  morning.  When  daylight  came  the  search  was  re-
newed. They  looked  for  the  footprints  of  the  intruders,  as  the
ground  passed  over  the  night  before  was  burnt  prairie  ;  the  men  found
their  own  footprints  and  the  marks  of  the  horses'  feet,  but  nothing
else.  Following  the  tracks  of  the  horses,  they  found  them  quietly
feeding  some  two  miles  from  the  camp.  "  It  was  ghosts  that  drove
off  the  horses,"  said  the  narrator,  as  he  finished  the  story.

Some  years  since  a  middle-aged  man,  a  young  man,  and  a  lad
were  out  hunting  ;  the  latter  had  with  him  two  white  hunting-dogs.
In  the  afternoon  the  eldest  of  the  party  wounded  a  deer,  but  failed
to  capture  the  animal.  He  came  to  the  lad  and  requested  to  have
the  dogs  put  on  the  trail  of  the  deer.  This  was  done  ;  the  hunters
followed  the  dogs,  secured  the  game,  cut  it  up,  and  the  two  younger
ones  were  for  starting  back  at  once,  although  it  was  late  ;  but  the
eldest  said,  "  Let  us  stay  here  to-night,  we  shall  find  our  trail  better
in  the  morning."  So  they  camped  under  a  walnut  tree,  the  young
man  and  the  lad  gathering  twigs  and  wood  for  the  fire,  and  picking
up  walnuts  for  their  own  pleasure.  Just  as  they  were  about  to
kindle  the  fire  they  heard  a  boy's  voice  call,  "  Wha-ae !  "     An  older


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  145

voice,  answered,  "Wha-ah!"  and  a  third  and  more  distant  voice,
belonging  to  a  mature  man,  shouted,  u  Wha-o-o  !  "  —  the  call  for  a  dog.
The  hunting-dogs  dropped  their  tails  between  their  legs,  shivered,
growled,  and  huddled  close  to  the  men.  The  eldest  hunter  at  once
hailed  the  new-comers.  The  three  voices  paid  no  attention  to  the
greeting,  but  kept  up  their  colls  to  each  other,  which  increased  the
distress  of  the  dogs.  After  a  time  the  eldest  hunter  said,  "Build
the  fire  ;  it  is  ghosts  that  we  hear."  The  fire  was  lighted,  the  meat
cooked  and  eaten ;  then  the  party  lay  down  to  rest.  The  two
younger  hunters  fell  asleep,  but  the  elder  kept  awake  until  midnight,
when  the  ghosts  ceased  their  calling.  "  It  was  strange  that  the
ghosts  corresponded  iu  age  to  our  party,"  remarked  the  man  who  told
the  story,  and  who  was  one  of  the  younger  hunters.

Once,  in  the  fall,  a  large  number  of  families  started  out  on  a  hunt.
While  they  were  camped  on  the  south  side  of  the  Platte  river,  nearly
opposite  the  place  now  known  as  Grand  Island,  Nebraska,  a  woman
fell  ill.  The  family  to  which  she  belonged  and  that  of  a  near  rela-
tive remained  behind  when  the  rest  of  the  people  moved  on.  After
they  had  been  gone  a  few  hours,  and  it  was  about  noon,  the  two  fam-
ilies which  had  remained  behind  sat  down  to  their  dinner.  Sud-
denly the  dog  began  to  growl ;  then  it  ran  out  and  barked  violently  ;
shortly  after  the  laugh  of  a  girl  was  heard,  then  a  woman's  voice.
One  of  the  men  at  dinner  exclaimed,  "  Some  of  the  people  have
returned  !  "  and  he  sent  his  little  daughter  to  see  who  the  folk  were.
The  child  came  back,  saying  she  could  not  see  an)7  one.  So  the  fam-
ilies resumed  their  meal.  In  a  moment  the  voices  were  heard  once
more,  first  as  if  at  a  distance,  then  nearer,  until  finally  words  could
be  distinguished  ;  these  sounds  were  accompanied  by  the  rattling  of
tent-poles,  as  when  a  camp  is  being  set  up.  Thinking  there  could
be  no  mistake  as  to  the  return  of  the  people  who  had  left  in  the
morning,  the  head  of  one  of  the  families  that  had  stayed  behind
rose  from  his  dinner  and  went  out  to  greet  his  friends.  As  he
emerged  from  his  tent  he  could  see  nothing  but  the  smoking  circles
left  by  the  late  camp.  As  he  stood  wondering  he  continued  to  hear
voices,  the  setting-up  of  tent-poles,  the  playing  of  children,  and  the
barking  of  dogs,  his  own  dog  responding  vigorously.  He  knew  then
that  the  camping-place  had  been  taken  possession  of  by  ghosts.  He
returned  to  his  tent  and  told  the  inmates  his  conviction  ;  the}7  con-
tinued their  meal,  without  further  attention  to  the  outside  voices.
The  footsteps  of  the  ghosts  and  their  talking,  as  they  pursued  the
ordinary  occupations  of  the  camp,  continued  to  be  heard  by  the  fam-
ilies during  their  stay  ;  but  no  one  was  oppressed  by  fear  of  the
supernatural  visitors.


146  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

Num-ba-dou-ba  and  his  family  were  returning  from  a  hunt,  and
went  into  camp  on  the  Logan  creek  ;  the  moon  was  shining  brightly.
As  the  people  sat  at  supper  their  large  dog  suddenly  began  to  bark,
and  rushed  out,  of  the  tent  as  if  to  attack  some  one  ;  in  a  moment  he
returned,  howling,  as  if  from  the  pain  of  a  blow.  Soon  the  inmates
of  the  tent  heard  a  sound  like  a  coming  breeze  ;  then  they  distin-
guished whistles ;  these  were  followed  by  footsteps  and  whisper-
ings, and  shortly  the  tent  was  struck,  as  if  with  sticks.  The  wind
increased  in  violence  ;  the  dog  manifested  great  fear ;  and  the  men
of  the  party  determined  to  fire  off  their  guns,  hoping  thereby  to
frighten  away  the  ghosts  which  they  were  sure  surrounded  them.
The  guns  produced  no  effect ;  the  steps,  whistling,  and  whipping  of
the  tent  continued.  At  last  a  cloud  covered  the  moon  ;  as  it  passed
by,  with  lightning,  the  ghosts  disappeared  with  it,  and  all  was  peace-
ful once  more.

Ka-heu-num-ba's  mother  had  a  quarrel  with  her  husband  when
the  tribe  were  moving  out  on  the  annual  summer  hunt,  and  were
already  some  days  distant  from  the  permanent  village  of  the  people.
She  determined  not  to  accompany  her  husband,  but  to  return  to  her
lodge  in  the  village.  Her  three  sons  were  absent  at  the  time  the
woman  started  across  the  prairie  ;  when  they  returned  to  camp  and
learned  of  their  mother's  departure  they  put  saddles  on  their  horses
and  set  out  in  pursuit.  They  sought  in  vain  for  any  trace  of  her,  and
after  a  time  she  was  given  up  for  lost.  The  woman  when  she  left
the  camp  hid  by  day  and  travelled  by  night,  for  she  was  afraid  of
the  Sioux,  who  were  at  war  with  the  Omahas  ;  and  she  also  feared  lest
her  relatives  should  track  her  and  take  her  back  to  the  camp.  At
last  she  reached  the  village  ;  the  lodges  were  empty,  for  eveiything
had  been  cached.  She  entered  her  own  lodge  ;  she  was  hungry  and
weary,  and  lay  down  on  one  of  the  reed  platforms  which  are  used  as
seat  and  a  bed  ;  as  she  lay  she  heard  some  one  on  the  roof  shout  her
father's  name,  as  if  to  the  assembled  village,  saying  that  his  daughter
had  returned  ;  she  also  heard  people  moving  about.  Her  own  lodge,
she  soon  found,  was  inhabited  by  ghostly  beings.  One  afternoon,  as
she  sat  in  her  lodge,  she  heard  a  child's  feet  run  past  and  pause  near
by;  then  the  voice  of  a  little  girl  said,  ''Mother,  the  people  are
coming  this  way,  right  into  our  house  !  "  Soon  footsteps  were  heard
entering  the  long  projecting  entrance-way  to  the  lodge,  and  the  num-
ber increased  until  a  large  company  was  present.  The  drum  was
brought  in  and  put  down  in  its  proper  place  ;  the  ghostly  women  as
they  chatted  took  their  seats  in  the  rear,  and  the  men  their  accustomed
stations.  By-ancl-by  the  men  began  to  sing  and  to  dance.  They
belonged  to  the  Hae-thu-ska, —  a  society  of  warriors  only.  The  woman,


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.  147

as  she  sat  on  the  platform,  heard  it  all,  and  she  could  even  see  the
dust  raised  from  the  earthen  floor  by  the  men  as  they  danced  around
the  fireplace.  As  she  became  familiarized  with  the  scene  she  tried
hard  to  discern  the  individuals  dancing.  At  last  she  was  able  to  dis-
tinguish their  feet,  and  finally  they  became  visible  as  high  as  the  knees.
She  was  never  able  to  see  any  more  of  their  persons,  although  they
came  frequently  to  her  lodge,  holding  feasts  and  dancing  the  Hae-
thu-ska.  No  one  spoke  to  her,  though  they  talked  of  her,  as  well  as
of  their  hunting  and  other  matters  connected  with  their  daily  affairs.
One  morning:  she  heard  an  old  man  on  the  roof  of  the  house  calling-
out  that  a  runner  had  come  in,  bringing  news  that  the  Omahas  were
returning  home.  Then  the  ghosts  were  heard  departing,  and  that
afternoon  the  tribe  came  back  to  the  village.  When  the  woman  heard
the  ghosts  go  away  she  became  dejected  and  homesick,  and,  when  her
own  family  found  her,  she  would  neither  eat  nor  speak.  She  was
very  thin  and  haggard,  and  no  one  knew  what  to  make  of  her  conduct.
It  was  noticed  that  she  plucked  and  ate  the  wild  sage.  After  a  time
she  was  persuaded  to  partake  of  some  corn,  and  at  last  she  consented
to  eat  meat.  It  was  some  time  before  she  became  reconciled  and
willing  to  resume  her  old  life,  for  she  still  mourned  for  the  company
of  the  ghosts.  Finally  she  narrated  her  experience  to  her  sons,  and
the  people  understood  what  had  happened  to  change  her  so  much.

The  Ma-wa-cla-ne  society  is  said  to  have  been  instituted  in  the
following  manner :  A  long  time  ago  a  party  were  out  on  the  war-
path. One  night  the  servers  had  cooked  the  meal,  called  the  leader,
and  placed  the  food  before  him  for  distribution  among  the  party,
when  a  voice  was  heard  singing.  The  fires  were  at  once  extinguished,
and  the  men  picked  up  their  bows  and  arrows.  The  voice  continued
to  sing,  but  it  was  evidently  at  a  distance.  The  leader  started  with
his  warriors  to  capture  the  singer.  He  sent  the  men  forth  so  as  to
form  a  circle  around  the  voice,  and  then  to  gradually  close  in  upon
the  place  whence  it  proceeded.  This  was  done.  In  the  starlight  the
men  silently  drew  closer  and  closer  together,  while  the  voice  rang
out  clearer  and  clearer  from  under  a  large  tree.  When  the  men
reached  the  tree  they  found  lying  at  its  foot  the  whitened  skeleton
of  a  man  long  since  dead.  The  voice  ceased  with  the  sight  of  the
bones.  The  warriors,  when  they  returned  to  their  tribe,  formed  a
society  to  give  gifts  to  the  poor  and  to  each  other.  They  preserved
the  song  of  the  ghost,  and  it  has  been  transmitted  to  different  gen-
erations. The  songs  of  this  society  are  marked  by  their  peculiar
opening  and  closing  cadences,  which  are  fashioned  to  resemble  the
song  of  the  ghost.  The  Ma-wa-da-ne  society  came  to  be  considered
the  most  honorable    among  the  tribe ;    its    members  at  times    rode


148  The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas.

together  in  the  rear  of  the  camp,  when  the  people  were  moving  on
the  annual  hunt,  this  being  one  of  the  posts  of  danger,  as  well  as  of
honor.  After  the  teuts  were  set  up  these  men  rode  slowly  around
the  tribal  circle,  singing  their  songs,  their  dignity  and  bearing  excit-
ing the  admiration  of  the  youth  of  the  tribe.

Many  stories  are  told  of  hearing  ghosts  wail  at  night,  and  these
sounds  were  always  found  to  proceed  from  graves  ;  hence  the  people
say  that  ghosts  cry  at  their  own  graves.

Ghosts  are  said  to  chase  persons  at  night.  A  man  who  is  out
walking  suddenly  hears  footsteps  behind  him,  and  he  also  hears  the
robe  of  the  ghost  catch  on  the  twigs  and  branches  of  trees  or  shrubs,
as  the  wearer  moves  rapidly  on.  When  a  person  is  so  pursued  he
makes  all  speed  to  reach  a  creek  and  to  cross  it;  then  he  is  safe,  for
ghosts  cannot  cross  any  running  stream.

Certain  diseases  are  caused  by  ghosts.  A  paralytic  has  been
touched  by  a  ghost,  and  the  side  or  part  of  the  body  over  which  the
afflicted  person  has  no  control  is  the  part  which  came  in  contact
with  the  ghost.  Sometimes  children's  eyes  become  fixed,  because  of
a  sudden  fright ;  this  is  said  to  be  caused  by  their  seeing  a  ghost.

That  which  has  belonged  to  an  individual,  as  his  garments,  or  the
hair  which  is  cut  from  or  falls  from  his  head,  has  still  some  connec-
tion with  this  person,  and  ma}'  be  used  as  a  means  to  influence  him.
If  a  man  can  become  possessed  of  a  lock  of  a  woman's  hair  he  can
have  certain  charms  and  spells  wrought  upon  her.  Women  are
therefore  very  careful  to  burn  their  combings  in  order  to  prevent
their  falling  into  any  one's  hands.  Similar  spells  can  be  worked  if
the  blanket  or  any  garment  touching  the  person  can  be  secured.  It
is  dangerous,  however,  to  employ  these  charms  unskilfully,  for  in  such
a  case  the  spell  turns  upon  the  user,  and  he  suffers  blindness  and
loss  of  reason.

A  father,  going  on  a  long  journey,  may,  if  he  has  a  male  child,
for  whom  he  is  ambitious,  take  his  son's  moccasons  with  him.
When  the  farthest  point  is  reached  he  places  the  child's  moccasons
on  the  prairie,  that  they  may  draw  their  owner  thither,  believing  this
will  cause  his  child  to  live  and  walk  far  aud  bravely  over  the  land.
If  a  child  dies,  and  the  father  in  his  grief  goes  upon  the  war-path,
he  sometimes  takes  in  his  belt  his  dear  child's  moccasons.  If  he
slays  a  man  the  moccasons  are  placed  beside  the  corpse,  that  the
man's  spirit  may  know  the  child  and  help  it  to  find  its  way  to  the
path  leading  to  the  land  of  spirits.  The  clothing  of  the  dead  is
always  buried  with  the  body  ;  nothing  belonging  to  a  deceased  person
is  ever  worn  by  the  living.

From  the  foregoing  sketch  of  the  ideas  of  the  preternatural  among


The  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas,  149

the  Omahas  and  of  the  manifestations  of  the  supernatural  among
them  the  following  deductions  may  be  made :  —

The  Indian  has  a  vague  belief  in  the  unity  of  nature  and  the  in-
terdependence of  the  various  forms  of  life,  but  he  has  no  knowledge
of  the  laws  which  govern  the  universe,  or  of  his  place  and  share  in
the  great  economy.  As  a  result  of  this  ignorance  all  manifestations
of  power  or  of  life  are  regarded  as  upon  a  general  level,  and  are
recognized,  appealed  to,  and  propitiated ;  for  he  believes  that  every-
thing has  the  ability,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  help  or  hinder
the  happiness  and  comfort  of  man.  He  is  equally  ignorant  of  the
laws  which  govern  his  mental  states ;  he  regards  his  dreams,  his
vivid  fancies,  as  actualities.  As  a  consequence  he  classes  as  evidence
equally  trustworthy  the  pictures  of  his  imagination  and  the  tested
observations  of  his  senses.  His  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  physiology
and  hygiene  tend  to  still  farther  obscure  his  powers  of  discrimination.

The  myths  and  legends  which  have  crystallized  about  his  beliefs
concerning  the  natural  and  the  supernatural  have  had  much  to  do  in
directing  his  fancies  and  supplying  the  imagery  of  his  thoughts
when  turned  toward  the  invisible.  The  names  bestowed  on  men
and  women  and  the  taboo  customs  of  each  gens,  keep  fresh  the
memory  of  the  animals  so  mysteriously  connected  with  mankind.
The  graphic  stories  of  animals  wherein  are  depicted  the  passions
and  experiences  common  among  men,  bridge  the  distinctions  be-
tween the  two  orders  of  creation,  and  tend  to  form  the  habit  of  mind,
that  does  not  feel  any  incongruity  in  the  belief  that  men  can  turn
into  animals  through  the  power  of  visions.

The  desire  to  possess  visions  and  to  receive  their  nrysterious
benefits,  which  will  enable  one  to  elude  disaster,  is  inculcated  in  the
child  from  his  infancy ;  not  only  has  he  the  hereditary  inclination,
but  his  training  leads  him  in  that  line  of  thought.  Children  are  sent
forth  by  their  parents  to  seek  these  supernatural  visitants,  and  these
occasions  are  always  reverently  remembered.  The  habit  of  seeking
and  resting  upon  visions  makes  it  easy  for  the  mind  to  expect  some-
thing supernatural  connected  with  the  ordinary  acts  of  life.

When  a  vision  is  called  upon  in  time  of  need  its  efficacy  depends
upon  the  fact  that  the  person  so  appealing  has  about  him  something
that  was  once  a  part  of  the  animal.  It  is  also  true  that  in  order  to
charm  an  individual  something  personal  to  him  must  be  obtained  to
work  the  spell.  The  clothing  of  a  person  is  believed  to  become
possessed  of  some  subtle  force  that  connects  it  with  its  owner,  as  in
the  case  of  the  moccasons  of  the  dead  or  living  child.

It  may  be  stated  as  a  rule,  among  this  tribe  of  Indians,  that  the
potency  of   a  supernatural  appearance   depends  upon  the  physical


150  Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living"

presence  of  something  that  belonged  to  the  apparition  in  its  natural
existence.  This,  and  the  fact  that  the  folk-lore  of  the  people  has
much  to  do  with  the  peculiarities  of  the  phantasms  that  appear
among  them,  may  explain  why  the  manifestations  of  the  super-
natural fail  to  transcend  the  experience  and  vocations  of  daily  life.
Pkabodt  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Feb.  15,  1887.


CRITICISM  ON  "  PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIVING."

AN    EXAMINATION    OF     AN    ARGUMENT     OF     MESSRS.     GURNEY,

MYERS,  AND  PODMORE.

BY   C.  S.  PEIRCE.

The  most  imposing  of  the  arguments  of  Messrs.  Gurney,  Mj-ers,
and  Podmore,  in  favor  of  spontaneous  telepathy,  popularly  called
"  ghosts,"  as  presented  in  their  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  is  this  :
Only  one  person  in  three  thousand  each  year  has  a  visual  hallucina-
tion. Hence  it  is  easy  to  calculate  from  the  annual  death-rate  that
in  a  population  of  fifty  millions  there  would  be  each  only  one  visual
hallucination  fortuitously  coinciding  within  twelve  hours,  before  or
after,  with  the  death  of  the  person  represented.  But  these  gentlemen,
having  addressed,  as  they  estimate,  a  public  of  only  three  hundred
thousand  persons,  claim  to  have  found  thirty-one  indubitable  cases  of
this  kind  of  coincidence  within  twelve  years.  From  this  they  cipher
out  some  very  enormous  odds  in  favor  of  the  hypothesis  of  ghosts.
I  shall  not  cite  these  numbers,  which  captivate  the  ignorant,  but
which  repel  thinking  men,  who  know  that  no  human  certitude  reaches
such  figures  as  trillions,  or  even  billions  to  one.

But  every  one  of  their  thirt}r-one  coincidences  sins  against  one  or
more  of  sixteen  different  conditions  to  which  such  an  argument  must
conform  to  be  valid.     This  I  proceed  to  show.

1st.  Every  case  should  have  occurred  between  January  1,  1874,
and  December  31,  1885,  for  the  calculation  of  the  probabilities  de-
pends upon  this  supposition.  Now,  Case  199  occurred  in  1873  ;  and
Case  355  occurred  in  1854.

2d.  The  percipient  should  in  each  case  have  been  drawn  from  their
public,  which  they  estimate  at  three  hundred  thousand  persons  who
are  supposed  to  have  seen  the  advertisement.  But  no  person  could
have  seen  the  advertisement  who  was  dead  at  the  time  of  its  publica-
tion;  and  this  was  the  state  of  the  percipients  in  Cases  170,  214,
238,  and  695.

3d.    According  to  their  calculations,  there  ought  not  to  have  been


Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."  151

among  their  three  hundred  thousand  persons  any  having  had  two  hal-
lucinations fortuitously.  Such  cases  must,  if  their  calculations  are
correct,  be  in  some  way  abnormal,  and  ought  to  be  thrown  out.
Now  the  percipient  of  Case  184  seems  to  have  hallucinations  nearly
every  day.  The  percipient  of  Case  1 75  has  had  them  frequently
without  any  coincidence.  In  Cases  173  and  298  the  percipients  had
had  other  hallucinations  without  significance.

4th.  The  general  frequency  of  hallucinations,  upon  which  the
whole  argument  depends,  was  ascertained  by  asking  of  certain  per-
sons whether  or  not  they  had  had  any  visual  hallucinations,  within
the  last  twelve  years,  u  while  in  good  health,  free  from  anxiety,  and
wide  awake."  It  is,  therefore,  an  indispensable  requisite  to  the  va-
lidity of  the  argument  from  probabilities,  that  no  account  should  be
taken  of  coincidences  where  the  percipient  was  not  in  good  health.
This  happened  in  Cases  28,  174,  201,  202,  236,  and  702.

5th.  For  the  same  reason,  cases  should  be  excluded  where  the
percipient  was  not  clearly  free  from  anxiety.  But  they  certainly
were  anxious  in  Cases  27,  28,  172,  174,  184,  231,  and  240  ;  and  were
probably  so  in  Cases  182,  195,  and  695.

6th.  For  the  same  reason,  all  cases  should  be  excluded  where  the
percipient  would  not  certainly  have  been  confident  of  having  been
wide  awake,  even  if  no  coincidence  had  occurred.  Now  the  percipient
of  Case  175  says,  "  I  cannot  yet  answer  to  my  satisfaction  whether  I
was  awake  or  asleep."  One  of  the  witnesses  to  Case  195  calls  it  a
"  vivid  dream."  In  Case  702  the  percipient  is  doubtful  whether  it
was  an}* thing  more  than  a  dream.  It  is  difficult  to  admit  any  case
where  the  percipient  was  in  bed,  which  happened  in  Nos.  26,  170,
172,  173,  174,  182,  184,  199,  and  697.  This  objection  applies  with
increased  force  to  cases  where  the  percipient  was  taking  an  afternoon
nap,  which  happened  in  Nos.  28  and  201.

7th.  All  cases  should  be  excluded  in  which  the  person  who  died
was  not  clearly  recognized  in  the  apparition.  This  applies  with  great
force  to  No.  170,  where  the  apparition  was  distinctly  recognized  as  the
percipient's  own  mother,  who  did  not  die,  though  a  person  who  re-
sembled her  did.  It  also  applies  to  Case  201,  where  the  percipient
says  "  she  could  not  say  who  it  was."  Also  to  Case  236,  where  the
percipient's  original  statement  was  that  she  saw  "  a  dark  figure  "  ;
although,  after  having  been  shown  the  testimony  of  a  second  witness,
who  testifies  that  it  "  resembled  her  [the  percipient's]  brother,"  she
assents  to  this  statement.  In  Case  249  the  supposed  ghost  only
showed  his  hat  and  the  top  of  his  head.  In  Case  697  the  percipient
does  not  seem  to  have  recognized  the  apparition  until  after  the  news
of  the  death  had  reached  her.


152  Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."

8th.  It  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  force  of  the  argument  that
the  death  should  have  occurred  within  twelve  hours  before  or  after
the  time  of  the  apparition  ;  and  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  evidence
should  satisf}r  a  mind  that  already  admits  the  existence  of  ghosts,  but
the  proof  must  be  strong  enough  to  establish  the  fact,  even  if  we
assume  that  it  is  due  only  to  hazard.  This  is  a  point  which  the
authors  totally  fail  to  appreciate.  They  have  admitted  among  their
thirty-one  cases  no  less  than  thirteen  which  might  well  enough  be  set
down  as  falling  probably  within  the  twelve-hour  limit,  once  we  have
admitted  any  special  antecedent  likelihood  of  such  an  occurrence;  but
which  beg  the  question  entirely  when,  the  evidence  of  the  coincidence
being  but  slight,  they  are  used  to  prove  the  existence  of  such  a  like-
lihood. In  Case  26,  for  example,  on  the  morning  after  the  apparition,
the  percipient  says  he  searched  the  newspapers,  and  that  day  was  Sat-
urday. His  words  are,  u  The  next  clay,  I  mentioned  to  some  of  my
friends  how  strange  it  was.  So  thoroughly  convinced  was  I,  that  I
searched  the  local  papers  that  day,  Saturday."  The  authors  inter-
pret this  as  meaning  that  he  told  his  friends  one  day,  and  searched
the  papers  the  day  after  that,  which  is  directly  contrary  to  his
statement,  and  unlikely  in  itself.  Their  only  warrant  for  this  is,  that
he  says  the  vision  occurred  on  Friday  at  2  A.M.  But  it  is  certainly
more  natural  to  suppose  that  he  inadvertently  used  this  expression
meaning  the  night  of  Friday  at  2  A.M.  This  is  the  more  likely  of  the
two  suppositions  ;  but  the  case  ought  not  to  be  included,  unless  it  can
be  shown  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  and  irrespective  of  consider-
ations drawn  from  the  time  of  the  death,  that  the  vision  occurred  on
the  night  of  Thursday.  In  Case  170  the  death  was  not  heard  of  for
months.  u  Time  passed,  and  all  was  forgotten."  Under  these
circumstances,  as  no  written  note  was  taken  of  the  time  of  the  appa-
rition, the  coincidence  is  plainly  doubtful.  I  shall  discuss  Cases  182
and  197,  which  violate  this  rule,  under  another  head.  In  Cases  195,
201,  202,  214,  231,  237,  and  355,  the  date  is  wholly  uncertain.  In
Case  199  the  vision  occurred,  if  at  all,  on  Saturday  ;  the  death  on
Wednesday.  In  Case  702,  the  date  given  for  the  apparition  differs
from  that  of  the  death  by  one  day ;  but  this  is  only  a  blunder,  for  it
is  admitted  that  the  date  was  changed,  after  ascertaining  the  day  of
death,  by  four  days.

9th.  Cases  ought  to  be  excluded  in  which  it  is  possible  that  a  real
person  was  seen.  In  Case  202  the  percipient,  who  "  had  been
ordered  by  the  doctor  to  take  absolute  rest,  and  not  read  at  all,  and  do
no  work  whatever,"  and  who  is  excessively  near-sighted,  when  she
was  out  driving  in  the  neighborhood  of  London,  met  a  carriage  con-
taining, as  she  thought,  the  person  who  died  [although  this  person's


Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living"  153

head  was  turned  away]  together  with  another  who  did  not  die.  It
surely  seems  a  little  unnecessary  to  suppose  that  this  was  anything
more  than  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.  In  Case  249,  a  man,  looking
out  of  his  window  on  Christmas-day,  saw,  on  the  other  side  of  a  brick
wall,  the  hat  and  the  top  of  the  head  of  what  he  took  to  be  one  of  his
neighbors  coming  to  see  him.  He  turned  round  to  remark  upon  it  to
the  persons  in  the  room  ;  and  his  first  surprise  came  when  there  was
no  knock  at  the  door  [we  may  assume  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  a
minute].  Then,  looking  out  of  the  window,  he  did  not  see  anything
at  all.  It  appears  quite  unnecessary  to  suppose  any  hallucination
here,  unless,  possibly,  some  slight  aberration  of  the  senses  connected
with  the  festivities  of  the  season.  I  should  suggest,  as  possible,  that
some  boy  had  stolen  the  old  man's  hat,  and  was  perpetrating  some
Christmas  joke,  which  he  was  ashamed  to  confess  when  it  turned  out
that  the  person  impersonated  was  at  that  moment  dying.  When  so
simple  a  hypothesis  is  admissible,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  appear-
ance of  something  that  was  not  there  has  been  positively  established.
There  are  several  other  cases  which  might  easily  be  explained  by
supposing  that  a  real  person  was  seen.

10th.  Every  case  should  be  excluded  which  can  be  explained  on
the  supposition  of  trickery.  In  Case  350,  one  evening  three  maid-
servants in  the  kitchen  saw  a  face  outside  the  window.  They  could
see  all  around  it,  so  that  there  was  no  body  attached  to  it ;  and,
while  they  were  looking  at  it,  it  turned  slowly  through  a  considera-
ble angle,  about  a  vertical  axis.  Now,  the  lady  of  the  house  is  so
exceedingly  superstitious  that  she  gravely  testifies  that  her  dog
howls  whenever  there  is  a  death  in  the  village ;  and  it  is  more  than
likel}'  that  the  maids  take  after  the  mistress  in  this  respect.  The
dog  was  howling  at  the  moment  that  the  face  appeared,  so  that  this
circumstance  may  have  helped  them  to  identify  the  face  with  that  of
a  woman  who  was  at  that  moment  expiring  under  the  surgeon's
knife,  in  an  operation  for  cancer.  Although  the  mistress  thinks  that
they  were  unaware  of  the  operation,  yet,  as  the  cook  shortly  after-
ward married  the  widower,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  servants
were  better  informed  than  the  mistress  thought,  and-  that  they  were,
in  fact,  talking  about  the  woman  and  her  danger  (and  perhaps  even
dared  to  hint  at  another  wedding)  when  they  were  confounded  by
this  dreadful  sight.  One  of  the  three  servants  testifies  that  it  looked
like  the  "  face  of  a  skeleton"  ;  while  the  other  two  identify  it  with
that  of  the  woman  who  died.  Meantime,  it  appears  that  there  were
certain  young  men  who  had  a  way  of  tapping  at  that  window  in  the
evening,  and  looking  in  and  smiling  at  the  girls,  and  who  had  not
been  treated  with  quite  the  politeness  to  which  they  probably  thought


154  Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."

themselves  entitled.  What,  then,  can  possibly  be  more  natural  than
to  suppose  that  these  young  men  had  contrived,  in  some  way,  to  let
down  a  skull  by  a  string  from  above,  perhaps  from  the  roof,  to
frighten  the  girls  and  punish  them  for  their  rudeness?  Clearly,  this
cannot  be  admitted  as  a  proved  case  of  seeing  something  that  was
not  there.

11th.  No  case  should  be  admitted  upon  the  unsupported  and
unverified  statement  of  a  superstitious,  ignorant,  and  credulous
person.  And  a  common  sailor  or  skipper  may  be  assumed  to  be
such  a  person.     This  throws  out  Cases  300  and  355.

12th.  Cases  should  be  excluded  in  which  there  is  any  room  to
suspect  that  the  percipient  was  intoxicated.  This  applies  to  Nos.
29  and  249  ;  and  no  doubt  to  others.

13th.  Cases  should  be  excluded  which  can  possibly  be  explained
by  the  delirium  of  fever.  In  Case  214,  the  percipient  first  told  of
the  apparition  after  four  months  of  severe  illness,  with  constant  de-
lirium or  unconsciousness.  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  the  whole
story  is  the  product  of  a  delirious  imagination.

14th.  No  case  should  be  admitted  which  can  be  attributed  to  the
effect  of  imagination.  In  Case  195  the  percipient  herself  is  inclined
so  to  explain  her  vision.

15th.  All  cases  ought  to  be  excluded  in  which  the  percipient  did
not  tell  of  having  seen  the  vision  until  after  the  news  of  the  death
had  been  received ;  otherwise,  all  sorts  of  exaggerations  would
creep  in.  There  might  even  be  cases  of  downright  lying,  besides
cases  in  which  the  well-known  sensation  of  having  undergone  a
present  experience  on  some  previous  occasion  might  have  given  rise
to  the  idea  of  an  apparition  which  was  really  not  experienced.  This
would  be  a  rare  case,  but  we  are  dealing  with  rare  cases.  This
objection  applies  to  Cases  172,   173,  174,   184,  and  214.

16th.  No  case  can  be  admitted  which  rests  largely  on  the  testi-
mony of  a  loose  or  inaccurate  witness.  Inaccuracies  of  more  or  less
importance  can  be  detected  in  Cases  27,  170,  182,  197,  and  199.  For
example,  in  Case  182,  a  young  lady  on  shipboard,  going  from  London
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  saw  one  night,  a  good  while  after  the
lights  were  out,  an  apparition  of  a  young  girl,  a  friend  or  acquaint-
ance of  hers,  who,  as  she  knew,  was  out  of  health,  and  who  bad  the
consumption.  She  is  positive  that  this  vision  took  place  at  half-past
ten ;  and,  as  no  bell  is  rung  at  that  time,  this  positive  precision  is
already  suspicious.  She  also  testifies  positively  that  she  mentioned
the  occurrence  the  next  morning  to  four  persons,  who  all  severally
took  written  notes  of  it ;  but  the  only  two  of  these  persons  who  can
be  reached  now  profess  to  know  nothing  whatever   of  the   matter.


Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."  155

She  gives  May  4th  as  the  date  of  the  vision,  but  the  death  occurred
on  May  2d.  She  says,  however,  that  she  is  sure  she  wrote  to  her
father  from  the  Cape,  giving  the  date  of  the  vision,  before  she  heard
of  the  death.  Her  father,  on  the  other  hand,  is  certain  he  wrote  to
his  daughter  the  news  of  the  death  by  the  very  next  mail  after  it
occurred.  Now,  since  taking  this  testimony,  the  letter  which  she
wrote  to  her  father  has  been  found  by  him.  The  whole  passage
about  the  apparition  is  not  given,  as  it  should  be;  but  it  is  stated
that  the  letter  gives  the  date  of  May  4th.  Now,  the  date  of  the  letter
is  June  5th  ;  and  it  only  takes  three  weeks  or  less  for  news  to  go
from  London  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  so  that  she  must  have
already  heard  of  the  death,  if  her  father's  statement  is  accurate.
But  why  is  the  passage  of   this  letter  withheld?

In  Case  197,  the  percipient  is  a  lady.  She  was  at  Interlaken  at
the  time  of  the  vision,  and  the  death  took  place  in  Colorado.  She
testifies  positively  that  written  notes  were  taken  at  the  time  of  the
occurrence,  both  by  herself  and  another ;  but  she  is  unable  now  to
give  the  date,  and  the  other  witness  has  not  been  called  upon.  Now
Messrs.  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore  request  us  to  accept  this  as  a
positively  proved  case  of  coincidence,  because  this  one  witness  avers,
with  all  the  solemnity  the  matter  calls  for,  that,  when  the  news  of
the  death  did  arrive,  it  was  found  to  be  absolutely  simultaneous  with
the  vision,  after  making  the  necessary  allowance  for  difference  of
longitude.  But  the  lady  remembers  the  time  of  day  at  which  the
vision  occurred,  namely,  it  was  before  breakfast  when  she  was  lying
on  her  bed.  The  time  of  day  of  the  death  is  also  known ;  and  the
best  supposition  that  can  be  made  with  regard  to  the  date  of  the
vision  will  make  it  eisrht  hours  from  the  time  of  death.  We  are
asked,  in  the  face  of  this  demonstrated  inaccuracy,  to  accept  a
coincidence  of  date  as  beyond  question,  because  this  witness  testifies
that  it  was  a  coincidence  exact  to  the  minute.

17th.  No  case  can  be  admitted  where  there  is  only  a  meagre
story  told  in  outline,  and  we  are  not  furnished  with  any  means  of
judging  of  the  reliability  of  the  witnesses,  or  where  questions  might
have  been  asked  which  would  have  brought  the  matter  to  a  test,  and
have  not  been  asked.  Thus,  in  Case  231  the  date  is  quite  doubtful ;
but  it  could  have  been  verified  by  means  of  the  letter  which  the
percipient  wrote  that  day  to  a  newspaper.  In  Case  236,  whatever
precision  the  story  possesses  is  due  to  the  statements  of  a  second
witness,  who  does  not  seem  to  have  been  cross-examined  at  all.
In  Cases  237,  240,  298,  300,  355,  695,  and  an  unnumbered  case,
the  story  is  so  excessively  meagre  as  to  be  worthless.

18th.   After  all,  the  reader,  who  cannot  cross-examine  the  wit-


156  Criticism  on  "Phantasms  of  the  Living"

nesses,  and  search  out  new  testimony,  must  necessarily  rely  upon
Messrs.  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore  having  on  the  whole  performed
this  task  well ;  and  we  cannot  accept  any  case  at  all  at  their  hands,
unless,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  they  have  proved  themselves  cautious
men,  shrewd  observers,  and  severe  logicians.

Although  there  is  not  a  single  one  of  the  31  cases  considered
which  can  be  accepted  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument,  yet  some
of  them  may  be  genuine  for  all  that.  It  can  only  be  guess-work
to  say  how  many  ;  but  in  my  opinion  not  more  than  two  or  three.

Let  us  now  glance  at  the  other  numerical  data  used  in  the  argu-
ment. The  ratio  of  frequency  of  hallucinations  without  coincidences
has  been  ascertained  by  inquiries  addressed  to  a  large  number  of  per-
sons, going  back  for  twelve  years.  The  authors  have  thus  assumed
that  a  hallucination  with  coincidence  of  the  death  of  the  person
represented,  is  no  more  likely  to  be  remembered  for  a  period  of
twelve  years  than  one  which  is  unaccompanied  by  such  a  coincidence.
Yet  there  are  numerous  cases  in  their  book  in  which,  the  death  not
having  been  heard  of,  the  vision  had  been  totally  forgotten  after
the  lapse  of  a  few  months,  and  was  only  brought  to  mind  again  by
the  news  of  the  death.  I  think  it  would  be  fair  to  assume  that,  in
considering  so  long  a  period  as  twelve  years,  a  coincidental  appari-
tion would  be  four  times  as  likely  to  be  remembered  as  one  without
coincidence.  I  also  strongly  dissent  from  the  authors'  estimate  that
their  coincidences  have  been  drawn  from  a  population  of  only  three
hundred  thousand.  I  should  reckon  the  matter,  for  my  part,  in  this
way :  Every  case  of  an  apparition  simultaneous  with  the  death  of
the  person  represented,  or  nearly  so,  becomes  known  to  a  circle  of
two  hundred  to  three  hundred  persons,  on  the  average.  If  any  one
of  this  circle  of  persons,  some  of  whom  have  had  an  interest  in  appari-
tions excited  by  the  story,  learn  and  are  interested  in  the  advertise-
ment of  Messrs.  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore,  these  gentlemen  would
learn  of  the  case.  Now,  I  suppose  that  the  advertisement,  being
of  a  very  peculiar  and  sensational  character,  interests  one  person
for  every  hundred  copies  of  the  newspaper  printed.  On  this  assump-
tion, since  a  million  and  a  half  is  given  as  the  circulation  of  the
newspapers,  the  instances  obtained  would  really  have  been  drawn
from  a  population  of  three  to  four  millions.  Adopting  {hese  figures,
they  ought  to  have  heard,  on  the  doctrine  of  chances,  of  three  or
four  purely  fortuitous  cases  of  visual  hallucination  with  coincidence
of  death.  In  view  of  the  utter  uncertainty  of  all  the  data,  it  would
be  very  rash  to  draw  any  conclusion  at  all.  But  the  evidence  so
far  as  it  goes,  seems  to  be  rather  unfavorable  to  the  telepathic  char-
acter of  the  phenomena.     The  argument  might  certainly  have  been


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  157

constructed  more  skilfully ;  but  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  much
prospect  of  establishing  any  scientific  fact  on  the  basis  of  such  a
collection  as  that  of  the  "Phantasms  of  the  Living."

Milford,  Pa.,  May  14,  1887.


REMARKS   ON   PROFESSOR  PEIRCE'S  PAPER.

BY    EDMUND    GURNET.

The  foregoing  review  has  been  to  me  a  source  of  genuine
pleasure  and  profit ;  not  so  much  in  respect  of  the  special  points
which  the  writer  raises,  —  though  my  pleasure  is  not  diminished  by
the  sense  that  on  most  of  these  his  objections  can  be  fairly  met,  —
as  on  account  of  the  business-like  and  thorough  spirit  in  which  he
has  gone  to  work.  Criticism,  as  my  colleagues  and  I  should  allow,
and  even  insist,  is  what  the  exponents  of  every  new  doctrine  must
expect ;  and  in  the  case  of  a  doctrine  so  new  to  science  as  telepathy,
the  criticism  cannot  be  too  searching.  But,  on  this  subject,  searching
criticism  is  as  rare  as  loose  and  hasty  comment  is  the  reverse.  The
world  is  roughly  divided  into  two  parties,  —  those  who  will  not  so
much  as  look  seriously  at  any  of  the  alleged  facts,  and  those  who
swallow  them  all  wholesale.  Thus  the  evidence  is  either  wholly
neglected,  or  is  admitted  without  due  warrant,  and  discredited  by
being  mixed  up  with  all  sorts  of  baseless  rumors  and  uncritical
fancies.  One  person  recognizes  no  difference  between  the  strongest
case  that  can  be  adduced  and  some  anonymous  "  ghost-story,"  and
would  accept  telepathy  or  any  other  marvel  on  the  score  of  a  few
third-hand  reports  or  vague  personal  experiences.  Another  turns
away  from  the  facts  in  whatever  strength  accumulated,  on  the
ground  that  they  are  a  priori  impossible  or  unprovable.  Both  are
equally  remote  from  the  rational  scepticism  which  alone  is  the  proper
attitude  for  approaching  psychical  investigation.  Apart  from  such
an  attitude  of  mind,  no  treatment  of  the  subject,  whether  construc-
tive or  critical,  can  be  of  any  value  ;  and  here  Mr.  Peirce  and  I  are
wholly  at  one.  But,  in  an  inquiry  so  novel  and  difficult,  it  is  likely
that  two  persons,  even  though  they  both  begin  as  rational  sceptics,
will  develop  differences  of  opinion  ;  and  it  is  at  least  equally  likely
that  fhey  will  both  make  mistakes.  Thus,  some  of  Mr.  Peirce's
strictures  depend  (as  I  shall  hope  to  show)  on  distinct  errors  and
misconceptions,  while  others  appear  to  me  to  be  unreasonable  and
overstrained.     On  the  other  hand,  he  has  pointed  out  some  errors  on


158  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper,

my  part ;  and  in  so  doing,  and  generally  in  enabling  me  to  make  the
present  apologia,  he  has  done  me  a  valuable  service.

Mr.  Peirce  prefaces  his  detailed  criticisms  with  a  more  general
remark  which  cannot  be  quite  passed  over.  Referring  to  "  Phantasms
of  the  Living,"  Chap.  XIII.,  he  objects  to  the  "  enormous  odds
ciphered  out  in  favor  of  the  hypothesis  of  ghosts,"  —  more  cor-
rectly, to  the  enormous  improbability  that  a  certain  series  of
coincidences  were  due  to  chance  alone  —  as  calculated  to  "  captivate
the  ignorant,"  but  to  u  repel  thinking  men,  who  know  that  no
human  certitude  reaches  such  figures  as  trillions  or  even  billions  to
one."  It  is  as  well  to  be  accurate,  even  at  the  risk  of  repelling
44  thinking  men."  But  most  thinking  men,  whose  thoughts  have
been  directed  to  the  subject  of  probabilities,  will,  I  imagine,  support
me  in  dissenting  from  Mr.  Peirce's  view.  There  are  many  cases  of
practically  absolute  certitude,  where  the  actual  degree  of  certitude
can  be  measured.  For  instance,  if  dice  turned  up  sixes  a  hundred
times  running,  which  could  any  day  be  made  to  happen,  the  mathe-
matical probability  that  the  dice  were  not  both  evenly  weighted  and
honestly  thrown  would  reach  a  figure  higher  than  those  which  have
offended  Mr.  Peirce.

To  proceed  now  at  once  to  his  numbered  list  of  objections.

1st.  Case  199.  The  discovery  that  this  incident  occurred  as  long  ago
as  April,  1873,  was  only  made  after  the  work  was  printed  off.  (That
it  was  made  so  late  was  partly  due  to  a  very  rare  accident  —  a  mis-
spelling of  a  name  in  the  Register  of  Deaths  at  Somerset  House.
Much  time  was  wasted  in  the  search  there,  before  it  occurred  to  me
to  apply  to  the  Coroner.)  The  date  has  been  rectified  in  the
''Additions  and  Corrections";  and  it  was  careless  of  me  not  to
remember,  when  this  was  done,  that  the  case  had  been  included  in
the  list  in  Chap.  XIII.,  so  as  to  have  added  a  warning  in  reference  to
that  list.  But,  of  course,  the  limitation  of  the  list  to  cases  occurring
in  a  period  of  twelve  years,  starting  from  Jan.  1,  1874,  was  purely
arbitrary.  Had  a  period  of  thirteen  years,  starting  from  Jan.  1,
1873,  been  selected  instead,  the  numerical  argument  would  not  have
suffered  appreciably,  if  at  all.

Case  355.  The  inclusion  of  this  case  was  a  bad  blunder,  for  which
I  take  the  fullest  blame.  My  eye  was  misled  by  the  date  in  the  first
line  of  the  account ;  but  that,  of  course,  is  no  excuse.

2d.  This  objection  seems  tome  fallacious.  We  can  scarcely  doubt
that  our  number  of  cases  would  have  been  increased  had  we  prose-
cuted our  search  during  the  whole  period  (1874-85),  instead  of  during


Remarks  on  Professor  Pence's  Paper.  159

the  last  quarter  of  it  only.  Had  we  done  so,  I  should  still  have  been
perfectly  justified  in  representing  the  size  of  the  group  of  persons  to
whom  we  had  had  access  by  the  number  of  them  all  alive  at  any  one
time  —  say  half  a  million  —  though  the  half-million  would  not  have
throughout  consisted  of  the  same  individuals.  The  reason  why  this
would  have  been  legitimate  is  that  in  the  calculation  the  whole  popula-
tion is  similarly  treated.  Of  course  a  much  larger  number  of  persons
are  alive  during  some  portion  of  a  period  of  twelve  years  than  are
simultaneously  alive  on  the  day  of  it  when  the  census  is  taken.  And
if  the  group  of  half  a  million  were  increased  so  as  to  allow  for  persons
becoming  adults  during  the  period,  and  thus  joining  the  group  (so  to
speak)  at  one  end  while  others  died  off  it  at  the  other,  the  size  of  the
whole  population  would  have  to  be  reckoned  in  a  similar  way ;  and
the  two  increases  would  balance  each  other  in  the  calculation,  which
would  only  be  made  more  complex  without  being  made  more  correct.
Thus  any  case  of  percipience  within  the  given  period  (where  the  evi-
dence which  reaches  us  is  on  a  par  with  firsthand  (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  148)
may  be  legitimately  included,  even  though  the  percipient  be  dead,  if
it  is  practically  certain  that  we  should  equally  have  obtained  it  direct
from  the  percipient,  had  he  or  she  survived.  This  applies  to  three  of
the  four  cases  which  Mr.  Peirce  cites  (his  number  237,  is,  I  suppose,
a  mistake  for  238) .  Cases  170  and  695  were  obtained  through  private
channels,  and  Case  238,  though  our  first  knowledge  of  it  was  due  to
a  published  account,  would  have  been  at  once  procured  at  firsthand
from  the  percipient  had  we  been  at  work  in  1876.  The  receipt  of
Case  214,  however,  was  due  to  a  newspaper-appeal  of  our  own,  which
it  is  not  certain  that  the  deceased  percipient  would  have  independently
seen  and  acted  on,  had  it  been  published  during  her  lifetime ;  and  as,
moreover,  it  is  only  by  straining  a  definition  (as  I  have  pointed  out)
that  this  case  can  be  regarded  as  on  a  par  with  firsthand,  it  would  be
best  to  drop  it  from  the  list.

3d.  Case  184.  Mr.  Peirce  says  that  the  percipient  "seems  to
have  hallucinations  nearly  every  day."  He  has  had  only  one  other
hallucination  in  his  life.  This  occurred  many  years  ago,  in  his  boy-
hood, and  represented  a  vague,  unrecognized  figure.  But  the  list
is  confined  to  cases  where  the  appearance  was  recognized ;  and  the
only  subjective  hallucinations  which  have  to  be  considered  per  contra
are  those  presenting  the  same  characteristic.  The  other  experiences
from  the  same  informant,  Nos.  21,  38,  and  56,  have,  in  the  first  place,
been  coincidental,  and  have  a  fair  claim  to  be  considered  telepathic ;
and,  in  the  second  place,  have  not  been  hallucinations  at  all.  They
have  conveyed  no  impression  of  external  reality,  but  are  distinctly


160  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.

described  as  impressions  and  "  mind's-eye  "  visions,  parallel  to  those
which  a  good  visualizer  can  summon  up  at  will.  Thus  Mr.  Peirce's
objection  is  doubly  out  of  place.

Case  175.  The  percipient  draws  a  distinct  line  between  the  expe-
rience which  he  here  describes  and  those  which  he  has  had  without
any  coincidence.  In  the  latter  he  "  quite  believes  he  was  asleep,"
—  i.e.,  there  is  no  ground  for  regarding  them  as  hallucinations  at
all,  in  the  sense  in  which  I  throughout  employ  the  word.

As  regards  Cases  173  and  298,  Mr.  Peirce's  use  of  the  plural
"other  hallucinations  "  is  misleading.  Each  of  the  two  percipients
has  had  one  other  hallucination,  and  neither  of  these  was  of  a  nature
to  affect  the  legitimacy  of  including  their  cases  in  the  list.  The
narrator  of  Case  173  had  once  seen  an  unrecognized  figure,  which  seems
curiously  to  have  corresponded  in  aspect  with  a  person  who,  unknown
to  her,  had  recently  died  in  the  room  in  which  it  appeared  ;  but  it  has
been  impossible  to  obtain  corroboratory  evidence  of  this  incident.
The  other  hallucination  of  the  narrator  of  Case  298  was  not  visual.

4th.  The  percipient  in  Case  29  was  in  perfect  health.  (Query  —  Is
it  Case  28  that  Mr.  Peirce  means,  where  the  percipient  "had  a
headache"  ?  If  so,  does  he  really  consider  that  such  a  condition  at
the  end  of  a  day's  work  amounts  to  not  being  "  in  good  health"?)

Case  201.  The  percipient  says,  u  I  had  been  in  ill-health  for  some
years,  but  at  that  time  was  stronger  than  I  ever  was  in  my  life,  the
warm  climate  suiting  me  —  so  well  that  I  felt  a  strength  and  enjoyment
of  life  for  its  own  sake,  which  was  a  delight  to  me."  Many  of  us
would  be  glad  enough  to  be  "  not  in  good  health  "  on  these  terms.

Case  202.  The  percipient  had  been  ordered  to  rest  and  do  no
work.  But  hers  was  not  a  condition  which  would  have  prevented
me  from  counting  her  hallucination  against  my  argument,  as  a  purely
subjective  specimen,  had  she  happened  to  be  included  in  the  census,
and  had  no  coincidental  event  occurred.

Case  214.     The  percipient's  illness  succeeded  the  vision.

In  Case  174,  the  percipient,  Miss  P.,  was  still  "far  from  well,"
having  recently  had  a  distinct  attack  of  illness  ;  and  in  Case  702,  the
percipient,  Mr.  G.,  was  weak  but  convalescent  after  fever.  My  in-
formation on  the  subject  of  hallucinations  does  not  lead  me  to  suppose
that  there  was  anything  in  Mr.  G.'s  state  especially  favorable  to  an
experience  of  the  sort;  as  to  Miss  P.,  I  cannot  tell.  Unless  their
state  was  so  favorable,  — indeed,  unless  visual  hallucinations,  repre-
senting recognized  figures,  are  markedly  common  in  such  states  —
which  is  certainly,  I  think,  not  the  fact  —  the  cases  remain  very
striking  ones.     There  would,  of  course,  be  some  force  in  Mr.  Peirce's


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  161

objection,  if  my  census-list  of  non-coincidental  hallucinations  would
have  been  considerably  larger  than  it  is  but  for  the  condition  as  to
health  (or  as  to  anxiety  —  see  his  5th  objection).  But  I  have  ex-
plained (p.  7)  that  the  interrogatories  were  put  in  separate  parts  —
questions  as  to  the  person's  bodily  or  mental  state  at  the  time  of  the
experience  being  kept  separate  from  the  question  as  to  the  fact  of
the  experience;  and  the  number  of  yeses  struck  off  the  list  used  in
the  computation,  on  the  ground  of  an  exceptional  bodily  or  mental
state  at  all  comparable  to  that  which  existed  in  a  few  of  the  coinci-
dental cases,  amounted  at  most  to  two  or  three.

5th.  I  cannot  admit  the  objection  in  more  than  one  of  the  cases
referred  to,  and  only  partially  in  that  one.

The  percipient  in  Case  702  says,  "I  had  no  idea  of  the  lady's  being
ill,  and  had  neither  been  anxious  about  her  nor  thinking  about  her."

The  percipient  in  Case  174  was  not  personally  intimate  with  the
gentleman  who  died ;  and,  though  she  was  u  aware  th:it  he  was  in  a
critical  condition,"  she  says,  "  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  had  been
quite  out  of  my  thoughts  and  mind."

The  percipient  in  Case  182  "  had  not  been  thinking  about  her  [the
girl  who  died]  at  all ;  she  was  an  acquaintance  and  neighbor,  but  not
an  intimate  friend."

The  percipient  in  Case  184,  having  absolutely  no  ground  for
anxiety,  was  naturally  not  anxious.  This  boy  was  perfectly  well
when  he  parted  from  him,  and  he  had  since  received  excellent
accounts  of  him,  including  an  "  assurance  of  the  child's  perfect
health,"  within  three  days  of  the  experience  described.

The  percipient  in  Case  28  knew  that  his  friend  had  had  an  attack
of  indigestion,  and  had  been  given  some  medicine  for  it  by  a  chemist.
A  medical  man  "  thought  he  wanted  a  day  or  two  of  rest,  but  ex-
pressed no  opinion  that  anything  was  serious  "  ;  and  even  this  not  very
appalling  professional  diagnosis  did  not  come  to  the  percipient's
knowledge  till  afterwards.

The  percipient  in  Case  195  was  not  expecting  the  death  of  a  relative
who  "  had  been  ailing  for  years,"  and  whose  "  death  occurred  rather
suddenly."  The  attitude  of  mind  of  young  persons  towards  chronic
invalids  whom  the}r  are  not  personally  tending,  and  whose  death  is
not  held  to  be  imminent,  is  too  habitual  and  continuous,  and  not  suf-
ficiently exciting  or  abnormal,  to  be  fairly  described  as  anxiety,  for
the  purpose  of  the  present  argument.

A  similar  remark  applies  in  Case  27.  The  percipient  had  heard
two  months  before  that  his  friend  had  a  complaint  which  was  likely
sooner  or  later  to  be  fatal,  but  was  "  in  no  immediate  apprehension


162  Remarks  on  Professor  Pence's  Paper.

of  his  death."  No  more  had  been  heard  of  him,  and  the  fact  that
"  his  name  had  not  been  mentioned  for  weeks  "  between  Mr.  It.  and
his  wife  is  a  tolerably  conclusive  sign  that  he  was  not  occupying  a
foremost  position  in  their  thoughts.  I  can  scarcely  think  Mr.  Peirce
seriously  believes  that  the  hallucination  here  was  due  to  anxiety.1

In  Case  172,  the  percipient  says  that  her  friend  "  had  been  for
some  time  seriously  ill,  and  I  was  anxious  about  her,  though  I
did  not  know  that  death  was  near."  Here  again,  though  the  word
"anxious"  is  used,  the  anxiety,  such  as  it  was,  was  chronic,  not
acute ;  and  I  certainly  should  not  have  felt  justified  in  making  such
a  condition  of  mind  the  ground  for  not  reckoning  the  hallucination,
had  it  happened  to  fall  on  the  other  side  of  the  account,  as  a  non-
coincidental  instance.

As  regards  Case  231,  I  can  only  quote  my  own  remark,  — that  it
would  be  pedantic  to  apply  the  hypothesis  that  anxiety  may  produce
purely  subjective  hallucinations  "to  cases  which  occur  in  the  thick
of  war,  when  the  idea  of  death  is  constant  and  familiar.  In  such
circumstances,  the  mental  attitude  caused  by  the  knowledge  that  a
comrade  is  in  peril  seems  scarcely  parallel  to  that  which  similar
knowledge  might  produce  among  those  who  are  sitting  brooding  at
home.  At  any  rate,  if  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  absent  comrades  be
a  natural  and  known  source  of  hallucinations  during  campaigns,  it
is  odd  that,  among  several  hundreds  of  cases  of  subjective  hallucina-
tion, I  find  no  second  instance  of  the  phenomenon."

In  Case  240,  the  percipient,  Mrs.  E.,  knew  the  person  whose  face
she  saw  to  be  ill,  but  "  did  not  know  he  was  so  near  death."  They
were  not  on  friendly  terms  at  the  time,  and  there  was  probably  no
anxiety  ;  but  the  sick  man  lived  only  five  miles  off,  and  it  is  possible
that  Mrs.  E.'s  mind  reverted  to  him  more  frequently  than  to  other
absent  acquaintances.  It  might  be  safer,  therefore,  to  drop  this
case  from  the  list.

Anxiety  is  clearly  a  condition  which  admits  of  all  degrees,  while
at  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  accurately  measured  ;  but  all  that  logic
demands  is  that  coincidental  cases  should  be  excluded  when  the  anx-
iety was  acute  enough  to  be  regarded  with  any  probability  as  the
sufficient  cause  of   the  hallucination.     A  person  who  has  been  for


3  An  objection  might  possibly  be  taken  to  this  case  which  Mr.  Peirce  has  not  taken,  —  the
vision  was  not  absolutely  externalized  in  space;  the  percipient  says  that  it  arose  "  in  my  mind's
eye,  I  suppose."  At  the  same  time,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  "  it  took  on  a  sort  of  vividness  and
objectivity  which  he  believes  to  have  been  unexampled  "  in  his  life.  And  this,  combined  with
the  fact  that  the  experience  (which  occurred  while  he  was  dressing  in  the  morning)  began  with
a  certain  conviction  that  some  one  was  in  the  room,  —  a  conviction  which  made  him  look
round^— seems  to  justify  the  treatment  of  it  as  a  hallucination  rather  than  as  a  mere  vivid
idea.


Remarks  on  Professor  Pence's  Paper.  163

some  time  ill,  but  whose  condition  has  not  been  seriously  dwelt  on,
is  in  fact  not  a  bit  more  likely  to  be  represented  in  a  friend's  hallu-
cination than  the  friend's  most  robust  acquaintance.  Such,  at  any
rate,  is  the  conclusion  to  which  a  wide  study  of  subjective  hallucina-
tions has  led  me.  And,  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  I  have  included  in
the  purely  subjective  group  (any  increase  of  which,  of  course,  tells
against  my  argument)  "  several  cases  where  there  was  such  an
amount  of  anxiety  or  expectancy  on  the  part  of  the  hallucinated
person  as  would  prevent  us,  if  it  were  present  in  a  coincidental  case,
from  including  such  a  case  in  our  telepathic  evidence. "

6th.  Case  175.  Mr.  Peirce  ought  to  have  quoted  a  few  additional
words  :  "  I  only  am  sure  that  as  the  figure  disappeared  [N.B.,  not
after  it  disappeared]  I  was  as  wide  awake  as  I  am  now."

Case  195.  Surely  a  second-hand  informant's  use  of  the  word
"  dream"  cannot  weigh  against  the  "  while  yet  fully  awake  "  of  the
percipient,  and  her  statement  that  she  "  sat  up  to  see  what  it  was,"
and  looked  round  the  room  to  discover  if  the  appearance  could  be  due
to  some  reflection.

Case  702.  I  cannot  understand  Mr.  Peirce's  remark,  which  con-
tradicts the  percipient's  emphatic  statement.  He  most  expressly
distinguishes  the  dream  from  the  waking  experience.

Case  28.  The  "nap"  is  an  inference  of  Mr.  Peirce's  from  the
fact  that  the  percipient  had  just  leaned  back  on  the  couch.  The  in-
ference is  incorrect,  and  surely  ought  not  to  have  been  put  forward
as  though  it  was  a  fact  which  appeared  in  the  evidence.

Still  more  inexcusable  is  the  assertion  that  the  percipient  in  Case
201  was  napping.  She  was  reading  Kingsley's  "  Miscellanies,"  and
she  says:  "  I  then  [i.e.,  after  the  apparition]  tested  myself  as  to
whether  I  had  been  sleeping,  seeing  that  it  was  ten  minutes  since
I  lay  down.  I  said  to  myself  what  I  thought  I  had  read,  began
my  chapter  again,  and  in  ten  minutes  had  reached  the  same
point."

In  saying  that  "it  is  difficult  to  admit  any  case  where  the  per-
cipient was  in  bed,"  Mr.  Peirce  has  apparently  not  observed  that
similar  non-coincidental  cases,  where  the  hallucinated  person  was  in
bed,  but  awake,  have  been  reckoned  on  the  other  side  of  the  account.
(See  Vol.  II.,  p.  12,  second  note.)  It  is  not  less  legitimate,  and
decidedly  more  instructive,  to  admit  such  cases  on  both  sides  than
to  reject  them  on  both  sides.  It  is  worth  adding  —  what  Mr.  Peirce
has  not  perceived —  that  for  purposes  of  comparison  with  the  census-
cases,  the  question  is  not  whether  people  were  awake,  but  whether
they  believed  they  were  awake.


164  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.

7  th.  Case  170.  I  have  myself  drawn  attention  to  the  peculiarity
of  this  experience,  as  regards  recognition.  The  case,  however,  is
one  which  I  am  inclined  to  drop  from  the  list,  for  a  reason  which  will
appear  later.

Case  201.  Mr.  Peirce  has  misquoted  the  account.  He  makes  the
percipient  say,  "I  could  not  say  who  it  was."  Her  words  are,  "I
knew  the  face  quite  well,  but  could  not  say  whose  it  was,  but  the
suit  of  clothes  impressed  me  strongly  as  being  exactly  like  one  which
my  husband  had  given  to  a  servant  named  Ramsay  the  previous
year."  She  suggests  what  seems  a  very  reasonable  explanation  of
the  fact  that  the  face,  though  familiar,  did  not  at  once  suggest  its
owner.

Case  236.  I  cannot  think  on  what  Mr.  Peirce  founds  his  assertion
—  which  is  contrary  to  the  fact  —  that  the  percipient  had  been
shown  the  testimon}'  of  a  second  witness.  She  states  clearly  that  the
apparition  reminded  her  of  her  brother ;  and  this  is  independently
confirmed  by  another  person  to  whom  she  described  her  experience
immediately  after  it  occurred.

Case  249.  The  important  point  is  surely  not  how  much  of  a  figure
is  seen,  but  whether  it  is  unmistakably  recognized.

Case  697.  Mr.  Peirce's  remark  is  again  contrary  to  the  facts.  The
percipient  had  not  heard  of  Z.'s  death  when  she  announced  that  it  was
his  face  that  she  had  seen.  Most  readers  would,  I  think,  infer
this  from  the  printed  account,  which  I  had  not  perceived  to  be  am-
biguous.

8th.  Case  26.  I  am  obliged  to  differ  from  Mr.  Peirce  in  respect
both  of  what  he  thinks  unlikely,  and  of  what  he  thinks  likely.  He
thinks  it  unlikely  that  the  percipient  should  have  told  his  friends  of
his  experience  on  one  day,  Friday,  and  have  searched  the  local
paper  on  the  next  day,  Saturday.  But  he  did  both  things  on  the
earliest  opportunit}x,  the  local  paper  not  being  published  till  Satur-
day. Mr.  Peirce  thinks  it  likely,  on  the  other  hand,  that  when  he  said
44  About  2  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  October  21,"  which  was  a  Fri-
day, he  meant  "  the  night  of  Friday  at  2  A.M.,"  i.e.,  2  o'clock  on  the
morning  of  Saturday.  Now,  had  he  made  the  statement  which  Mr.
Peirce  incorrectly  attributes  to  him,  u  The  vision  occurred  on  Friday,
at  2  A.M.,"  there  might  be  some  ground  for  this  view  ;  for  "  Friday  at
2  A.M."  is  a  phrase  which  one  could  imagine  to  be  laxly  used  for  2
A.M.  on  the  night  of  Friday-Saturday.  But  the  use  of  the  precise
phrase  "  on  the  morning  of,"  which  Mr.  Peirce  suppresses,  and  the
giving  of  the  day  of  the  month,  not  of  the  week,  surely  makes  a  very
distinct  difference.     On  what  ground  can  it  be  held  that  a  person  is


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  165

likely  to  say  "  2  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  October  21,"  when  he
means  "  2  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  October  22  "?

Case  170.  I  agree  that  the  degree  of  exactitude  in  the  coincidence
is  here  doubtful,  and  I  would  drop  the  case  from  the  list  in  conse-
quence.

Case  182.  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  much  doubt  here,  as  the
date  of  the  percipient's  experience  was  particularly  remarked  at  the
time,  and  might  well  be  remembered  for  a  month.

Case  197.  I  have  myself  pointed  out  thnt  it  is  possible  that  the
limit  was  exceeded  by  some  hours.  But  two  or  three  such  cases  may,
I  think,  fairly  be  included  in  the  estimate,  considering  what  the
object  and  upshot  of  the  estimate  is.  The  reader  may  of  course  be
trusted  to  perceive  that  had  the  arbitrary  limit  been  fixed  at  twenty-
four  hours  instead  of  twelve,  the  overwhelming  character  of  the  odds
against  chance  would  remain.  The  precise  figures  would  differ,  ac-
cording as  a  limit  of  six,  twelve,  eighteen,  or  twenty-four  hours  was
selected  ;  but  considering  that  any  selection,  with  the  calculation
based  on  it,  would  lead  us  to  the  same  conclusion,  I  see  nothing  mis-
leading in  the  inclusion  of  a  case  where  the  interval  may  have  exceeded
the  actually  selected  lower  limit,  provided  that  it  is  equally  likely  not
to  have  done  so,  and  provided  due  warning  is  given.  These  remarks
apply  equally  to  Cases  201  and  231.

Case  195.  It  ought  to  have  been  stated  that  the  percipient  returned
home  almost  immediately  after  —  she  and  her  mother  think  the  very
day  after  —  the  death,  thereby  missing  a  letter  which  was  sent  to  her,
and  finding  her  grandmother  dead.  She  would  thus  only  have  to
carry  her  memory  back  a  day  or  two  to  identify  the  date  of  her  vision
with  that  of  the  death.

Case  202.  The  percipient  distinctly  states  that  she  saw  the  an-
nouncement of  the  death  "  two  or  three  days"  after  her  experience ;
to  which,  therefore,  there  is  again  a  very  high  probability  that  she
assigned  the  right  date.

A  similar  remark  applies  to  Case  237,  where  the  percipient  heard  of
the  death  "a  day  or  so  after"  her  experience.  The  interval
certainly  cannot  have  been  much  longer,  as  she  saw  her  dead  friend
before  the  funeral.

In  Case  214  we  are  told  that  the  percipient  "  noted  the  day  and  the
hour"  ;  but  the  testimony  to  this  effect  is  second-hand,  and  there  was
no  written  note,  so  that  here  there  is  reasonable  ground  for  doubt  as
to  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence.  The  case  has  been  already
dropped  from  the  list  for  another  reason  ;  as  also  has  Case  355,  where,
however,' the  coincidence,  on  the  evidence,  was  extremely  close.

Case  190.    Mr.  Peirce  says  that  "  the  vision  occurred,  if  at  all,  on


166  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce^s  Paper.

a  Saturday  ;  the  death  on  a  Wednesday."  This  seems  unwarranted.
The  narrator  thought  that  both  the  vision  and  the  death  bad  been  on
a  Saturday,  but  he  recollects  and  says  nothing  which  independently
marks  the  day  of  the  week  of  the  vision.  Why  is  it  to  be  assumed
that  his  memory  is  right  as  to  the  quite  uninteresting  and  little  no-
ticeable point  of  the  day  of  the  week,  and  wrong  as  to  the  extremely
interesting  and  noticeable  point  that  the  day  of  the  two  events  was
the  same?  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  he  has  made  one  definite
mistake  ;  and  the  probability  that  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence
has  been  exaggerated  in  memory  seems  here  sufficiently  appreciable
to  condemn  the  case  for  the  purpose  of  this  particular  list  —  even
had  not  its  retention  been  made  impossible  by  its  having  occurred
before  1874,  as  already  stated.

Case  702.  Mr.  Peirce  says,  "  The  date  given  for  the  apparition
differs  from  that  of  the  death  by  one  day."  This  is  contrary  to  the
fact.  The  apparition  is  stated  to  have  taken  place  on  June  11,  the
day  of  the  death  ;  and  as  the  death  occurred  in  England  at  5.20  A.M. ,
and  the  apparition  in  Jamaica  at  a  few  minutes  past  12  A.M.,  the
coincidence  of  hour  would  be  extraordinarily  close  if  the  coincidence
of  day  is  correctly  remembered.  Mr.  Peirce's  next  sentence  conveys
a  totally  false  impression.  In  conversation  with  me,  Mr.  G.  said
that  he  fancied  the  date  of  the  two  events  had  been  June  15,  but
that  he  could  not  be  sure  of  this  till  he  referred  to  the  letter.  What
he  was  sure  of  was  the  identity  of  the  two  dates,  which,  according  to
his  account,  was  noted  both  by  his  friend  and  himself  with  special
care.  Mr.  Peirce's  way  of  putting  it  would  imply  that  there  was  some
independent  reason  —  apart  from  Mr.  G.'s  idea  that  the  15th  was  the,
date  of  the  coincidence  —  for  believing  that  the  15th  was  the  day  of  the
apparition.  But  this  is  not  the  case  ;  and  surely  it  is  obvious  that
correctness  of  memory  as  to  a  very  striking  coincidence  does  not
necessarily  involve  infallibility  as  to  the  perfectly  insignificant  point
on  what  particular  day  of  the  month  the  coincidence  fell.

9th.  Case  202.  "The  percipient,  who  is  excessively  near-
sighted,"—  this  is  Mr.  Peirce's  version  of  the  sentence,  "She  is
short-sighted,  but  wears  suitable  glasses,  and  was  wearing  them  on
this  occasion."  "This  person's  head  was  turned  away,"' — this  is
his  version  of  "  I  saw  only  the  three-quarter  face."  He  has  omitted
to  notice  the  improbability,  specially  pointed  out  in  the  account,
that  a  lady  of  flesh  and  blood  should  be  wearing  a  seal-skin  jacket
in  August,  and  also  the  fact  that  the  bonnet  was  recognized  ;  nor  does
he  seem  to  have  remarked  the  importance  of  the  recognition  of  the
child,  which  tells  strongly  against  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity.


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper,  167

Case  249  (  I  presume  that  this  is  the  case  meant,  though  the
number  given  is  201).  Most  readers  of  the  whole  case  will,  I
think,  agree  with  me  that,  if  the  facts  are  correctly  stated,  mistaken
identity  is  a  highly  Improbable  explanation.  And  I  cannot  think
that  it  is  much  helped  by  the  hypothesis  of  the  facetious  and  then
conscience-stricken  bo}\  If  that  hypothesis  be  adopted,  however,
I  would  venture  to  suggest  the  further  feature  of  stilts,  both  as
adding  to  the  humor  of  the  "  Christmas  joke,"  and  as  probably
necessary  in  order  to  enable  the  bo\*'s  head  (which  he  would  nat-
urally have  practised  before  a  mirror  in  the  method  of  Mr.  X's
"  peculiar  droop  ")  to  be  visible  above  the  wall.

10th.  Case  350.  One  of  Mr.  Peirce's  suppositions  contradicts
what  is  plainly  stated  in  the  account — that  it  was  not  known  that
the  woman  was  d}Ting,  or  in  any  way  near  death.  She  was  a
chronic  invalid.  I  cannot  guess  how  Mr.  Peirce  knows  that  she
had  cancer,  which  is  nowhere  mentioned.  The  hypothesis  of  the
skull  is  quite  inconsistent  with  M.  J.  F.'s  and  Mrs.  R.'s  evidence.
I  may  add  that  "  looking  in  and  smiling  at  the  girls'*  is  rather  a  free
version  of  k4  trying  to  look  in,"  which  is  the  expression  used  in  the
account.

11th.  Case  355  has  been  already  excluded  on  the  ground  of  the
date;  but  Captain  A.  impressed  our  friend  and  helper,  the  Rev.  J.
A.  Macdonald,  as  a  reliable  witness ;  and  personal  knowledge,
though  not  an  infallible  guide  in  such  matters,  is,  at  any  rate,  a
safer  one  than  such  a  sweeping  presumption  as  Mr.  Peirce  enun-
ciates. As  to  Case  300,  I  can  well  imagine  a  difference  of  opinion.
But,  again,  the  witness  appeared  to  be  honest  and  truthful  to  a  clear-
headed cross-examiner,  who  had  begun  by  disbelieving  the  story.

12th.  By  "  any  room  to  suspect "  I  suppose  that  Mr.  Peirce  means
any  appreciable  grounds  for  suspecting.  I  should  be  interested  to  know
what  his  own  grounds  are.  As  regards  Case  29,  would  he  supple-
ment his  assumption  that  all  sea-captains  are  ignorant  and  supersti-
tious by  the  still  more  robust  hypothesis  that  all  gardeners  get  drunk?
The  hypothesis,  however,  whether  general  or  particular,  would  not  at
all  affect  the  case,  if  the  percipient's  wife  is  correct  in  saying  that  he
mentioned  the  dying  lady,  as  the  person  whom  he  had  seen,  immedi-
ately on  his  return  home;  i.  e.,  before  the  news  of  her  death  had
arrived.  But  then,  perhaps,  all  gardeners'  wives  are  liars,  —  a  par-
ticular hereditary  taint,  derived  from  our  first  parents,  may  cling  to
this  walk  in  life.  I  had  better,  therefore,  quote  the  words  of  the  Rev.
C.  F.  Forster,  vicar  of  the  parish,  in  a  letter  written  to  me  on  August


168  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.

18,  1887:  "I  think  the  hypothesis  that  B.  was  intoxicated  is  quite
untenable.  Mine  is  only  a  small  parish,  and  I  should  be  certain  to
know  of  it  if  a  man  was  inclined  that  way.  I  never  heard  the  slight-
est suspicion  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  I  should  have  said  that,  what-
ever faults  he  had,  he  was  a  thoroughly  sober  man.  Added  to  this
you  ought  to  know  that  he  had  come  three  miles  on  his  bicj'de  before
entering  the  churchyard  ;  and  I  should  have  thought  this  almost  im-
possible if  a  man  was  so  intoxicated  as  this  account  would  make  out.
Again,  we  have  to  account  for  the  coincidence  that  this  appearance  to
him  (drunk  or  sober)  occurred  at  the  time  of  Mrs.  de  F.'s  decease."

As  regards  Case  201,  though  quite  in  the  dark  as  to  Mr.  Peirce's
principle  of  selection,  I  cannot  quite  believe  that  he  would  pitch  on
this  particular  informant  in  connection  with  this  particular  suspicion.
If  he  has  really  done  so,  I  shall  not  insult  a  lady  who  is  my  esteemed
friend  by  making  a  syllable  of  reply.  But  I  am  fain  to  hope  that  by
No.  201  he  again  means  No.  249,  in  speaking  of  which  in  another
place  he  has  mentioned  "  the  festivities  of  the  season"  as  a  possible
element  in  the  case.  Not  that  the  idea  would  be  any  less  absurd  in
connection  with  this  percipient.  ,  Even  on  Christmas-day,  men  of
business  in  England  are  not  usually  intoxicated  at  4  o'clock  in  the
afternoon  ;  and  the  suspicion  seems  specially  extravagant  in  the  case
of  an  elderly  and  respected  member  of  tiie  Society  of  Friends  —  "a
typical  Quaker,"  as  Mr.  Pod  more  describes  him  in  a  letter  which  lies
before  me.  Is  it  likely,  moreover,  that  a  man  in  his  position,  if  he
had  really  been  the  worse  for  liquor,  would  have  cared  to  revive  the
recollection  of  the  fact  in  his  friends'  minds,  by  calling  them  to  bear
witness  to  the  occurrence  of  a  hallucination  which  took  place  while  he
was  in  that  state?

Mr.  Peirce  seems  to  have  taken  a  rather  unfair  advantage  of  the
fact  that,  though  much  time  has  been  spent  in  forming  a  judgment
as  to  witnesses'  characters  by  personal  interviews,  and  often  by
prolonged  correspondence,  I  have  expressly  avoided  giving  the
results    in    the   shape    of   definite    testimonials.

13th.  Case  214.  There  is  not  a  word  in  the  account  about  "  constant
delirium,"  or  about  any  delirium  at  all.  Like  the  cancer  in  a  former
case,  it  is  a  contribution  of  Mr.  Peirce's.  And  what  authority  has
he  for  regarding  illness,  caused  by  shock,  as  likely  to  produce  a
single  perfectly  distinct  and  isolated  "retrospective  hallucination"?

14th.  This  objection  seems  to  me  quite  fallacious.  The  fact  of  ex-
periencing a  hallucination  of  the  senses  does  not  make  a  person  an
expert   in   regard  to    such    phenomena,  any  more   than    having   an


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce^s  Paper,  169

illness  would  make  him  an  expert  in  disease.  If,  in  the  course  of
long  stud}'  of  the  subject,  including  the  formation  of  a  large  collec-
tion of  cases  of  purely  subjective  hallucination,  I  have  found  no
evidence  that  affectionate  thoughts  directed  to  a  person,  even  though
that  person  has  been  "  ailing  for  years,"  as  in  Case  195,  have  the
power  of  evoking  a  distinct  visual  impression  representing  that  person
and  another,  I  am  justified  in  not  inventing  the  hypothesis  for
this  particular  case.  Nor  even  if  I  did  invent  it,  could  the  coinci-
dence do  otherwise  than  enormously  detract  from  its  plausibility.

15th.  Mr.  Peirce's  axiom  seems  to  me  decidedly  too  sweeping.
As  to  the  hypothesis  of  lying,  I  must  hold  that  our  mode  of
conducting  the  investigation  reduces  the  scope  of  its  possible
application  to  an  extremely  small  proportion  —  I  do  not  myself  believe
it  to  be  applicable  to  a  single  one  —  of  our  cases.  Each  case  must  be
judged  on  its  merits,  with  the  aid  of  all  the  knowledge  attainable  of
the  witness's  character.

The  central  fact  in  Case  173  is  an  extremely  simple  one,  and  there
is  no  attempt  at  adornment.  The  account  of  Case  174  may,  to  the
best  of  our  judgment,  be  relied  on.  The  absence  of  any  personal
relation  between  the  person  who  died  and  the  percipient  makes  the
narrative  a  particularly  unlikely  one  to  have  been  consciously
invented.  In  Case  184  —  also,  I  believe,  quite  reliable  —  we  have  a
second  person's  testimony  to  the  percipient's  depression,  and  his
anxiet}r  about  the  child,  though  he  did  not  mention  the  cause  before
the  news  of  the  death  arrived.  In  Case  214  we  are  told  that  the
percipient  was  clear-headed  and  truthful,  and  never  varied  in  her
statement.

I  do  not  quite  understand  Mr.  Peirce's  suggestion  that  some  of  the
cases  may  be  explained  by  "  the  well-known  sensation  of  having
undergone  a  present  experience  on  some  previous  occasion."  Does
he  mean  that  the  witness  had  a  sensory  hallucination  representing
the  deceased  person  on  some  occasion  subsequent  to  the  death,  ac-
companied by  the  delusion  of  having  had  it  before  ?  But  this  would
involve  a  double  improbability.  The  supposed  delusion  is  not  of  the
vague  sort,  unlocalized  in  time,  and  often  in  space,  which  is  the
common  form  of  the  "  well-known  sensation  "  referred  to,  but  a  very
distinct  picture  of  an  experience  belongiug  to  a  particular  hour  and
a  particular  place.  And,  stranger  still,  the  supposed  real  sensor}7
hallucination,  which  actually  does  belong  to  a  particular  place  and
time,  is  clean  forgotten  —  vanishes  from  the  mind  —  its  place  being
wholly  usurped  by  the  retrospective  delusion  to  which  it  is  supposed
to  give  birth.


170  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.

16th.  Case  27.  As  Mr.  Peirce  gives  no  clue  to  the  "  inaccuracy
of  more  or  less  importance"  which  he  detects  in  this  case,  and  as  careful
scrutiny  fails  to  reveal  any,  I  can  make  no  reply  with  regard  to  it.
Is  it,  perchance,  that  while  the  percipient  saj-s  "  Every  feature  of  the
face  and  form  of  my  old  friend  X,"  his  wife,  to  whom  he  immediately
mentioned  his  experience,  merely  says  "X's  face"?

Case  180.  This  case  is  not  included  in  my  list,  and  I  presume
that  Mr.  Peirce  has  included  it  in  his  through  rough  inadvertence.
As  he  has  mentioned  it,  however,  I  may  quote  my  comment  on  it.
"  It  seems  practically  beyond  doubt,"  as  will  be  admitted,  I  think,  on  a
perusal  of  the  account,  "  that  at  the  time  that  the  news  arrived,
Mr.  C,  as  well  as  his  wife,  fixed  the  date  of  the  dream  [more
correctly  '  Borderland '  hallucination]  as  Monday,  the  19th;  and
the  fact  thnt  in  his  letter  to  us,  written  more  than  three  years  after-
wards without  reference  to  documents,  he  says  'about  the  25th,'  is
therefore  unimportant."

Case  182.  Mr.  Peirce  says  that  the  percipient  "  is  positive  that
her  vision  took  place  at  half-past  ten  ;  and,  as  no  bell  is  rung  at  that
time,  this  positive  precision  is  already  suspicious."  The  reader  will
be  surprised  to  learn  that  Mr.  Peirce  is  the  sole  authority  for  the  sus-
picious circumstance.  There  is  not  a  word  as  to  the  hour  of  the
vision  in  the  percipient's  account ;  and  in  the  passage  quoted  from  her
letter  to  her  father,  the  only  indication  of  time  is  in  the  words,  u  in
the  night,  or  rather  morning."

The  percipient  says  that  she  mentioned  her  experience  to  "  two  or
three  passengers  on  board,  who  made  a  note  of  it."  Afterwards  she
gives  the  names  of  four  persons  whom  she  told  k'  next  day,"  but  adds
nothing  there  about  a  note.  Mr.  Peirce's  version  of  these  statements  is  :
'•*  She  testifies  positively  that  she  mentioned  the  occurrence  the  next
morning  to  four  persons,  who  all  severally  took  written  notes  of  it."
(I  am  forced  to  notice  these  frequent  inaccuracies  in  his  versions  of
the  facts,  as  they  would,  of  course,  be  extremely  misleading  to  any  one
who  did  not  take  the  pains  to  study  the  original  cases.)  u  Two  of
these  persons,"  Mr.  Peirce  adds,  "  now  profess  to  know  nothing  what-
ever about  the  matter."  Even  this  is  not  quite  accurate,  as  u  the
matter  "  wns  not  mentioned  by  me  to  one  of  these  two  persons  ;  he
was  merely  asked  generally  if  he  remembered  any  singular  announce-
ment made  by  Miss  J.  during  the  voyage.  I  have,  however,  now
received  the  independent  recollections  of  one  of  the  persons  told,  to
whom  I  was  unable  to  apply  last  year,  as  he  was  travelling  and  his
address  could  not  be  ascertained.     He  writes  as  follows  :  —


Remarks   on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  171

"  June  1,  1887.

"  It  was  some  years  [four]  ago  that  the  voyage  referred  to  in  your
note  took  place  ;  but  I  distinctly  remember  that  one  morning  during
that  voyage,  Miss  K.  J.  told  me  that  during  the  previous  night  she
had  dreamed  that  a  lady  friend  of  hers  was  dead,  or  (for  I  cannot
now  remember  which)  that  this  friend  had  appeared  to  her  on  that
night  and  announced  her  death.1

"A  short  time  after  arriving, at  the  Cape  (about  the  time  that
would  be  required  for  the  transmission  of  a  letter),  Miss  J.  informed
me  that  she  had  heard  that  her  friend  had  died  on  the  identical  night
of  the  dream  or  supposed  appearance."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  made  a  written  note,  he
says :  "  It  is  possible  I  may  have  at  the  time  noted  the  date  and  the
supposed  apparition  in  an  ordinary  pocket-book ;  but  if  I  did  so,
this  pocket-book  is  now  lost.  I  have  some  recollection  of  having  seen
the  letter  announcing  the  death  of  the  lady,  but  none  of  comparing
the  date  with  that  in  a  pocket-book ;  it  is  possible,  however,  that  I
have  forgotten  this  circumstance."

I  regard  it  as  not  improbable  that  Miss  J.  is  wrong  in  thinking
that  any  of  the  persons  to  whom  she  mentioned  her  experience  made
a  written  note  of  it.  This  is  just  the  sort  of  feature  that  is  likely
enough  to  creep  into  an  account  without  warrant,  owing  to  the
tendency  of  the  mind  to  round  off  and  complete  an  interesting  story.
One  might  expect  d,  priori  that  this  would  be  so  ;  and  the  fact  is
illustrated  by  the  far  greater  commonness  of  written  notes  in  second-
hand than  in  first-hand  accounts.  But  in  Miss  J.'s  case,  though  she
is  only  a  second-hand  witness  as  regards  the  note,  I  think  it  probable
that  the  idea  of  it  had  some  real  origin  at  the  time  of  the  event.
Very  likely  one  or  more  of  the  persons  to  whom  she  mentioned  her
experience  said  that  it  was  worth  making  a  note  of,  or  that  they
were  going  to  make  a  note  of  it  —  which  has  left  in  her  mind  the
impression  that  the  note  was  actually  made.

Mr.  Peirce's  sentence,  "  She  gives  May  4th  as  the  date  of  the
vision,  but  the  death  occurred  on  May  2d,"  is  extremely  misleading.
When  she  wrote  her  account  (as  I  explain),  she  had  nothing  in-
dependent by  which  to  mark  the  day  of  the  vision,  and  fancied  that
the  vision  and  the  death  had  both  occurred  on  May  4th.  But  after-
wards (without  the  real  date  of  the  death  being  recalled  to  her  mind)
she  stated  that  she  was  not  sure  of  the  exact  date,  but  that  she  knew

1  The  second  of  these  alternatives  is  the  right  one,  but  it  is  not  quite  correct.  The  visual  expe-
rience was  certainly  a  waking  impression,  not  a  dream ;  but  there  was  no  impression  of  an  an-
nouncement or  of  any  words.  This  is  a  good  instance  of  the  way  in  which  lapse  of  time  affects
memory  as  to  details,  without  the  evidence  becoming  in  the  least  untrustworthy  as  to  essentials


172  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce^s  Paper,

it  had  been  mentioned  in  a  letter  from  the  Cape  to  her  father.  It  is
contrary  to  what  is  stated  to  say  that  the  letter  (i.e.,  the  first  letter)
written  to  her  father  has  been  found  by  him.  He  expressly  states
that  he  cannot  find  it.  And  why  does  Mr.  Peirce  make  the  assump-
tion, for  which  there  is  not  the  slightest  ground,  that  the  whole
passage  about  the  apparition,  in  the  letter  which  is  quoted,  is  not
given?  Why,  again,  does  he  assert  that  "  it  is  stated  that  the  letter
gives  the  date  of  May  4th,"  when  it  is  nowhere  so  stated,  and  when
the  very  first  words  of  the  extract  quoted  are,  "  On  the  2d  of  May  "?

The  evidence  would,  of  course,  be  more  complete  if  it  could  be
proved  that  the  percipient  gave  a  written  account  of  her  experience
(as  well  as  the  verbal  account  which  we  now  have  corroborative  testi-
mony that  she  did  give)  before  hearing  of  the  death.  In  spite  of
both  her  own  and  her  father's  belief  that  she  did  so,  I  think  it  more
probable  that  she  did  not,  and  that  the  letter  of  June  5th  was  really
the  first  letter ;  as  the  way  in  which  the  fact  of  the  vision  is  there
mentioned  does  not  suggest  that  it  has  been  mentioned  before.  The
idea  that  letters  have  crossed,  in  a  case  of  this  kind,  is  a  likely  first
dereliction  from  perfect  accuracy.  The  direction  in  which  imagina-
tion and  failure  of  memory  gradually  tend  is  just  this,  of  neatening
the  facts,  and  supplementing  the  essential  point  by  details  which
enhance  its  interest.  Of  course  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  human
memory  is  not  infallible,  and  that  time  acts  in  any  way  as  a  distort-
ing medium.  But  it  is  very  important  to  avoid  confounding  the
natural  growths  on  the  margin  (so  to  speak)  of  a  telepathic  record
with  the  vital  point  at  its  centre,  or  concluding  that  the  latter  is  as
likely  to  be  unconsciously  invented  as  the  former.  Supposing  the
mistake  which  I  here  think  probable  to  have  been  really  made,  the
substance  of  the  case  is  not  affected.  Having  specially  observed  the
date,  the  percipient  was  likely  to  retain  it  correctly  for  the  short
period  before  hearing  of  the  death ;  and  her  ability  at  that  time  to
identify  it  could  not  be  seriously  impugned  on  the  ground  of  a  subse-
quent mistake  as  to  the  date  of  her  first  writing  home.  We  should
note,  too,  that  in  its  essentials  the  case  is  a  specially  unlikely  one
(even  apart  from  the  corroborative  testimony)  to  have  been  the  work
of  imagination ;  as  the  percipient  was  not  personally  attached  to  the
lady  who  died,  nor  had  she  been  thinking  about  her.

Case  197.  Mr.  Peirce's  phrase,  "  A  coincidence  exact  to  the  min-
ute," is  not  used  in  the  account.  What  the  narrator  says  is  that  the
date  of  the  death,  "  allowing  for  the  difference  of  longitude,  coin-
cided "  with  that  of  the  vision.  Mr.  Peirce  is  wrong  also  in  saying
that  I  ask  him  to  accept  the  coincidence  of  date  in  this  case  as  "  be-
yond question,"  or  as  "  positively  proved."     I  have  again  and  again


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  173

urged  that  exaggeration  of  the  closeness  of  a  coincidence  is  a  com-
mon and  natural  form  for  exaggeration  to  take  ;  and  I  have  pointed
out  that  there  certainly  had  been  some  exaggeration1  in  this  particular
case.  I  have  quite  recently  learnt  that  the  error  was  greater  than  at
first  sight  appeared.  The  vision  took  place  on  the  morning  of  Sept.
G,  that  is  the  day  before  the  death.  The  date  is  fixed  by  the  entry  in
the  diary  of  th.3  narrator's  friend ,  Miss  K.  ; a  under  the  head  of  Sep-
tember 5  is  written,  "On  this  night  Isabella  saw  Jim  vividly  ap-
pear to  her  as  if  dead."  The  vision  was  actually  in  the  early
morning  —  that  is,  at  the  close  of  the  night  Sept.  5-6.  The
case,  therefore,  if  telepathic,  is  one  in  which  the  telepathic  impulse
coincided  not  with  death,  but  with  a  time  of  exceptional  danger  and
probably  excitement  on  the  side  of  the  agent.  Another  document
which  has  lately  been  recovered  further  strengthens  the  evidence.
This  is  a  letter,  sent  at  the  time  by  the  narrator  to  her  sister,  which,
though  it  contains  no  date,  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  record  of  the
hallucination  having  been  written  and  sent  away  before  the  news
of  the  death  arrived.  This  is  really  a  better  and  rarer  form  of
documentary  evi-.lence  than  an  entry  in  a  diary,  which  sometimes
allows  of  the  hypothesis  that  it  was  written  later  than  the  day  under
which  it  figures.     The  following  is  the  account  in  the  letter  :  —

"Hotel  Interlaken,

"  Wednesday.

"  A  few  days  ago,  about  seven  in  the  morning,  I  had  lain  down
again  after  drawing  up  my  blind  to  let  in  the  beautiful  view  of  the
rose-flushed  morning,  when  I  saw  an  appearance  of  Mountain  Jim,
looking  just  as  he  did  when  I  last  saw  him.  There  was  an  impres-
sion on  my  mind  as  though  he  said  :  4 1  have  come  as  I  promised.
Farewell.'  It  was  curious,  and  if  I  had  not  heard  that  he  was  getting
well  and  going  about,  I  should  have  thought  he  was  dead."

This  record,  which  closely  corresponds  with  the  printed  account,
written  more  than  eleven  years  afterwards,  makes  it  almost  certain
that  the  narrator's  memory  was  at  fault  as  to  one  unimportant  detail,
when  she  said  in  that  account  that  she  was  lying  on  her  bed  and
writing  to  her  sister  at  the  moment  when  the  apparition  occurred  ;  for


1 1  take  this  opportunity  of  noting  another  instance  of  exaggeration  which  I  have  dis-
covered since  the  book  was  published.  In  Case  29  it  is  stated  that  Mrs.  de  F.  was  found  dead
at  7.30  P.M.  I  learn  from  a  near  relative  of  hers  that  the  time  was  certainly  some  hours  earlier,
about  2  P.M.

2  Before  this  diary  was  recovered,  Miss  K.  wrote  to  me,  "I  distinctly  remember  that  on  my
going  into  her  room  in  the  morning  she  told  me  immediately  what  she  has  related  to  you."


174  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce'' s  Paper.

had  she  been  so  employed  she  could  hardly  have  failed  to  mention
the  experience  in  that  letter,  instead  of  waiting  some  days.

17th.  Case  231.  The  date  could  not  be  verified  in  the  way  that
Mr.  Peirce  suggests,  since,  as  I  have  stated,  we  have  been  unable  to
obtain  the  address  of  the  witness.  The  original  letter  containing  the
account  was  not  preserved  03'  the  editor  of  the  paper  in  which  it  was
published.

Case  236.  Mr.  Peirce's  remark  seems  to  me  utterly  without  foun-
dation. The  percipient's  account  is  quite  as  precise  as  that  of  her
friend,  who,  however,  completely  corroborates  her.

As  to  Case  237,  I  can  only  wish  that  Providence  would  bless  us
with  more  such  "  meagre"  accounts,  with  essentials  stated  in  a  per-
fectly clear  and  straightforward  manner,  and  with  not  a  word  sug-
gestive of  adornment  or  exaggeration.  If  Mr.  Peirce  really  considers
such  a  narrative,  if  true,  as  "  worthless"  for  the  purpose  for  which
it  is  used,  I  am  afraid  that  nothing  I  can  say  is  likely  to  influence  him.

The  same  remarks  apply  with  almost  equal  force  to  the  other  cases  to
which  Mr.  Peirce  refers  —  to  Nos.  298  and  G95  with  quite  equal  force.
As  to  Case  300, »it  would  be  improved  for  evidential  purposes  by
being  a  little  more  meagre,  there  being,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  some
suggestion  of  exaggeration  in  respect  of  details.

18th.  It  is  possible  that  my  colleagues  and  I  fall  far  short  of  Mr.
Peirce's  standard  in  respect  of  caution,  shrewdness  of  observation,
and  severity  of  logic.  I  think,  however,  that  some  readers  of  the
book  may  feel  the  connection  between  our  deficiencies  and  the  evi-
dence which  we  present  less  vital  than  he  does  —  that  they  may  find
themselves  able  to  judge  the  cases  on  their  merits,  and  to  u  accept"
any  case  so  far  as  it  seems  trustworthy  (not,  of  course,  as  a  proof  of
telepathy,  but  as  an  item  in  the  proof),  without  receiving  from  us
anything  beyond  the  assurance  that  in  our  opinion  it  was  certainly
given  in  good  faith.

To  sum  up  my  view  as  to  the  cases  in  the  list.  Nos.  199  and  355
must  certainly  be  omitted,  as  having  occurred  before  Jan.  1,  1874  ;
and  Nos.  214  and  240  had  better  also  be  omitted,  though  on  grounds
different  from  those  which  Mr.  Peirce  adduces.  Mi*.  Peirce  seems  to
be  logically  right  in  demanding  the  exclusion  of  Nos.  174  and  702,
on  the  ground  that  non-coincidental  hallucinations,  falling  at  a  time
when  the  percipient  was  so  decidedly  below  par  in  point  of  health  as
in  those  cases,  would  probably  not  have  been  reckoned  on  the  other
side.     If  the  census  of  hallucinations  had  not  included  so  explicit  a


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper,  175

condition  as  to  health,  these  two  cases  might  have  been  reckoned,
without  any  considerable  alteration  in  the  estimate  from  an  increase  of
the  number  of  subjective  hallucinations  representing  recognized  figures
to  be  reckoned  on  the  other  side.  No.  702  remains,  anyhow,  a  strong
case,  and  may  become  stronger  still  if  tlie  diary-entry  can  be  re-
covered when  the  writer  returns  to  England.  As  regards  closeness
of  coincidence,  the  recent  information  as  to  case  197,  though  improv-
ing the  quality  of  the  evidence,  removes  it  from  this  particular  death-
list ;  and  there  is  enough  room  for  doubt  as  regards  Nos.  170,  201
(a  very  valuable  case),  and  231,  to  make  it  wiser  to  exclude
them  also ;  though  I  must  point  out  that  I  never  represented
the  coincidence  as  actually  proved  in  every  instance  to  have  been
close  to  within  twelve  hours  ;  that  the  doubt  has  been  clearly  ex-
pressed in  connection  with  the  particular  cases  (except  in  respect  of
Case  170,  an  omission  which  I  regret)  ;  and  that  the  list  and  the
calculation  would  necessarily  be  taken  subject  to  that  doubt  in  re-
spect of  a  few  of  the  items.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  dropping  these  cases  I  am  merely
conceding  their  omission  from  a  particular  calculation.  The  omis-
sion will  not  at  all  detract  from  their  worth,  and  scarcely  at  all  from
the  worth  of  the  argument  which  the  calculation  exemplifies  ;  since,
for  this  to  be  appreciably  affected,  it  would  be  necessary  that  a
large  majority  of  the  records  in  the  list  should  be  substantially  false,
i.e.,  that  the  professing  percipient  should  have  had  no  such  experience
as  is  described  in  at  all  close  proximity  to  the  death.  The  collective
force,  even  of  the  excluded  cases,  say  of  the  group  174,  197,  199,  and
a  case  which  happened  a  few  mouths  earlier,  Nos.  500,  201,  231,  702,
as  evidence  of  a  causal  link  between  the  death  and  the  percipient's
experience,  is  alone  quite  enough  to  give  us  pause  ;  and  as  for  the
list  as  it  stands  without  them,  most  candid  students  will,  I  think,  find
in  it  good  evidence  for  a  sufficient  number  of  highly  abnormal  ex-
periences, in  correspondence  with  unexpected  deaths  at  a  distance,
to  supply  material  for  a  legitimate  and  exceedingly  strong  numerical
argument.  Of  the  retained  cases,  there  are  only  seven  in  which  we
have  not  a  second  person's  testimony  to  the  percipient's  mention  of
his  or  her  experience  at  the  time,  before  the  fact  of  the  death  was
known ;  or  six,  if  we  do  not  count  No.  184,  where,  though  the
actual  experience  wras  not  so  mentioned,  the  special  anxiety  to  which
it  gave  rise  was.  As  for  the  evidential  point  in  respect  of  which
the  substantial  accuracy. of  a  certain  proportion  of  the  cases  may
with  most  reason  be  questioned  —  the  degree  of  closeness  in  the  co-
incidence —  it  is  not  of  cardinal  importance  ;  if  the  arbitrary  limit  had
been  three  days,  or  even  a  week,  instead  of  twelve  hours,  the  ob-


176  Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce^s  Paper,

jectionable  odds  of  billions  to  one  against  the  proximity  in  time
being  due  to  chance  would  still  be  attained.  Points  of  this  sort
were  so  obvious  that  I  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  encumber  the
exposition  with  them ;  a  very  little  good-will  would  enable  any
reader  to  see  that  the  particular  calculation,  based  on  the  particular
data  assumed,  was  a  mere  sample,  serving  to  show  what  an  immense
margin  there  was  to  the  argument,  and  how  little  any  reasonable
abatement  would  affect  its  force.

It  may  be  well  to  point  out  in  a  more  general  way  what  has
already  been  shown  in  respect  of  the  particular  point  of  degree  of
coincidence,  that  the  admission  of  possible  inaccuracies  in  the  cases
used  is  not  in  any  way  an  afterthought,  or  in  any  degree  a  con-
demnation of  my  treatment  of  them.  In  the  very  first  page  of  the
chapter  which  Mr.  Peirce  has  criticised,  I  say  :  "•  It  is  very  necessary
to  distinguish  these  two  questions :  Whether  the  evidence  may  be
trusted,  and,  if  trusted,  what  it  proves.  It  is  the  latter  question  that
is  now  before  us.  The  character  of  the  evidence  was  discussed  at
some  length  in  the  fourth  chapter,  and  is  to  be  judged  of  by  the
narratives  quoted  throughout  the  book.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is
assumed  that  these  narratives  are  in  the  main  trustworthy  ;  that  in
a  large  proportion  of  them  the  essential  features  of  the  case  —  i.e.,
two  marked  experiences  and  a  time-relation  between  them  —  are
correctly  recorded."  These  words  naturally  refer  the  reader  to  the
actual  cases,  and  the  comments  which  accompany  them,  for  the
means  of  judging  as  to  their  evidential  value.  He  will  find  that  in-
completeness and  doubtful  points  are  abundantly  recognized  ;  but  I
believe  he  will  also  find  that  the  probable  or  possible  mistakes  do  not
generally  touch  the  real  core  of  the  case,1  and  that  enough  reliable
ground  remains  to  support  a  numerical  estimate  —  if  not  my  particular
one,  another  conducted  on  the  lines  which  that  illustrates — of  a  sort
that  science  cannot  afford  to  disregard.

Mr.  Peirce's  concluding  remarks  on  "  the  other  numerical  data
used  in  the  argument"  require  but  brief  comment.  He  says  that  I
4 'have  assumed  that  a  hallucination  with  a  coincidence  of  the  death
of  the  person  represented  is  no  more  likely  to  be  remembered  for  a
period  of  twelve  years  than  one  which  is  unaccompanied  b\r  such  a
coincidence."  All  that  I  have  assumed  is  that  a  hallucination  of
the  waking  senses,  so  distinct  as  those  which  have  occurred  in  the

1 1  am,  of  course,  not  assuming  that  a  case  is  necessarily  a  strong  item  of  evidence  if  it  is  free
from  substantial  error.  There  are  many  weaknesses  which  are  in  no  sense  mistakes;  but  I  do
not  think  that  this  specially  applies  to  the  cases  in  the  list  in  question.  Granted  their  sub-
stantial correctness,  those  cases  form  a  very  strong  group.


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  177

coincidental  cases,  is  likely  to  survive  in  the  mind  on  its  own  ac-
count, or  at  any  rate  to  be  recalled  when  the  person  who  has  ex-
perienced it  is  put  into  the  right  attitude  for  recalling  it  by  being
asked  a  definite  question  on   the  subject.     (See  Vol.  II.,  pp.  10,

no

Mr.  Peirce  adds,  "There  are  numerous  cases  in  which,  the  death
not  having  been  heard  of,  the  vision  has  been  totally  forgotten  after
the  lapse  of  a  few  months,  and  was  only  brought  to  mind  again  by
the  news  of  the  death."  I  doubt  if  there  are  as  many  as  three  such
cases  in  the  book ;  and  there  is  not  one  in  respect  of  which  the  ex-
pression "  totally  forgotten  "  would  not  be  thoroughly  misleading.
A  thing  may  be  totally  forgotten  in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  likely  to
recur  spontaneously  to  the  mind  ;  but  this  is  a  very  different  thing
from  total  forgetfulness  in  the  sense  that  a  question  with  respect  to
that  very  thing  will  wake  no  memory  of  it.  There  is  no  coincidental
case  in  the  book  in  which  it  seems  at  all  likely  that  such  forgetful-
ness as  this  followed  the  hallucination  ;  so  that  Mr.  Peirce's  d,  priori
argument  as  to  the  forgetableness  of  the  non-coincidental  experiences
of  the  same  kind  comes  to  nothing.

Mr.  Peirce's  final  objection  seems  to  rest  on  the  assumption  that,
having  supposed  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  newspaper-readers,  I  forgot
that  each  of  these  had  a  circle  of  persons  sufficiently  closely
connected  with  him  to  make  it  likely  that  he  would  hear  of  a  remark-
able experience  befalling  an}T  one  of  them,  of  which  he  might  then  let
us  know,  so  that  the  number  of  persons  tapped  by  newspaper  appeals
should  have  been  reckoned  not  as  a  quarter  of  a  million  only,  but  as
a  quarter  of  a  million  multiplied  by  the  average  number  of  each
person's  acquaintances.  I  have  been  guilty  of  no  such  stupendous
blunder.  Had  the  cases  of  the  type  which  is  used  in  the  cal-
culation been  mainly  obtained  by  means  of  public  appeals,1  it  would,
of  course,  have  been  very  necessary,  in  estimating  the  area  from
which  they  were  drawn,  to  distinguish  the  direct  from  the  indirect
results  of  the  appeals  —  that  is,  to  distinguish  the  cases  which  were
from  percipients  who  had  encountered  the  appeal  from  those  where
the  percipients  had  not  themselves  encountered  it,  but  had  been
applied  to  for  their  accounts  on  the  strength  of  it.  Only  five  cases,
however,  out  of  the  whole  list,  were  obtained  in  this  way  through
public  channels ;  and  of  these,  only  one,  Case  300,  was  an  indirect
result,  in  the  sense  just  explained.  That  case  was  certainly  not
known  to  a  wide  circle  ;  and  as   I  was  making  a  rough,  but  as  I

1  A  sentence  in  Chap.  XIII.  (V.  of  II.,  p.  14)  is  certainly  calculated  to  mislead.  I  say,  "  our
chief  means  of  obtaining  information  has  been  by  occasional  requests  in  newspapers."  I  ought
to  have  added,  "apart  from  information  derived  from  our  own  circle  of  fiiends."


178  Remarks  on  Professor  Petrels  Paper.

believed  a  very  liberal,  estimate  of  the  area,  I  felt  justified  in  in-
cluding it.

In  this  connection  I  may  repeat  the  substance  of  some  remarks
which  Mr.  Peiroe  has  perhaps  not  observed,  and  which  seem  to  me
of  great  importance.  Of  the  64  coincidental  experiences  of  three
sorts  —  vivid  dreams  of  death,  and  visual  and  auditory  hallucina-
tions—  used  in  the  calculations  of  Chapters  VIII.  and  XIII.,  5,  or
about  one-thirteenth,  were  obtained  by  canvassing  a  body  of  about
5,535  persons,  taken  at  random.  It  is  not  unreasonable,  therefore,
to  suppose  that  the  body  from  which  the  whole  G4  were  drawn  amounts
to  13  times  5,535,  or  71,955.  No  doubt  the  number  of  coincidental
(or,  as  we  should  now  say,  probably  telepathic)  experiences  yielded
by  a  random  group  of  5,535  persons  is  too  small  for  us  to  be  confident
that  it  represents  the  average  proportion  in  other  groups  of  the  same
size.  But  the  estimate  is  probably  not  so  inexact  but  that  it  may
safely  be  taken  as  showing  my  assumption  of  300,000  to  be  decidedly
unfair  lo  the  telepathic  argument.  I  have  further  supposed  this  area
of  300,000  persons  to  have  been  drained  dry  —  an  extravagant
concession  ;  for,  though  it  is  easily  assumed  that  any  one  who  has
ever  had  a  "  psychical  experience"  is  desirous  to  publish  it  abroad,
as  a  matter  of  fact  people  do  not  usually  take  the  trouble  to  write  a
letter  to  perfect  strangers,  about  the  family  and  personal  matters  of
themselves  or  their  friends,  on  the  ground  of  a  newspaper-appeal.
Would  that  Mr.  Peirce's  view  of  the  general  eagerness  to  communicate
with  us  were  anywhere  near  the  truth.  We  know  of  much  evidence
which  the  reluctance  or  indifference  of  the  parties  concerned  has
made  unavailable  for  our  collection  ;  we  can  scarcely  doubt,  therefore,
that  much  more  remains  un elicited,  even  among  those  whom  our
appeal  has  reached.  A  further  strong  argument  for  the  existence  of
these  unelicited  facts  is  the  very  large  proportion  of  our  actual  cases
(specially  large  in  the  group  with  which  Mr.  Peirce  and  I  have  here  been
concerned)  that  has  been  drawn  from  a  circle  of  our  own,  for  the
most  part  quite  unconnected  with  ''psychical"  inquiry  —  from  the
friends,  or  the  friends'  friends,  of  a  group  of  some  half-dozen  persons
who  have  had  no  such  experiences  themselves,  and  who  have  no  rea-
son to  suppose  their  friends  or  their  friends'  friends  better  supplied
with  them  than  anybody  else's.  In  view  of  this  latter  fact,  Mr.
Peirce's  guess  that  the  cases  in  the  list  (or,  at  any  rate,  a  sufficient
number  of  them  amply  to  support  the  argument)  are  "  drawn  from  a
population  of  three  to  four  millions  "  clearly  becomes  grotesque.

As  to  the  concluding  paragraph,  in  which  Mr.  Peirce  sums  up  his
view,  I  may  be  allowed  to  point  out,  that  if  "  the  evidence,  so  far  as
it  goes,  seems  to  be  rather  unfavorable  to  the  telepathic  character  of


Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper.  179

the  phenomena,"  that  is  a  most  important  result,  and  one  which  would
amply  repay  the  time  and  pains  bestowed  on  collecting,  and  examin-
ing the  cases.  The  prime  reason  why  it  seems  a  scientific  duty  to
collect  and  examine  such  evidence  is  not  to  support  a  foregone
conclusion,  not  to  prove  this  or  that,  but  to  see  what  is  really
involved  in  it ;  how  far,  when  rationally  criticised,  it  reveals  facts
which  our  previous  knowledge  fails  to  explain.  No  rational  opinion
could  be  formed  on  the  subject,  no  rational  guess  even  could  be  haz-
arded, till  a  wide  effort  had  been  made,  and  a  large  body  of  material
got  together  and  arranged.  Mr.  Peirce's  provisional  conclusion  is,
therefore,  a  quite  sufficient  justification  for  the  book ;  for  I  do  not
imagine  that  he  would  deny  that,  if  this  collection  actually  goes
some  distance  towards  disproving  telepathy,  telepathy  is  not  very
likely  to  be  proved.  At  the  same  time,  his  is  not  a  conclusion  which
I  can  pretend  that  I  expect  man}7  to  share  who  devote  an  equal
amount  of  study  to  the  matter.  He  regards  me,  no  doubt,  as  an
advocate  rather  than  a  judge ;  and  he  is  so  far  justified,  in  that  the
mistakes  which  I  have  made  are  all  mistakes  which  tell  in  favor  of
my  conclusion.  He  will  pardon  me  if  I  say  that  he  is  in  the  same
position  ;  he  has  made  (I  think)  a  larger  number  of  mistakes  in  seven
pages  than  I  in  as  many  hundreds  ;  and  they  all  tell  in  favor  of  his
conclusion.  Thus  the  impartial  reader  who  may  be  led  to  the  book
by  this  controversy  will  start  fair ;  and  that  some  may  be  so  led  is,  I
trust,  one  probable  and  useful  result  of  a  controversy  which,  I  grate-
fully acknowledge,  has  not  been  without  other  uses.

Finally,  let  me  urge  on  American  readers  that  good  as  criticism  is,
cases  to  criticise  are  even  better.  I  have  expressly  stated  in  "  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,"  that,  though  the  book  may  reasonably  be
accepted  as  supplying  a  proof  of  Telepathy,  the  proof  is  not  one
which  all  candid  minds  are  likely  to  accept.  More  cases,  and  con-
temporary cases,  are  needed  ;  and  for  this  we  must  largely  depend  on
the  wide  assistance  of  educated  persons  in  many  countries.  We
trust  that  it  is  from  the  United  States  that  the  next  considerable
batch  of  evidence  will  come.

19  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


180  Mr.  Peirce*s  Rejoinder,


MR.  PEIRCE'S  REJOINDER.

[Note.  — In  the  copy  of  the  above  criticism,  which  was  sent  to  Mr.
Gurney,  and  on  which  he  has  based  his  reply,  the  following  errata
occurred :  —


jection

2

Line

6

True  reading

238

Reading  sent  Mr.  G,

237

4

8

28

29

4

8

236

214

5

4

695

702

9

9

249

201

12

3

249

201

13

4

or

and

16

3

170

180

C.  S.  P.]

When  "Phantasms  of  the  Living  "  appeared,  I  desired  for  my
own  satisfaction  to  examine  the  arguments  for  spontaneous  telepathy.
But,  as  I  lacked  the  leisure  to  study  the  whole,  I  was  forced  to  con-
fine m}T  attention  to  a  single  argument, — the  most  important  one.
Having  reached  a  definite  opinion  in  regard  to  the  validity  of  this,  I
found  myself  in  the  possession  of  a  good  many  notes  which  I  thought
might  be  useful  in  economizing  the  time  of  another  student  of  the
book.  I,  therefore,  abridged  these  notes  as  much  as  possible,  and
so  constructed  an  article  afterwards  communicated  to  the  American
Ps}'chical  Research  Society  and  now  printed  above.  In  the  abridg-
ment of  my  notes  a  number  of  errors  have  crept  in  ;  but  none  of
these  are  such  as  to  alter  my  conclusion  ;  only  one  or  two  are  impor-
tant ;  most  of  them  consist  in  misstating  my  points  ;  several  are  abso-
lutelv  without  significance,  and  some  are  errors  favorable  to  the
telepathic  hypothesis.  The  reader  may  well  ask  whether  I  have  not
corrected  in  the  proof-sheets  as  many  of  these  errors  as  I  have  been
able  to  discover  ;  for  to  bring  before  the  public  a  paper  containing
acknowledged  faults  certainty  seems  like  an  act  of  presumption.
In  truth,  none  of  the  errors  have  been  corrected,  except  those  in  the
list  above,  which  are  of  a  purely  clerical  nature.  My  excuse  for
pursuing  this  course  will,  I  hope,  be  admitted.  One  of  the  chief
points  of  Mr.  Gurney's  reply  is  that  I  have  committed  as  many  mis-
takes as  he  has.  Accordingly,  instead  of  simply  dropping  the  cases
against  which  he  is  forced  to  admit  fatal  objections  for  the  purpose
of  the  argument  under  examination,  he  labors  to  show  that  I  have


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  181

fallen  into  some  small  errors  in  my  account  of  them.  This  line  of
argumentation  seems  more  appropriate  to  a  school  disputation  than
to  a  scientific  inquiry  ;  for  it  would  not  hetp  the  theory  of  spontaneous
telepathy  in  the  least  to  prove  me  never  such  a  blunderer.  With
Mr.  Gurney's  own  intellectual  character  it  is  different.  He  stands  to
a  certain  extent  as  endorser  of  the  witnesses  to  his  ghost-stories.
The  public,  which  comes  into  contact  with  these  witnesses  only
through  him,  is  obliged  to  confide  in  his  sagacity  ;  end  it  thus  be-
comes very  important  to  ascertain  whether  he  is  an  accurate  and  stern
logician,  or  not.  Now,  the  manner  in  which  he  conducts  his  reply
might  be  judged  quite  significant  in  this  regard  ;  and  hence  I  was  un-
willing to  make  corrections  which  might  interfere  wTith  the  develop-
ment of  Mr.  Gurney's  thought.  I  must  beg  pardon  of  the  reader
for  the  extent  to  which  this  course  has  lengthened  the  discussion.  As
long  as  I  allow  my  errors  to  stand,  since  the  reply  is  of  the  nature  of  an
attack  upon  my  scientific  morals,  involving  accusations  of  garbling,
suppression,  and  invention  of  testimony,  it  is  incumbent  upon  me  to
notice  the  strictures  in  detail ;  and  I  have  preferred  to  review  the
whole  argument,  repeating  as  little  as  possible  what  I  have  already
said,  but  rearranging  the  matter  in  such  a  form  as  to  render  the  force
of  my  various  objections  more  clear.  My  first  paper  was  intended
only  for  the  use  of  close  students  of  the  book,  and  the  several  objec-
tions were  indicated  as  briefly  as  possible.  The  present  rejoinder  is
sufficiently  expanded  to  permit  any  one  who  has  read  the  work  atten-
tively, and  who  will  actually  turn  to  the  pages  I  cite,  to  form  a  judg-
ment of  the  correctness  of  what  I  allege.

Every  attempt  to  explain  ghost-stories  without  admitting  anj'thing
supernatural  (by  which  I  mean  anything  counter  to  the  great  body  of
human  experience)  has  dealt  largely  with  supposed  fortuitous  coinci-
dences ;  and  students  of  the  theory  of  probabilities  must  have  enter-
tained no  little  doubt  whether  a  larger  number  of  such  coincidences
were  not  supposed  than  was  morally  possible.  Mr.  Gurney  has,  for
the  first  time,  undertaken  a  statistical  inquiry  with  a  view  of  putting
this  question  to  rest ;  and  he  thinks  he  has  reached  an  irrefragable
conclusion.  But  I  maintain  he  leaves  the  question  just  where  he
found  it.  (In  the  last  paragraph  but  one  of  his  reply,  he  does  not
observe  the  significance  of  my  phrase  "  as  far  as  the  evidence  goes."
My  judgment,  I  repeat,  is  that,  "  in  view  of  the  uncertainty  of  all  the
data,  it  would  be  very  rash  to  draw  any  conclusion  at  all."  I  ab-
stain, after  reading  the  book  as  I  did  before,  on  account  of  the
doubt  just  mentioned,  from  any  positive  denial,  though  I  decidedly
incline  to  disbelieve  in  any  supernatural  theory  of  ghost-stories.)

Mr.  Gurney  does  not  demur  to  my  rbsumi  of  his  argument.     lie


182  Mr.  Peirce*s  Rejoinder.

says,  "  It  may  be  calculated  that  the  odds  against  the  occurrence,  by
accident,  of  as  many  coincidences "  within  twelve  hours,  of  visual
hallucinations  with  the  deaths  of  the  persons  presented,  as  a  natural
explanation  would  require,  are,  from  the  thirty-one  cases  he  takes  as
established,  "  about  a  thousand  billion  trillion  trillion  trillions  to  one."
To  my  remark  that  no  human  knowledge  can  reach  such  a  probabil-
ity as  this  he  dissents,  and  gives  an  illustration  from  the  throws  of  a
die.  I  will  grant,  at  once,  that  problems  of  that  sort  can  be  im-
agined which  yield  probabilities  indefinitely  nearer  certainty  than  the
above.  For  instance,  if  a  die  be  thrown  but  once,  the  odds  that  one
or  another  of  the  six  faces  will  turn  up  is,  upon  the  usual  assump-
tions, absolute  certainty,  or  infinity  to  one.  But  this  only  refers  to
an  imaginary  state  of  things.  In  any  actual  case  there  is  a  possi-
bility—  ordinarily  very  rightly  neglected,  but  far  greater  than  one
out  of  trillions  of  trillions  —  that  the  die  may  rest  on  its  vertex,  or
fly  up  to  heaven,  or  vanish  altogether,  or  that  before  it  reaches  the
table  earth  and  heaven  shall  be  annihilated.  The  continuance  of  the
order  of  nature,  the  reality  of  the  external  world,  my  own  existence,
are  not  as  probable  as  the  telepathic  theory  of  ghosts  would  be  if  Mr.
Gurney's  figures  had  any  real  significance.  And  for  that  it  would  be
requisite,  too,  that  each  one  of  his  thirty-one  cases  should  be  established
with  a  degree  of  certainty  far  transcending  the  odds  he  gives.  He
might  reply  that  the  enormous  number  giveu  does  not  profess  to  be
an}'thing  but  the  calculated  probability  of  the  thirty-one  coincidences
happening  by  chance  ;  but  this  would  be  admitting  at  once  what  I  al-
lege, that  the  number  has  no  real  significance  ;  and  it  is  because  the
thinking  man  will  see  this,  while  the  vulgar  may  not,  that  I  say  such
figures  may  be  calculated  to  overawe  the  latter,  but  can  only  repel  the
former.  Mr.  Gurney,  in  his  reply,  continues  to  insist  upon  the  number,
for  the  sake,  as  he  says,  of  accuracy.  To  my  mind,  it  is  precisely
against  strict  accuracy  of  thought  that  such  insistance  offends.

I  will  first  consider  the  census  of  5,705  persons,  taken  at  random,  of
whom  only  21  could  recall  having  had  within  twelve  }7ears  a  visual  hal-
lucination of  a  living  person  while  they  were  in  good  health,  free  from
anxiety,  and  wide  awake,  two  of  these  having  had  two  such  experiences.
If  it  would  answer  the  purpose  to  accept  these  answers  in  the  rough,  as
Mr.  Gurney  has  done,  the  census  would  be  large  enough  ;  but  this  is
not  so.  It  is  essential  to  ascertain  the  proportion  of  hallucinations  that
have  been  forgotten.  I  have  pointed  out  that  Mr.  Gurney  assumes
that  hallucinations  with  coincidence  of  death  within  twelve  hours  of
the  person  presented  are  no  more  likely  to  be  remembered  for  twelve
years  than  similar  hallucinations  without  coincidence  !  Mr.  Gurney,
in  his  reply,  has  the  air  of  denying  that  he  has  made  this  assumption  ;


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  183

but  I  submit  that  a  careful  reading  of  the  passage  will  show-that,  on
the  contrary,  he  fully  admits  it.  Mr.  Gurney  sharply  censures  me
for  saying  that  there  are  numerous  cases  in  the  book  of  an  apparition
being  totally  forgotten  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  months.  The  remark
is  certainly  somewhat  exaggerated  ;  I  should  have  said,  so  far  for-
gotten that  in  the  absence  of  coincidence  they  would  not  have  been
called  to  mind  in  answering  the  census-question.  But  I  think  it  is
unjust  to  sa}r  that  the  expression  "  totally  forgotten  "  is  "  thoroughly
misleading,"  since  it  is  a  very  common  exaggeration,  and  I  add  the
qualifying  clause,  "  and  was  only  brought  to  mind  again  by  the  news
of  the  death."  Mr.  Gurney  doubts  if  there  are  as  many  as  three
cases  of  forgetting  an  apparition  in  the  book.  I  cannot  say  how
many  there  are  ;  I  have  noticed  the  following,  and  I  suppose  there
are  others.  In  Case  1G5,  "all  seemed  forgotten."  In  Case  177,  it
was  not  until  long  after  hearing  of  the  death  that  it  occurred  to
the  percipient  to  "put  two  and  two  together"  and  to  associate  the
apparition  with  the  death,  although  the  recognition  was  perfect.
In  Case  235,  the  percipient  says,  "  But  for  the  fact  of  his  death
I  should  never  probably  have  recalled  the  circumstance."  In  Case
258,  the  percipient  only  "happened  to  remember"  the  apparition.
In  Case  30G,  the  percipient's  mind  "recurred  to  it  from  time  to
time,"  and  no  doubt  would  soon  have  forgotten  the  apparition  in
the  absence  of  any  coincidence.  In  Case  552,  the  percipient  testi-
fies that  she  heard  of  the  death  after  six  weeks,  but  did  not
mention  the  apparition  for  many  months.  Mr.  Gurney,  however,
on  the  ground  of  subsequent  conversation,  says  that  this  appears  to
be  an  error.  In  Case  579,  the  percipient  thought  no  more  about
the  vision,  and  therefore  probably  would  have  forgotten  it.  In
Case  588,  "the  thing  was  in  great  measure  forgotten."  In  Case  607,
"no  more  was  thought  of  it;"  but  that  may  not  mean  by  the  per-
cipient, who  was  a  child.  Perhaps  a  pedantic  accuracy  might  object
to  calling  these  cases  "  numerous,"  though  there  are  doubtless  others.
There  are  not  a  great  many  cases  in  the  book  in  which  an  apparition
has  been  recalled  at  all  where  the  death  constituting  the  coincidence
has  been  heard  of  only  after  the  lapse  of  a  long  time,  unless  the  ex-
perience had  created  the  fear  of  the  death  of  a  relative  or  friend,  or
was  brought  to  mind  by  some  record,  or  was  kept  in  remembrance  by
being  a  collective  or  reciprocal  experience.  I  am  confident  that  Mr.
Gurney  is  wrong  in  supposing  that  hallucinations  are  experiences
particularly  well  remembered.  They  are  so  with  the  few  persons
who  take  a  special  interest  in  them  ;  but  whatever  has  no  apparent
bearing  upon  facts  we  consider  important  or  interesting  is  quickly
lost  from  mind.     I  should  have  said  unhesitatingly  that  I  personally


184  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

bad  never  had  a  visual  hallucination,  until  almost  as  I  write  these
words  I  recollect  such  an  occurrence  about  thirty  years  ago.  At
any  rate,  the  question  cannot  be  settled  by  discovering  microscopic
errors  in  my  criticism ;  the  average  index  of  forgetf ulness,  in  these
cases,  ought  to  be  positively  ascertained  ;  and  the  census  proves
nothing  until  it  is  made  so  large  that  the  affirmative  replies  can  be
classified  according  to  their  dates,  without  too  much  diminishing
the  numbers  in  the  several  classes.  It  would  also  be  needful,  in
order  to  arrive  at  satisfactory  results,  to  separate  the  different  kinds
of  hallucinations.  First,  the  genuine  hallucination,  the  product  of  an
overwrought  brain,  which  is  preceded  by  great  depression,  accompanied
by  faintness  (manifesting  itself  in  damp  weather  as  an  icy  chill  as  soon
as  the  skin  has  had  time  to  cool) ,  and  followed  by  an  access  of  terror  ;
second,  the  dream  continued  through  the  process  of  waking  up  and
even  for  a  second  into  the  wide-awake  state ;  and  third,  the  mere
illusion,  or  imaginative  misinterpretation  of  something  really  seen,
without  any  disorder  of  the  brain,  should  be  distinguished  in  this
inquiry.  There  was  no  good  reason  for  limiting  the  census-question
to  a  period  of  twelve  years  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  would  have  been
better  to  use  all  the  available  data.  It  was  a  mistake,  too,  to  limit
the  question  by  the  clause  relative  to  beiug  in  good  health,  free  from
anxiety,  and  wide  awake.  The  entire  answers  should  rather  have
been  printed,  and  the  subtractions  on  account  of  illness,  anxiety,  and
drowsiness  have  been  made  within  the  view  of  the  public.  Finally,
a  fallacy  seems  to  be  involved  in  limiting  the  question  to  hallucina-
tions presenting  persons  really  (and  not  merely  supposed  to  be)
alive  ;  for  there  may  be  a  decided  tendency  for  hallucinations  to  repre-
sent those  who  are  approaching  their  end.  A  new  census  should  be
undertaken  upon  a  larger  scale  and  with  the  sufficient  means  to  carry
it  out  in  a  thoroughly  scientific  manner.

In  the  estimate  which  I  made  of  the  size  of  the  circle  from  which
the  coincidental  cases  were  drawn,  I  relied  on  the  statements  in  the
tc  Phantasms  of  the  Living."  We  there  read1  in  the  discussions  of
these  cases,  "  Our  chief  means  of  obtaining  information  has  been  03*  oc-
casional requests  in  newspapers."  But  Mr.  Gurney  now  says,  "  Mad
the  cases  used  been  mainly  obtained  by  means  of  public  appeals,"
this  calculation  of  the  population  from  which  the  coincidences  were
drawn,  made  as  it  was,  would  have  involved  "  a  stupendous  blunder."
In  point  of  fact,  however,  as  he  says,  "  Only  five  cases  .  .  .  out  of
the  whole  list  were  obtained  in  this  way."  But  on  the  same  page  of  the
book  last  cited  he  allows  250,000  as  the  number  of  persons  who  have

1  Vol.  II.,  p.  14.


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  185

become  acquainted  witb  the  inquiry  through  the  newspapers,  and  only
50,000  as  the  number  of  those  who  have  derived  the  same  information
through  private  channels.  If  the  former  class  have  furnished  only  5
cases,  or  1  for  every  50,000,  while  the  latter  class  have  furnished  26
cases,  or  1  for  every  2,000,  it  would  seem  that  the  bulk  of  Mr.
Gurney's  cases  have  been  drawn  from  a  class  which  is  twenty-five
times  as  fertile  in  ghost- stories  as  the  general  population.  This
furnishes  food  for  reflection.  An  attempt  is  made  to  check  the
estimate  by  a  piece  of  imaginative  statistics.  "Would  any  one,"
he  asks,  "suppose  that  if  he  canvassed  the  first  one  thousand
adults  whom  he  met  in  the  streets  of  any  large  town,  he  would
find  that  twelve  or  thirteen  of  them  had  within  the  last  three  years
been  aware  of  what  we  wanted,  and  of  the  address  to  which  informa-
tion might  be  sent?"  Perhaps  not;  but  here  again  the  author
forgets  that  people  not  only  send  their  own  experiences,  but  also  cause
those  of  others  to  be  sent,  of  which  they  have  heard.  I  have  esti-
mated that  the  advertisements  in  the  newspapers  ought  to  have  drawn
the  really  remarkable  ghost-stories  from  a  population  of  three  mil-
lions ;  and  though  I  admit  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  this  estimate,
I  still  see  no  reason  to  modify  it.  Mr.  Gurney  puts  forth  two  objec-
tions to  it.  One  is  that  5  of  his  64  coincidental  cases  have  been
obtained  by  canvassing  a  body  of  5,535  persons  taken  at  random.
The  other  is  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  31  cases  on  which
the  argument  under  examination  has  been  based,  have  been  the  ex-
periences of  the  friends  and  friends'  friends  of  half-a-dozen  persons.
These  objections  seem  at  first  glance  crushing  ;  but  they  both  involve
one  and  the  same  petit  io  principii.  For  the  whole  question  is  whether
the  advocate  of  naturalistic  explanations  of  ghost-stories  is  forced  to
assume  a  greater  number  of  purely  fortuitous  coincidences  than  the
doctrine  of  chances  will  permit.  Now  this  devil's  advocate,  whose
office  I  endeavor  to  fill,  is  not  by  any  means  forced  to  attribute  the
whole  of  the  31  visual  and  33  auditory  cases  to  the  operation  of
chance  alone.  I  have  only  examined  the  former  class,  but  of  these
I  find  only  one  which  I  am  obliged  to  call  a  purely  fortuitous  coinci-
dence. It  is  the  case  of  Mrs.  Duck,  number  238.  This  case  did  not
come  from  the  5,535  persons,  nor  from  the  friends'  friends,  but  was
taken  from  the  "  Englishman  "  newspaper  of  May  13,  1876.  If  we  are  to
suppose  that  every  very  striking  ghost-story  published  in  any  promi-
nent newspaper  back  to  1876  and  susceptible  of  investigation  has
come  to  Mr.  Gurney's  ears,  surely  three  or  four  million  is  not  a  very
large  number  to  assign  to  the  population  from  which  they  were  drawn.
In  my  view  of  the  matter,  then,  what  Mr.  Gurney  calls  his  well- attested
coincidental  cases  are  of  two  classes  :  one  derived  from  closely  ques-


186  Mr.  Peiree's  Rejoinder,

tioning  a  relatively  small  number  of  persons,  not  one  of  these  stories
being  capable  of  sustaining  a  severe  criticism ;  the  other  confined
mainly  to  the  more  remarkable  of  the  experiences  of  a  far  larger
population,  among  which  one  visual  case  seems  to  involve  a  purely
fortuitous  coincidence.  That  something  like  this  is  the  truth  of  the
matter  will,  I  am  confident,  be  the  final  judgment  of  students.

Mr.  Gurnej'  takes  as  the  chance  that  a  given  hallucination  will  fall
accidentally  within  twelve  hours  of  the  death  of  a  person  whom  it
represents,  the  ratio  of  deaths  in  a  day  to  the  number  of  the  popula-
tion. This  would  be  correct  if  the  death-rate  for  persons  represented
in  hallucinations  were  the  same  as  that  of  the  whole  population.  But
the  examples  given  in  the  book  are  sufficient  to  show  that  this  is  not
the  case.  Persons  who,  from  the  percipient's  stand-point,  appear  par-
ticularly likely  to  die  are,  we  find,  particularly  apt  to  appear  in  halluci-
nations. This  is  not  surprising,  for  genuine  hallucinations  are  accom-
panied by  a  peculiar  terror,  as  one  of  their  physiological  symptoms  ;  so
that  it  is  quite  natural  that  they  should  tend  to  take  the  forms  of  those
whose  death  the  percipient  has  most  reason  to  expect,  rather  than  of
those  in  whom  he  may  be  more  interested.  This  is,  at  least,  a  natural
supposition  ;  the  burden  of  proof  is  not  upon  me  to  show  it  actually
is  the  rule ;  for  I  am  not  trying  to  prove  anything,  but  only  to  show
that  nothing  has  been  proved.  Until  we  obtain  some  positive  statis-
tics, we  can  only  assume  that  the  thirty-one  cases  under  consideration
are  fairly  representative  of  hallucinations  in  general  in  regard  to  the
lengths  of  time  that  the  percipients  might  expect  the  apparitor  to
live.  Suppose,  now,  that  a  given  person  is  to  have  a  hallucination
on  a  given  occasion.  The  apparition  might  take  the  form  of  a  person
belonging  to  one  of  several  classes  having  different  death-rates.
Let  d,  d4.,  d!\  etc.,  be  the  antecedent  probabilities  to  the  percipient  in  the
given  case  that  individuals  belonging  to  these  several  classes  will  die
on  a  given  day.  Let /i,  h',  /i",  etc.,  be  the  antecedent  probabilities
that  the  apparition  in  the  same  case  will  take  the  form  of  individuals
of  those  several  classes.  Then,  hd  +  h'd'  -\-h"d"  +,  etc.,  will  be
the  antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucination  in  the  given  case
will  be  accompanied  within  twelve  hours  by  the  death  of  the  appari-
tor (but  it  will  usually  be  unnecessary  to  take  account  of  more  than
one  term  of  the  algebraical  expression)  ;  and  the  reciprocal  of  this
quantity  will  be  the  number  of  hallucinations  like  this  among  which,
in  the  long  run,  there  would  be  one  accompanied  by  such  a  coinci-
dence. We  do  not,  it  is  true,  in  our  existing  ignorance  of  the  sub-
ject, know  whether  more  or  fewer  ordinary  hallucinations  than  of
hallucinations  like  this  would  be  requisite  to  yield  such  a  coincidence.
But  we  can  only  assume  that  if  we  sum  these  numbers  for  the  whole


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  187

thirty-one  cases  (or  as  man}7  of  them  as  are  admitted  into  the  argu-
ment), we  shall  obtain  about  that  number  of  hallucinations  among
which  there  would  be  thirty-one  coincidences  of  this  sort.  If  there  are
two  different  natural  explanations  of  a  ghost-sUny,  one  giving  P  and
the  other  Q  as  the  number  of  hallucinations  per  coincidence,  and  if
the  respective  probabilities  of  these  theories  are  p  and  q,  where  p  -(-
q  —  1,  then  the  number  to  be  adopted  is  p  P-f-  q  Q.  Tf  one  of  the  ex-
planations is  complete,  we  need  only  take  account  of  one  of  the  terms
of  this  last  formula,  since  the  other  will  be  very  small.  If  there  is  a
probability,  r,  that  the  case  ought  to  be  excluded  from  the  calculation,
then  P  is  to  be  multiplied  by  (1-r).  I  have  estimated  the  numbers
given  below  to  the  best  of  my  judgment,  but  it  will  be  seen  that  for
the  most  part  considerable  changes  might  be  made  in  them  without
essentially  affecting  the  conclusion.  But  logic  will  forbid  the  mak-
ing of  any  changes  in  favor  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  except
where  the  number  given  by  me  may  be  unquestionably  wrong.

It  will  be  seen  that,  in  treating  the  stories  upon  these  principles,
I  have  somewhat  refined  upon  the  method  of  my  first  criticism.  This
I  have  done  in  response  to  Mr.  Gurney's  protest  that  I  have  pinned
him  down  to  too  hard  and  fast  an  interpretation  of  his  argument.
I  thought  it  fair  to  meet  a  roughly  stated  argument  by  a  roughly
stated  reply.  But  since  he  seems  to  desire  to  leave  his  demonstra-
tion of  his  theory  hazy,  while  insisting  on  great  precision  in  my
objections,  I  so  far  comply  with  his  wish  as  to  attempt  to  estimate
numerically  the  effect  of  the  latter,  instead  of  ruling  the  case  out
altogether,  when  the  objections  are  not  absolute  in  their  nature.

In  the  discussion  of  each  story,  I  shall  endeavor  either  to  show
that  it  has  no  bearing  on  the  argument  under  examination,  or  else
to  explain  it  in  a  way  that  is  more  probable  than  the  telepathic
theory.  This  explanation  is  either  complete,  if  it  leaves  nothing  to
be  accounted  for  by  a  chance  coincidence,  or  partial,  if  it  serves  to
increase  very  greatly  the  probability  of  the  coincidence.  It  is  neces-
saiyand  sufficient  that  the  explanation  which  I  propose  for  each  story
should  be  more  probable  than  the  telepathic  explanation.  This
opens  the  question  how  antecedent^'  probable  that  theory  is.  Now
there  is  a  considerable  body  of  respectable  evidence  in  favor  of
telepathy,  in  general.  Yet  I  am  clear  that  we  cannot  probably
infer  that  there  is  any  influence  of  mind  upon  mind  otherwise  than
through  the  recognized  avenues  of  sense.  It  must  be  regarded  as
exceedingly  unlikely  that  such  a  proposition  should  ever  be  estab-
lished by  means  of  evidence  of  the  kind  hitherto  chiefly  relied  upon.
For  this  proposition,  being  counter  to  some  of  the  fundamental
elements  of  the  general  conception  of  nature  which  we  have  formed


188  Mr,  Peirc&s  Rejoinder,

under  the  influence  of  our  aggregated  experience,  has  against  it
antecedently  odds  of  hundreds  of  thousands,  perhaps,  to  one.  In
order  to  refute  it,  then,  for  the  time  being,  it  is  only  necessary
to  bring  some  other  explanation  of  the  facts  less  improbable  than
that.  Telepathy  might  conceivably,  by  another  method,  be  put  out
of  all  doubt.  You  might,  for  example,  begin  by  establishing  a  propo-
sition, A,  not  in  itself  very  improbable,  which  in  turn  might  lend  so
much  probability  to  a  second  proposition,  B,  that  it  might  be  possible
to  establish  this  by  evidence ;  aud  this  again  might  render  a"  third
proposition,  C,  sufficiently  probable  to  be  capable  of  being  estab-
lished by  observations  ;  and  by  proceeding  thus,  you  might  bridge
over  the  profound  chasm  which  separates  telepathy  from  the  soli-
darity of  our  ordinary  experience.  This  is  the  way  in  which  all  the
marvels  of  science  have  been  made  credible.  But  to  mix  with  the
well-compacted  body  of  scientific  truth  sporadic  propositions  contrary
to  the  main  principles  of  science,  simply  because  we  find  ourselves
without  an}T  other  ready  explanation  at  hand  for  certain  outlying
facts,  would  be  a  proceeding  calculated  to  throw  our  whole  knowl-
edge into  confusion,  even  if  but  a  small  minority  of  the  propositions
so  accepted  should  be  false.  To  admit  the  existence  of  a  prin-
ciple, of  which  we  certainly  only  meet  with  manifestations  in  very
exceptional  observations,  is  to  rashly  set  the  prosperity  of  scientific
progress  at  hazard.  Moreover,  though  nature  gives  us  examples
enough  of  rare  substances,  a  rarely  operative  fundamental  principle
is  yet  to  be  discovered.  On  the  contrary,  every  force  or  other
cause  we  know  works  almost  everywhere  and  at  all  times.  But
telepathy,  as  the  evidence  stands  at  present,  if  it  acts  at  all,  does
so  only  with  the  extremes!  infrequency.

The  degree  of  my  disbelief  in  telepathy  in  general  is  such  that  I
might  say  that  I  think  the  odds  against  it  are  thousands  to  one.  But
even  were  I  convinced  of  the  general  phenomenon,  I  should  find  the
telepathic  explanation  of  ghost-stories  but  little  more  acceptable  than
I  do  at  present.  Even  if  telepathy  exists,  we  know  next  to  nothing
of  the  conditions  of  its  action.  I  have  heard  ignorant  persons  at-
tribute table-tipping  to  electricity,  an  agent  which  they  only  knew
from  sporadic  manifestations.  I  thought  such  persons  not  only
ignorant,  but  foolish ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  we  should  be  imitat-
ing them  if  we  were  to  try  to  explain  anything  by  an  agency  that  we
know  so  little  about  as  we  do  about  thought-transference.  The
phenomena,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  seem  to  depend  for  one  condi-
tion upon  a  vigorous  effort  on  the  part  of  the  telepathic  agent ;  and  it
is  fair  to  presume  that  this  would  be  impaired  with  other  powers  in
sickness,  and  would  cease  with  death.     Then  again,  why  should  we


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  189

draw  npcn  such  an  extreme  rarity  as  telepathy,  so  long  as  we  have
such  ordinary  elements  of  human  experience  as  superstition,  lying
and  self-lying  (from  vanity,  mischief,  hysteria,  mental  derangement,
and  perverse  love  of  untruth),  exaggeration,  inaccuracy,  tricks  of
memory  and  imagination,  intoxication  (alcoholic,  opiate,  and  other),
deception,  and  mistake,  out  of  which  to  shape  our  hypotheses?  For
these  reasons,  I  hold  the  telepathic  theory  of  ghost-stories  to  be  an
unwarrantable  and  wild  surmise.  I  would  prefer  to  this  an  explana-
tion which  I  deemed  antecedently  very  improbable,  provided  it  was
not  utterly  preposterous.  I  do  not  therefore  think  it  incumbent  upon
me  in  opposing  the  telepathic  theory  to  suggest  only  positively  proba-
ble explanations.  No  explanation  within  the  bounds  of  common
sense  can  well  be  so  unlikefy  as  that  one.  Mr.  Gurney,  in  his  reply,
admits  that  ho  has  the  bias  of  an  advocate  ;  but  thinks  that  I,  on  my
side,  have  so  too.  Perhaps :  I  certainly  profess  a  legitimate  and
well-founded  prejudice  against  the  supernatural.  But  observe  that  a
bias  against  a  new  and  confounding  theory  is  no  more  than  conserv-
ative caution  ;  while  a  bias  in  favor  of  such  a  theory  is  destructive
of  sound  judgment.

Before  I  take  up  the  stories  in  detail,  there  are  a  few  of  my  objec-
tions concerning  which  a  few  additional  words  seem  necessary.  In
referring  to  these  objections,  I  preserve  the  original  numbering.

2d.  Certain  percipients  were  dead  before  the  advertisements  of
Messrs.  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore  were  inserted  in  the  news-
papers. I  propose  to  surrender  this  objection  altogether.  It  is
logically  sound  ;  but  the  estimate  of  the  population  from  which  the
cases  have  been  drawn  is  so  exceedingly  uncertain,  that  it  is  hardly
worth  while  to  insist  on  this  point.  Accordingly,  I  now  admit  one
case  of  purely  fortuitous  coincidence,  No.  238.

3d.  I  have  not  clearly  expressed  this  objection.  What  I  say  is
that  every  case  must  be  thrown  out  in  which  the  percipient  has  v'  had
two  hallucinations  fortuitously."  But  I  intended  to  say,  what  the
logic  of  the  case  required,  that  every  case  must  be  thrown  out  in
which  the  percipient  remembers  having  had  any  other  insignificant
hallucination  ;  —  for  Mr.  Gurney  has  shown  that  only  1  person  in  59
remembers  having  had  the  illusion  of  a  voice  in  twelve  years,  and  only
1  in  248  remembers  having  seen  an  apparition  of  a  person  in  the  same
period.  Heuce,  as  not  over  half-a-dozen  cases  of  pure  coincidence
from  his  list  can  be  admitted  by  any  careful  critic,  if  any  of  the
percipients  in  these  cases  remembers  a  hallucination  of  any  kind  at
any  time  of  his  life,  the  probability  is  large  that  he  is  abnormally
subject  to  hallucinations.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  census  ques-
tion very  rightly  says  nothing  about  the  recognition  of  the  apparition*


190  Mr.  Peirce*s  Rejoinder.

6th.  Mr.  Gurney  says  that  I  have  not  perceived  that  the  question
is  not  whether  the  percipients  were  awake,  but  whether  they  believed
they  were  awake.  First,  I  think  it  would  be  absurd  to  include  dreams
in  this  inquiry.  Second,  waiving  this,  the  question  is,  not  whether  the
percipients  do  believe  themselves  to  have  been  awake,  but  whether
they  would  have  continued  to  do  so  had  there  been  no  coincidence.
For  a  like  reason,  the  including  of  cases  in  the  census  where  the  per-
cipient was  in  bed  cannot  balance  the  objection  to  this  circumstance
in  the  coincidental  cases.

12th.  The  percipient  may  have  been  intoxicated.  I  should  have
added  that  he  may  have  taken  opium,  chloral,  or  other  exciting  drug.
This  throws  a  certain  suspicion  upon  ever}r  case  in  which  the  per-
cipient was  even  slightly  unwell.  Of  course,  such  cases  may  be
thrown  out  on  the  ground  of  ill-health.  But  that  is  not  an  explana-
tory objection,  —  it  only  going  to  show  that  the  cases  have  no  relevancjr
to  the  argument.  In  the  present  view  of  the  matter,  it  appears  that
there  may  have  been  circumstances  rendering  hallucinations  specially
probable  (relatively  to  ordinary  circumstances) ,  thus  partially  explain-
ing the  coincidences.

15th.  If  the  percipient  has  not  told  of  the  vision  until  after  hav-
ing received  news  of  the  death,  several  modes  of  explanation  are
suggested.

A.  He  may  be  lying.  This  is  a  disagreeable  hypothesis,  especially
when  it  is  more  probable  that  he  is  telling  the  truth.  Still,  an  almost
inappreciable  possibility  of  lying  may  outweigh  the  probability  of  the
telepathic  explanation.

B.  In  ordinary  indistinct  vision,  if  the  person  is  led  to  think  that
he  ought  to  recognize  what  is  seen  as  a  certain  person  or  thing,  he
will  often  feel  sure  he  has  already  so  recognized  it,  although  the
perception  may  be  quite  incompatible  with  the  identification  made.
The  same  is  true  with  dreams.  So  far  as  my  own  are  concerned,
I  have  long  convinced  myself  that  they  are  largely  fabricated  after
I  wake  up,  iu  trying  to  recover  and  go  over  in  my  mind  what  I  had
been  dreaming.  I  am  confident,  therefore,  that,  in  some  cases,
the  memory  of  the  hallucination  could  be  greatly  modified  by  subse-
quent suggestion.

C.  Just  as  a  person  often  has  considerable  difficulty  in  persuad-
ing himself  that  he  has  not  previously  been  in  the  same  situation  in
which  he  finds  himself,  so  if,  on  hearing  sudden  news  of  another
person,  an  image  of  that  person  is  presented  before  his  eyes,  he
might  think  he  had  seen  that  vision  before.

lGth.  If  the  principal  witness  is  shown  to  be  inaccurate  even  in  a
small  matter,  we,  who  have  no  opportunity  to  cross-examine  him,


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  191

must  make  np  for  that  disadvantage  by  throwing  out  the  case  ;  for  an
essential  perversion  of  the  truth  —  an  unintentional  one  —  by  such
a  witness  is  more  likely  than  the  telepathic  hypothesis.  It  is  not
necessary  in  such  a  case  to  make  a  definite  hypothesis  of  what  the
truth  may  be.

17th.  A  story  so  meagre  that  we  cannot  judge  of  the  thorough-
ness of  the  cross-examination  nor  of  the  real  character  of  the  witnesses,
and  which  does  not  fully  detail  the  circumstances,  must  go  for  noth-
ing. Anyone  in  a  large  city  by  frequenting  the  right  company  —
that  of  highly  cultivated  people,  too  —  may,  with  a  little  encourage-
ment, hear  such  stories  in  an  endless  flood.

I  will  now  consider,  one  by  one,  Mr.  Gurney's  thirty-one  cases  of
visual  hallucinations  with  coincidence  of  the  death  of  the  person  rep-
resented within  twelve  hours,  and  show  the  force  of  my  objections.

Case  26  (Vol.  I.,  p.  207).  An  old  farmer  sees  the  apparition  of  a
cousin.     See  objections  G  and  8.

The  percipient  was  in  bed,  but  says  he  was  "  perfectly  wide
awake."

There  is  a  doubt  about  the  date  ;  for  he  says  he  searched  the
papers  on  the  same  day  he  told  his  friends.  Namely,  his  words  are,
"  The  next  day  I  mentioned  to  some  of  my  friends  how  strange  it
was.  So  thoroughly  convinced  was  I,  that  I  searched  the  local
papers  that  day  [Saturday]."  The  local  papers  appeared,  as  Mr.
Gurney  now  tells  us,  on  Saturday.  On  Saturday,  then,  the  per-
cipient first  told  his  friends.  But  three  of  his  friends  sign  a  state-
ment that  he  told  them  he  had  the  vision  "  during  the  previous  night."
This  does  not  quite  agree  with  his  testimony  that  it  occurred  V*  about
two  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  October  21st ;"  for  the  21st  was  Fri-
day. I  think  the  odds,  then,  two  to  one  that  he  meant  it  occurred
about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  night  of  October  21-22,
which  would  harmonize  the  whole,  but  spoil  the  twelve-hour  coinci-
dence. Mr.  Gurney,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  by  the  statement
first  quoted  he  means  to  say  :  That  same  day  I  mentioned  it  to  my
friends,  and  the  next  day  (Saturday)  I  searched  the  local  papers.
He  still  insists  on  using  the  case  as  a  premise  from  which  to  draw  a
conclusion  to  which  (since  u  it  is  as  well  to  be  accurate  ")  he  assigns
a  probability  of  a  thousand  billion  trillion  trillion  trillions  to  one.

The  percipient's  age  is  seventy-two.  He  would  seem  to  have  no
immediate  relations  ;  so  that  I  shall  assume  that  those  who  might  be
represented  in  his  hallucinations  would  be  as  old  as  he.  The  proba-
bility of  dying  on  a  given  day  at  that  age  is  1  :  5000.  But  the
probability  tjiat  there  was  a  twelve-hour  coincidence  is  only  -J.  Then*
the  probability  of  such  a  coincidence,  if  this  was  one,  is  3 :  5000.


192  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

Case  27  (Vol.  I.,  p.  209).  A  gentleman,  while  dressing  in  the
morning,  sees  in  his  mind's  eye  the  face  and  form  of  an  old  friend.
See  objections  5  and  16.  I  have  reckoned  this  case  among  those  in
which  inaccuracies,  small  or  great,  might  be  detected  in  the  testimony.
In  this  case,  the  inaccuracy  I  meant,  if  it  be  one,  is  very  small.  It  was
supposed  to  consist  in  the  lady's  saying  that  her  husband  "  had  al-
ways been  particularly  unbelieving  as  to  anything  supernatural."
Everybody  who  has  patiently  listened  to  many  such  stories  knows
that  phrases  like  this  are  so  perpetually  in  the  mouths  of  cultivated
people  inclined  to  superstitious  credulity,  that  they  are  just  a  little
suspicious  in  themselves.  Now,  in  this  case  the  percipient  did  not
have  a  regular  hallucination  at  all;  so  that  there  was  probably  no
physiological  fear ;  and  yet  he  was  more  agitated  and  impressed  by
the  occurrence  than  a  person  uninclined  to  credulity  would  have  been
by  the  most  substantial  apparition.  It  therefore  clearly  conveys  an
erroneous  impression  to  say  that  he  is  u  particularly  unbelieving."
The  lady's  account  contains  no  sentence  attributable  to  a  desire  to
bring  to  light  any  circumstance  telling  against  the  supernatural  char-
acter of  the  vision;  but  both  matter  and  phraseology  ("  strange  to
say")  are  directed  to  heightening  the  effect.  The  story  is  very
well  told.

I  have  also  reckoned  this  case  among  those  in  which  the  percipient
was  anxious.  My  reasons  are  as  follows  :  The  decedent  was  an
old  friend  of  the  percipient,  so  intimate  that  the  latter  was  informed
of  the  deatli  by  a  letter  received  the  next  morning  ;  and  the  peculiar
illusion  seems  (on  any  hypothesis)  to  reveal  a  close  bond  of  sympathy
between  the  two  men.  Now  the  percipient  knew  that  the  decedent
had  a  mortal  disease.  Hence,  I  think  a  certain  degree  of  anxiety
must  have  existed.  This  may  not  have  been  so  great  that  a  really
vivid  non-coincidental  hallucination  affected  by  it  would  have  been
on  this  account  unnoticed  in  replying  to  the  census-question ;  but  the
vision  in  question  was  only  seen  "  in  the  mind's  eye,"  and  was  so  little
removed  from  an  imagination  that  the  percipient's  wife  thinks  it
necessary  to  say,  "My  husband  is  the  last  person  in  the  world  to
imagine  anything."  I  think,  therefore,  that,  had  there  been  no  coin-
cidence,-husband  and  wife  would  have  concluded  that  the  apparition,
if  it  can  be  called  one,  was  a  product  of  an  imagination  worried
by  anxiety.  Mr.  Gurney  says,  "  I  can  scarcely  think  Mr.  Peirce
seriously  believes  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to  anxiety."  But
it  is  not  the  question  whether  the  hallucination  was  really  due  to
anxiety  or  not,  but  whether  it  is  certain  that  there  was  not  suf-
cient  anxiety  to  prevent  such  a  case  from  being  repprted  in  the
census,  provided   it  had   proved   to  have   no   significance.     In   my


Mr.  P Circe's  Rejoinder.  193

opinion  the  chance  is  that  the  case  ought  to  be  excluded  for  this
reason.

At  the  same  time  if  it  were  a  pure  coincidence  it  would  bo  nothing
remarkable.  Though  the  percipient  was  not  very  anxious,  he  was  prob-
ably more  anxious  about  the  decedent  than  about  any  other  friend ;
so  that  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  probability  that  this  decedent  would
be  represented  in  any  hallucination  that  the  percipient  might  have  at
this  time  was  four-fifths.  The  decedent  was  known  to  have  a  cancer ;
and  that  cancer  was  a  mortal  one,  because  it  was  an  u  incurable  "
one,  and  the  phrase  that  "we  were  in  no  immediate  apprehension
of  his  death"  shows  that  he  was  expected  to  die  of  it  at  some
time.  The  average  duration  of  such  a  cancer  may  be  five  hundred
days.  But  the  percipient  does  not  seem  to  have  been  very  well  in-
formed in  regard  to  the  particulars  ;  and  we  may  therefore  presume  he
did  not  know  how  long  the  malady  had  been  going  on.  If  so,  it  was
an  even  chance  that  the  decedent  might  die  in  two  hundred  and  fifty
days.  That  is,  there  was  one  chance  in  two  hundred  and  fifty  that
he  would  die  that  day.  The  antecedent  probability  of  the  coinci-
dence is  f  of  this,  or  1  in  312.  The  case  is  thus  insignificant,  even
if  it  be  admitted.  In  view  of  the  anxiety,  I  will  reckon  its  antece-
dent probability  as  1  in  156.

Case  28  (Vol.  I.,  p.  210).  An  employe  in  an  office  while  on  a  sofa
in  the  evening  sees  an  apparition  of  a  fellow-em plo}Tc.  See  objections
4,  5,  and  G.  There  was  a  certain  inaccuracy  in  my  putting  this  case
among  those  in  which  the  percipients  were  taking  afternoon  naps.  But
my  notes  were  only  the  briefest  references  for  students.  B37  the  word
u  nap"  I  meant  that  the  percipient  was  not  in  bed,  but  either  snooz-
ing or  liable  to  do  so.

This  is  a  very  impressive  case,  owing  both  to  the  unexceptionable
character  of  the  testimony  and  to  the  numerous  details  which  the  fine
observation  of  the  percipient  brings  out.  Nevertheless,  I  do  not
think  it  proves  anything;  and  I  am  gratified  to  find  my  judgment
borne  out  by  the  witness  A.  C.  L.  (p.  212,  at  the  end  of  his  letter),
who  was  in  so  much  bettor  a  position  to  judge  it  than  the  public  can
be.  The  present  discussion  of  the  case  must  of  course  be  limited  to
its  bearing  on  the  single  argument  under  examination.

The  percipient  was  apparently  reclining  upon  a  couch  at  nine  o'clock
in  the  evening  ;  but  he  had  only  leaned  back  the  minute  before.  He
was,  however,  not  well.  He  not  only  had  a  headache,  but  he  said  to
his  wife  that  he  was,  what  he  had  not  been  for  months,  rather  too
warm.  He  was,  therefore,  probably  feverish.  It  is  possible  that  he
may  have  taken  some  exciting  medicine.  This  degree  of  illness  would
not  have  been  sufficient  of  itself,  I  suppose,  to  prevent  such  a  case,


194  Mr.  Peirce*8  Rejoinder.

if  not  coincidental,  from  being  reported  in  the  census ;  but  it  is  sig-
nificant on  another  account.  For  I  believe  that  the  derangement  of
the  percipient's  health  was  brought  on  by  snb-conscious  anxiety  con-
cerning his  friend  the  decedent.  Mr.  Gnrney,  in  his  answer  to  my
criticisms,  represents  that  the  only  knowledge  the  percipient  had  of
the  illness  of  his  friend  was  that  he  knew  he  had  an  attack  of  indi-
gestion. But  there  was  nothing  to  be  called  an  "  attack"  of  indiges-
tion. On  Monday,  the  decedent  "complained  of  having  suffered
from  indigestion  ;  "  that  is  to  say,  he  had,  no  doubt,  had  a  pain  which
he  referred  to  his  stomach,  and  which  had  been  so  severe  that  he
mentioned  it  after  it  was  over ;  and  he  still  felt  that  something  was
the  matter,  for  he  consulted  an  apothecary.  This  apothecary  "  told
him  that  his  liver  was  a  little  out  of  order,  and  gave  him  some  medi-
cine," doubtless  a  blue  pill.  On  Thursday  k' he  did  not  seem  much
better,"  so  that  it  was  apparent  that  there  was  something  more  than
mere  biliousness  the  matter.  Nor  was  this  all ;  for  on  Saturday  he  was
absent  from  the  office.  All  these  symptoms  were  known  to  the  per-
cipient; and,  besides  these,  there  must  have  been  indescribable  indi-
cations of  illness.  For  a  man  can  hardly  have  an  aneurism  of  the
aorta  and  be  so  little  ill  that  the  derangement  of  his  health  wholly
escapes  the  notice  of  a  sympathetic  and  observant  friend  who
sees  him  ever}-  day.  Such  a  wonderful  sympathy  existed  be-
tween these  two  men,  that  when  A.  L.,  the  brother  of  the
decedent  (the  same  whose  opinion  of  the  case  has  been  cited
above),  came  to  announce  the  death  to  N.  J.  S.,  the  percipient,
the  following  extraordinary  conversation  took  place :  "  A.  L.  said,
4 1  suppose  }rou  know  what  I  have  come  to  tell  you?'  N.  J.  S.
replied,  'Yes,  your  brother  is  dead.'  A.  L.  said,  *I  thought  you
would  know  it.'  N.  J.  S.  replied,  'Why?'  A.  L.  said,  'Because
you  were  in  such  sympathy  with  one  another.'  "  Here  was  a  man  in  a
better  situation  to  judge  the  case  than  any  one  can  now  be,  and  who
is  so  little  given  to  marvels  that  after  this  occurrence  he  continues  to
disbelieve  in  telepathic  visions,  and  who  says  he  gives  his  testimony
14  to  strengthen  a  cause  I  am  not  a  disciple  of;  "  and  yet  this  excel-
lent judge  thought  the  percipient  would  know  of  the  death.  The  same
good  judge  must,  then,  have  thought  the  percipient  would  have  been
anxious.  The  reason  he  gave  for  his  surmise  shows  that,  like  a  good
observer  of  human  nature,  he  knew  that  deep  sympathy,  as  the  word
implies,  may  produce  a  wonderful  exaltation  of  sensibility.  In  such
a  condition  perceptions  of  the  truth  may  be  reached  which  are
founded  on  differences  of  sensation  so  slight  that  even  an  attentive
scrutiny  of  the  field  of  consciousness  may  not  be  able  to  detect  them,
and  which  may  be  almost  magical  in  their  effects.


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  195

I  would  propose,  then,  the  following  hypothesis  to  account  for  this
story.  The  exalted  sensibility  of  sympathy  had  unconsciously
detected  alarming  symptoms  in  the  decedent,  and  given  rise  to  very
great  anxiety.  But  anxiety  is  a  vague  sensation,  which  frequently
escapes  recognition,  even  though  it  be  enough  to  make  the  person
sick.  So  I  suppose  it  was  in  the  present  case.  Fever  resulted,  with
headache  due  to  over-excitation  and  exhaustion  of  the  brain  (owing
both  directly  to  worry  and  also  to  the  heat  of  fever) ,  and  faintness
due  to  an  irritation  of  the  sympathetic  nerves.  When  the  percipient
leaned  back  on  the  couch  I  suppose  he  felt  the  weakness  of  ap-
proaching faintness  ;  then,  a  moment  later,  an  ic\T  chill  passed  through
him, — a  sure  sign  that  the  blood  had  been  withdrawn  from  the
periphery  long  enough  for  the  skin  to  cool.  The  brain  must  have
been  already  left  bloodless  ;  and  this  withdrawal  of  the  blood,  in  the
condition  in  which  the  brain  was,  sufficed  to  bring  on  a  hallucination.
I  submit  that  this  hypothesis  keeps  nearer  to  the  facts,  and  is  less
far-fetched,  than  that  of  spontaneous  telepathy,  and  is  also  far
more  antecedently  probable.

I  assume  it  to  be  practically  certain  antecedently  that  any  hallu-
cination that  the  percipient  might  have  on  that  day  would  refer  to
the  decedent,  and  further  that  his  unconscious,  anxious  clairvoyance
showed  that  the  decedent  was  a  very  sick  man.  It  is,  therefore,
fair  to  sa}7  that  the  latter's  antecedent  chance  of  dying  was  ten  times
that  of  the  average  man,  or  say  1  in  2,000,  which  is,  therefore,  the
antecedent  probability  of  the  coincidence.

Case  29  (Vol.  L,  p.  212).  See  objections  4  and  12,  with  Mr.  Gur-
ney's  replies,  especially  under  the  former  head,  where  he  communicates
the  important  additional  fact  that  the  percipient  was  in  perfect  health.1
I  am  sorry  he  does  not  say  on  whose  testimony  he  states  this,  for
such  supplementary  testimony  must  be  received  with  special  caution.

This  gardener  stumbling  about  the  churchyard  in  the  evening
suggests  an  Ingoldsby  legend.  When  he  got  home  he  half  thought
what  he  had  seen  must  have  been  his  fancy.  Such  uncertainty  is  odd,
and  seems  to  show  something  was  the  matter  with  the  man.  I  suspect
drunkenness  ;  but  perhaps  this  is  too  gratuitous,  for  the  man  has  an
excellent  character.  Yet  I  do  not  think  that  the  drunkenness  of  a
man  to  whose  character  the  vicar  of  the  parish  certifies  is  quite  so
improbable  as  the  telepathic  hypothesis.  Let  us,  however,  assign  to
the  former  only  one-third  the  probability  of  the  latter.

But,  further,  as  the  percipient  on  his  return  half  thought  what  he
had  seen  must  have  been  his  fancy,  he  perhaps  would  have  settled


1J  only  refer  the  reader  to  Mr.  G-urney's  replies  in  cases  where  they  include  new  testimony


196  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

down  to  that  belief  had  there  been  no  coincidence,  and  consequently
would  not  have  reported  the  case,  had  the  census-question  been  put  to
him.  Observe  that  I  am  not  supposing  there  was  such  a  case  among
the  persons  to  whom  the  census-question  was  put ;  but  probability  deals
wholly  with  what  would  happen  in  an  indefinitely  long  run,  and  in
the  long  run  there  would  have  been  such  a  case  ;  besides,  though
there  may  not  have  been  any  case  in  the  census  exaclly  analogous
to  this,  yet  to  balance  this  defect  there  were  probably  cases  of  sup-
pression of  hallucinations  which  find  no  precise  analogues  among  the
coincidental  cases.  Still,  as  the  case  might  have  been  reported
under  the  circumstances  supposed,  I  will  not  cut  it  off  altogether  on
account  of  this  objection,  but  only  reduce  its  weight  by  one-third.    '

Finally,  it  appears  to  me  that  this  case  has  not  been  sufficiently
inquired  into.  I  cannot  help  thinking,  for  example,  that  if  we  knew  as
much  about  it  as  we  do  about  No.  28,  that  if  we  had  a  better  acquaint-
ance with  the  witness  than  is  conveyed  by  the  vicar's  banal  cer-
tificate to  the  man's  character,  and  that  if  we  were  fully  informed
concerning  the  events  of  that  day,  some  explanation  might  offer
itself  which  does  not  now  occur  to  us.  I  will  estimate  the  probability
of  this  at  one-third  that  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  to  which  I
think  I  have  thus  been  unduly  liberal.  These  probabilities  sum  up
to  the  equivalent  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis.

As  the  news  of  the  death  reached  the  town  the  next  morning,  it  is
fair  to  assume  that  the  gardener  was  aware  of  the  illness  of  the
decedent.  We  may,  then,  reasonably  estimate  the  antecedent
probability  that  the  hallucination  would  relate  to  the  invalid  whose
tomb  was  before  his  eyes  as  four-fifths.  I  further  assume  that  the
widow  in  a  coal-scuttle  bonnet  was  sixty-five  years  of  age,  and  that,
being  poorly,  her  chance  of  dying  was  five  times  the  normal.  Ac-
cording to  the  table  of  the  English  Institute  of  Actuaries,  out  of
49,297  assured  persons  living  at  the  age  of  sixty-five,  2,141  die  in  the
year,  or  say  1  in  23.  Then  the  chance  that  such  a  person  will  die
on  a  given  day  is  1  in  365  times  23,  or  1  in  8,400.  But  this  woman's
chance  was  five  times  that,  or  1  in  1,700.  However,  there  was  only
a  probability  of  four-fifths  that  she  would  be  the  object  of  the  halluci-
nation ;  so  that  the  probability  of  the  coincidence  was  only  |-  of  1 J-Q  0 ,
or  2  ^  0 .  In  other  words,  there  would  have  in  the  long  run  to  be
2,100  hallucinations  before  a  coincidence  equivalent  to  this  would
occur.  But  there  is  an  even  chance  that  one  of  the  above  objec-
tions is  valid,  when  we  are  not  obliged  to  fall  back  on  fortuitous
coincidence,  so  that  in  the  long  run  only  1,050  hallucinations  would
be  necessary.

Case  170   (Vol.  I.,  p.  428).     A  woman  saw  an  apparition  of  her


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  197

mother,  and  her  aunt  died.  See  objections  2,  6,  7,  8,  and  16.  Owing
apparently  to  an  error  of  a  copyist,  Mr.  Gumey  understands  me,
under  the  16th  head,  to  object  to  Case  180,  instead  of  to  this;  and
hence  his  smooth  remarks  on  my  "  rough  inadvertency."

The  percipient  was  in.  a  delicate  condition,  and  consequently,  per-
haps, not  in  good  health.

It  was  in  the  morning,  and  she  had  not  risen,  though  she  had  been
awake,  and  probably  still  was  so.

She  did  not  recognize  the  apparition  as  the  person  who  died,  but
as  another  person.

The  date  is  altogether  doubtful.

Owing  to  the  lapse  of  time  the  testimony  is  not  good.

The  case  has  not  been  very  thoroughly  investigated.

Mr.  Gurney  gracefully  surrenders  this  case,  which  must  go  for
nothing.

Case  172  (Vol.  I.,  p.  430).  See  objections  5,  6,  and  15.  A
housekeeper,  alone  in  the  house,  as  she  is  going  to  sleep  at  night,
sees  the  apparition  of  a  dear  friend.

The  honesty  of  the  witness  cannot  be  doubted.  She  did  not  tell
the  experience,  apparently,  until  long  after  she  had  heard  of  the
death;  but  in  this  case  that  could  hardly  make  any  difference,  unless
we  suppose  outrageous  lying  without  any  known  motive.

It  is  quite  possible  that  a  real  person  may  have  been  seen ;  yet
there  is  no  positive  indication  whatever  of  the  presence  of  such  a
person.

The  percipient  was  in  bed,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  hallucina-
tion, at  least,  not  wide  awake,  as  required  by  the  census-question.
Such  a  case,  if  non-coincidental,  would  probably  not  be  reported  in
the  census,  and  therefore  should  not  be  counted  in  the  argument
under  examination.

Morever,  the  percipient  expressly  says,  "I  was  anxious  about  her."
Mr.  Gurney  replies  that  she  was  not  anxious  in  the  sense  in  which  he
uses  the  word.  But  she  would  have  understood  the  word  "anxiety,"  in
the  census-question,  as  she  herself  uses  it.  For  this  reason,  I  must
positively  exclude  the  case.

Yet,  even  if  all  the  above  objections  fail,  it  has  no  value.  For
it  was  antecedently  practically  certain  that  the  dream  would  relate  to
the  decedent,  an  "intimate  friend"  about  whom  the  percipient  was
anxious;  and  since  the  decedent  "  had  been  for  some  time  seriously
ill,"  and  anxiety  existed,  the  antecedent  probability  of  death,  and,
therefore,  of  the  coincidence,  may  be  put  at  1  in  200.

Case  173  (Vol.  I.,  p.  431).  See  objections  3,  6,  and  15.  The
captain  of  a  steamer  was  killed  by  the  fall  of  a  spar  at  six  o'clock  in


198  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

the  morning.  The  percipient  was  the  stewardess,  and  was  then  asleep
in  her  berth.  I  suppose  there  was  loud  talk  about  the  event,  and  that
this  talk,  b3ing  heard  by  the  stewardess  in  her  sleep,  produced  a  vivid
dream.  This  dream  was  continued  for  an  instant  after  she  woke  or
half  woke  up,  "  probably  between  six  and  seven."  She  rose  at  once
and  went  to  the  pantry  and  there  heard  what  had  happened,  being
very  likely  not  yet  wide  awake.  This  explanation  is  complete  and
satisfactory.

Were  it  necessary  to  suppose  any  fortuitous  coincidence,  we  should
have  to  take  into  the  account  that  the  percipient  has  had  another
hallucination.

Case  174  (Vol.  I.,  p.  431).  A  young  hufyin  bed  sawa  vivid  appa-
rition of  an  acquaintance,  Major  G.,  walking  in  the  room.  See
objections  4,  5,  6,  and  15.

The  percipient  did  not  mention  the  vision  to  the  family  for  fear  of
ridicule  until  after  the  news  of  the  death.  Hence,  upon  general
principles,  we  should  entertain  a  doubt  whether  her  recognition  of  the
person  she  seemed  to  see  was  quite  as  absolute  as  she  afterwards
thought  it  had  been.  Yet,  in  view  of  the  details,  — "  neither  his
features  nor  his  figure  any  whit  altered," — I  do  not  think  we  can
attribute  any  importance  to  her  having  kept*  her  experience  to
herself.

The  percipient  was  not  in  good  health.  Mr.  Gurney  says  that
unless  the  percipient's  health  was  favorable  to  subjective  halluci-
nation, her  illness  is  of  x\o  consequence.1  But  he  himself  sufficiently
refutes  this  notion  in  his  summing  up.  It  is  not  so  ;  for  as  she  was
far  from  being  in  good  health,  if  the  hallucination  had  been  non-co-
incidental, it  would  not  have  been  reported  in  answer  to  the  census-
question  ;  and  a  case  which  would  not  have  been  reported  if
non-coincidental  must  not  be  counted  as  coincidental.  Mr.  Gurney
is  obliged  to  admit  that  this  is  logical.  He  says  he  cannot  tell
whether  the  percipient's  particular  malady  would  be  favorable  to
subjective  hallucination  or  not..  But  the  young  lady  says,  "  An
attack  of  rheumatism  and  nervous  prostration  left  me  far  from  well
for  some  weeks  last  spring,  and  one  night,"  etc.  This  seems  to  mean
that  she  had  not  recovered  from  her  nervous  prostration.  On  that
night  she  "  had  gone  to  bed  early,"  showing  she  felt  more  tired  than
usual,  so  that  her  brain  must  have  been  unusually  taxed.  I  should
think  it  plain  that  such  a  condition  was  favorable  to  the  production
of  hallucinations.

I  have  reckoned  this  as  a  case  in  which  the  percipient  was  certainly

*1  note  in  the  second  proof-sheet,  that  Mr.  Gurney  has  modified  this  statement.  The  passage,
as  it  will  go  to  the  reader,  furnishes  a  curious  illustration  of  how  the  census  was  constructed.


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  199

anxious.  I  do  not,  however,  think  that  she  was  so  to  such  a  degree
as  to  exclude  the  case  on  that  ground.  But  she  knew  that  the  person
seen  in  her  vision  was  fatally  ill,  and  his  case  had  been  "  a  topic  of
conversation"  in  the  family.  "  We  had  also  received  bad  accounts
a  few  days  before,  and  were  aware  that  he  was  in  a  critical  condition."
This,  I  think,  implies  such  a  degree  of  inquietude  about  the  decedent
as  to  give  an  antecedent  probability  of  nine-tenths  that  he  would  be
the  object  of  any  hallucination  which  she  might  have  at  that  time.

After  no  hopes  of  his  recovery  were  any  longer  entertained,  further
bad  accounts  were  received,  and  he  was  "  known  to  be  in  a  critical
condition."  His  chance  of  dying  on  any  given  day  may  therefore
be  put  at  one  in  ten.  Hence,  nine-tenths  of  one-tenth,  or  one-eleventh,
was  the  antecedent  probability  of  the  coincidence.

But,  for  the  reason  given  above,  the  case  cannot  be  counted  at  all.

Case  175  (Vol.  I.,  p.  433).  A  gentleman  dreamt  he  saw  his
neighbor  lying  on  the  bed  between  him  and  his  wife,  and,  waking,
still  thought  he  saw  him.     See  objections  3  and  6.

The  percipient  has  had  other  hallucinations  many  years  before.
He  describes  them  as  "day-mares."  "That  is,  ...  I  quite
believe  I  was  asleep  while  experiencing  them."  The  present  case
was  of  the  same  general  character,  but  more  vivid,  and  continued
into,  or  at  least  up  to,  a  fully  waking  condition.  Probably  the  old
experiences  were  more  vivid  than  he  now  remembers  them  as  being ;
and  even  if  they  were  not  so,  I  cannot  think  they  were  of  a  radically
different  nature.  He  admits  that  "It  is  difficult  to  define  the  dif-
ference in  these  cases."  Mr.  Gurney  says,  "  There  is  no  ground
for  regarding  them  (the  former  experiences)  as  hallucinations  at  all,
in  the  sense  in  which  I  throughout  employ  the  word."  But  they  were
so  according  to  the  definition  of  the  census-question ;  that  is,  they
were  "vivid  impressions  of  seeing"  human  beings.  The  percipient
says,  "  In  the  earlier  cases  many  years  ago  I  concluded  that  waking
had  caused  what  looked  real  to  disappear."  The  phrase  implies  that
he  was  some  time  in  coming  to  this  conclusion,  and  there  can  be  little
doubt  to  an  unprejudiced  mind  that,  in  the  absence  of  coincidence,
he  would  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion  regarding  the  present
case.

The  percipient  falls  into  confusion  in  trying  to  make  out  whether
his  state  during  this  vision  was  that  of  waking  or  sleeping.  He  says,
"I  reflected,  'Am  I  awake,  or  is  this  a  dream?'  I  cannot  yet
answer  this  question  to  my  own  satisfaction  ;  I  cannot  tell  when  my
dream  merged  in  in}'  waking  thoughts.  I  only  am  sure  that  as  the
figure  disappeared  I  was  as  wide  awake  as  I  am  now."  That  is,  he
fully  woke  just  as  the  figure  disappeared,  and  he  knows  not  whether


200  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

to  call  his  previous  state  sleeping  or  waking.  "  I  had  not  a  pe-
culiar sense  of  breaking  out  of  sleep  at  once,  and  with  a  snap,  as  it
were.  ...  I  believe  I  might  be  awake,  I  even  think  I  was  awake,
with  the  image  of  a  dream  still  strongly  on  my  mind.  .  .  .  Briefly,
I  cannot  be  sure  .  .  .  that  I  was  asleep,  although  all  experience
would  go  to  say  that  I  was."  All  this  shows  it  was  a  dream  continued
through  a  slow  process  of  waking  up  and  just  into  the  fully  waking
state.  Cases  of  this  sort  are  so  common,  and  so  little  attention  is
paid  to  them,  that  they  could  not  possibly  got  fully  reported  in  the
census,  and  should  be  altogether  excluded  from  the  class  of  halluci-
nations for  the  purpose  of  this  argument.  I  am  willing,  however,  to
give  it  one-fourth  weight.

There  seems  to  be  nothing  surprising  in  the  percipient's  dreaming
of  the  decedent,  who  seems  to  have  been  an  intimate  acquaintance,
and  who  was  a  sufferer  from  bronchial  asthma.  There  probably
was  no  other  acquaintance  about  whom  he  was  more  anxious.  I  will
put  the  antecedent  probability  of  the  hallucination  relating  to  the  de-
cedent at  two-thirds.  A  man  could  not  die  of  asthma  without  it
being  generally  known  to  his  friends  that  his  attacks  were  frightful.
Hence,  I  think  we  may  assume  that  the  antecedent  probability  of  his
dying  on  a  given  day  was  1  in  2,500.  This  would  make  the  proba-
bility of  the  coincidence  1  in  3,700.  In  other  words,  1  hallucination
in  3,700  would  present  a  coincidence  as  remarkable  as  this.  But,
owing  to  the  percipient  being  exceptionally  subject  to  hallucinations
of  this  nature,  say  more  so  than  1  man  out  of  20,  we  must  divide
the  3,800  hallucinations  by  20,  making  190.  Finally,  as  the  case  is
to  have  only  one-fourth  weight,  we  divide  again  by  4,  and  so  reach
the  number  forty-eight.

Case  182  (Vol.  I.,  p.  441).  The  case  of  the  young  lady  on  the
voyage  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  See  objections  3,  5,  6,  8,  and
16,  and  Mr.  Gurney's  replies,  especially  under  16.  I  regret  that  a
number  of  material  errors  have  crept  into  my  account  of  the  case.
Mr.  Gurney  also  now  furnishes  new  testimony,  he  does  not  say  whose,
affording  important  corroboration  of  that  of  the  principal  witness.

The  percipient  experienced  another  apparition  shortly  afterwards
of  a  dressmaker  who  died  about  that  time,  the  dates  not  being  ascer-
tainable. This  shows  that  the  percipient  was  at  that  time  very
unusually  liable  to  hallucinations.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  rough
coincidence  of  the  second  apparition  with  death  almost  forbids  the
hypothesis  that  either  coincidence  was  purely  fortuitous.  I  can  see
but  two  alternatives.  The  first  is,  that  there  has  been  some  important
suppression  or  falsification  of  the  testimony,  the  nature  of  which  I
cannot  divine.     This  possibility  should  be  gravely  considered,  though


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  201

in  my  numerical  estimate  I  will  not  take  account  of  it.  The  second
is,  that  this  young  lady  had  a  wonderful  hypnotoid  sensitiveness,  by
which  she  was  sometimes  able  to  make  unconscious  estimates,  or
rather  unconscious  mental  modifications  analogous  to  estimates,  of
how  long  consumptives  approaching  their  end  would  live,  with  a
probable  error  of  perhaps  a  few  months,  at  the  end  of  which  time
she  would  have  apparitions  of  them.  It  would  then  be  a  chance  result
that  in  the  hallucination  on  shipboard  the  error  was,  say,  only  three
or  four  hundredths  of  the  probable  error.  The  telepathic  hypothesis
would  leave  it  very  strange  that  the  young  lady  should  have  visions
of  two  persons  in  whom  she  had  no  special  interest,  and  whom  she
had  not  seen  nor  probably  thought  of  for  a  long  time.

I  assume  that  the  antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucination
would  relate  to  the  decedent  was  one-half,  and  that  the  antecedent
probability  of  death  was  1:  200,  so  that  the  probability  of  the  coinci-
dence was  1:  400.

Case  184  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  444,  546,  lxxx,  196,  235,  255).  Mr  Keule-
mans,  in  Paris,  has  two  visions  of  his  little  boy  in  London.  See
objections  3,  5,  6,  and  15.

I  have  said  that  the  percipient  seems  to  have  hallucinations  nearly
eveiy  day.  Mr.  Gurney  replies  :  "  He  has  had  only  one  other  halluci-
nation in  his  life.  This  occurred  many  year's  ago  in  his  boyhood,  and
represented  a  vague,  unrecognized  figure."  The  census-question
asks  whether  the  person  addressed  has  "had  a  vivid  impression
of  seeing  ...  a  human  being."  This  defines  what  we  have  to
understand  by  a  hallucination  for  the  purposes  of  the  argument
under  examination.  Now  we  find  (Vol.  I.,  p.  256,  note)  that  on  New
Year's  eve,  1881,  this  percipient,  Mr.  Keulemans,  had  "a  vivid
picture  of  his  family  circle  in  Holland."  Nor  was  there  any  coinci-
dence of  the  death  which  this  vision  had  led  him  to  expect.  What  I
meant  by  saying  that  Mr.  Keulemans  seems  to  have  hallucinations
nearly  every  day  (for  I  made  no  positive  statement)  was  that  he  ha*
constant  vivid  impressions  of  seeing  objects,  not  always  human
beings.  Mrs.  Keulemans  says  (p.  256),  "My  husband  looked  at
some  eggs,  and  made  the  remark  that  he  had  seen  them  before."
This  shows  that  Mr.  Keulemans  speaks  of  these  experiences  as  acts  of
seeing.  Mr.  Gurney  tells  us  (p.  196),  "  He  has  experienced  so
many  of  these  coincidences  that,  even  before  our  inquiries  quickened
his  interest  in  the  matter,  he  has  been  accustomed  to  keep  a  record
of  his  impressions."  I  assumed,  as  there  was  nothing  to  the
contrary,  that  a  large  proportion  of  these  would  present  human
beings.  But  it  is  not  of  much  consequence  whether  they  do  so  or  not.
Unless  we  adopt  the  telepathic  theory  at  once,  it  is  plain  that  this


202  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

percipient  is  so  excessively  liable  to  hallucinations  that  a  coincidence
or  two  is  no  more  than  natural.

Mr.  Gurney  says  that  the  percipient,  having  absolutely  no  ground
for  anxiety,  was  naturally  not  auxions.  The  decedent  was  a  child  of
his,  five  years  old,  who  had  been  removed  from  his  parents,  and  from
Paris  to  London,  on  account  of  an  outburst  of  small-pox.  Here  I
think  is  ground  for  such  a  degree  of  anxiety  as  would  determine  the
hallucination  to  take  the  form  it  did.

I  assume  it  to  have  been  antecedently  practically  certain  that  any
hallucination  at  that  time  would  relate  to  the  decedeut.  The  antece-
dent probability  of  death,  and  therefore  of  coincidence,  maybe  taken
at  1  in  25,000.  But,  owing  to  the  great  liability  to  hallucinations,  I
multiply  the  probability  of  coincidence  by  1,000,  making  it  1  in  25.

Case  195  (Vol.  I.,  p.  528.)  See  objections  5,  6,  8,  and  14,  and
the  reply  of  Mr.  Gurney  under  the  8th.

Miss  Rogers  saw  her  mother  and  grandmother  about  the  time  of
the  death  of  the  latter.  This  happened  in  1878,  and  does  not  seem
to  have  very  profoundly  impressed  anybody  at  the  time.  It  is  only
set  down  on  paper  in  1884,  one  of  the  family  being  then  interested  in
telepathy.  Consequently  the  memory  of  the  witnesses  is  hardly  ade-
quate to  giving  correctly  all  the  circumstances.  The  percipient
fct  cannot  fix  exact  times  and  hours  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  she  thinks
her  vision  corresponded  with  the  time  of  the  death."  Mr.  Gurney,
however,  now  adds  a  circumstance  to  the  account  (it  is  a  pity  he
seldom  cites  any  testimony  for  his  numerous  additions)  which  makes
an  error  in  the  date  less  probable.

The  percipient,  I  still  think,  was  anxious.  A  witness  wbose  house
she  was  visiting,  and  who  was  therefore  in  a  better  condition  to  judge
than  we  can  be,  says  she  u  doubtless  had  gone  to  bed  with  an  anxious
mind."

The  percipient  herself  is  inclined  to  attribute  the  virion  to  the
effect  of  a  strong  imagination.  (This  comes  to  us  at  second-
hand. I  should  like  to  have  her  develop  her  views  on  this  point.)
Now,  the  imaginations  of  different  persons  differ  enormously,  and  the
percipient  ought  to  know  her  own  imagination  better  than  Mr.  Gurney
can  do,  — expert  if  he  be.

As  two  persons  appeared  in  the  vision,  and  the  death  of  either  of
these  would  have  been  reckoned  as  a  coincidence,  the  probability  is
doubled.

That  the  grandmother  would  be  one  of  the  two  persons  represented
in  any  such  coincident  hallucination  of  the  percipient  at  that  time  I
take  to  be  certain  ;  for  she  says  she  was  continually  thinking  of  her
grandmother.     The  antecedent  probability  of  death,  in  view  of  the


Mr.  Pelves' §  Rejoinder.  203

age  of  the  decedent,  her  state  of  health,  and  the  anxiety  of  her
granddaughter,  I  take  to  have  been  1  in  200,  which  is  therefore  the
probability  of  the  coincidence.

Case  197  (Vol.  I.,  p.  531).  The  apparition  of  Mountain  Jem.
See  objections  8  and  16,  and  Mr.  Gurney's  reply  under  the  latter
head.  The  following  remarks  were  written  before  the  discovery  of
the  diary.

I  carelessly  represented  the  witness  as  saying  that  the  time  of
death  coincided  with  that  of  the  apparition.1  What  she  does  sny
is,  that  the  "  date,  allowing  for  difference  of  longitude,  coin-
cided." We  are  to  conclude,  then,  that  the  dates  would  not  have
been  the  same  without  such  allowance.  The  meridian  of  the  death
is  seven  and  a  half  hours  west  of  that  of  the  apparition,  and  the  ap-
parition occurred  at  7  A.M.  Ihus,  what  she  probably  means  is,
that  the  civil  date  of  death  was  one  day  previous  to  that  of  the  appa-
rition. I  consider  the  hypothesis  that  the  witness  applied  the
longitude  the  wrong  wa}*  both  gratuitous  and  improbable.  It
is  true  this  would  make  the  hour  agree  ;  but  she  seems  to  have  no
remembrance  of  the  hour  agreeing.  Unfortunately  there  is  no  record
of  the  date  of  the  apparition,  and  probably  never  was.  The  witness
could  not  have  heard  of  the  death  for  some  weeks,  and  hence  there
must  be  great  doubt  whether  the  apparition  really  came  on  the  right
day.  On  some  Wednesday,  she  says  it  occurred,  "  a  few  days  ago."
Now,  it  should  have  occurred  1874,  September  8.  But  that  day  was
Tuesday.  Eight  days  might  conceivably  have  been  called  "  a  few-
days  ago  ;  "  but,  unless  she  had  already  forgotten  the  day,  she  would
have  been  more  likely  to  refer  to  that  interval  as  "about  a  week  ago."
Is  there  no  postmark  on  the  letter?  Does  the  hotel  register  show  that
she  was  there  on  Wednesday,  September  16?  What  was  the  weather
at  Interlaken  on  September  8,  at  7  A.M.,  since  she  speaks  of  the
rose-flushed  morning?

Mr.  Gumey  admits  the  coincidence  of  time  is  not  proved  to  be
within  twelve  hours,  but  still  thinks  the  case  should  be  allowed,
becuise  the  limit  of  twelve  hours  is  arbitrary,  and  might  have  been
fixed  at  eighteen  or  twenty-four  hours.  But  he  is  altogether  wrong  in
this.  The  doctrine  of  chances  supposes  the  instances  to  be  drawn
blindly  ;  and  the  conditions  of  the  drawings  must  not  be  modified
so  as  to  take  in  known  cases.  If  a  silver  mine  was  to  be  sold,  and
Mr.  Gurney,  on  the  part  of  the  sellers,  and  I,  on  the  part  of  the
buyers,  were  to  be  sent  to  the  mine  to  collect  a  fair  sample  of  the

1  It  was  Mr.  Gurney  himself  who  first  made  this  mistake  and  thus  led  me  into  it.  For  he
says  (p.  532),  "  The  coincidence  cannot  have  been  as  close  as  Mrs.  Bishop  imagines."  But  she
says  nothing  of  a  closer  coincidence  than  a  day.


'J.1  '-


-  were
fBfmst   to  tiiror  »articnlar  lamp,  becnee    1  -om

it-    ..---..*..:.-     tiii '     :   t-::j   -    ■:    :l   s:.-e:    and    bee— w     *   was  lyinr
ek*  iotber  Inn:  I  shon

-

The  testimoi  witnet  jcnrate.

There   was   probably   no  Tecord    mac  nere

-

i
jedem  Jtboug:    -  _  ■

r-~...:    —  -      .:      :       _    -      v.       ^   ^i   :-.-i:.;    rr- -■--.-."    Bean    :»:'
bin

should  fie-  rter  death   (meaning.  I  sup-

jum*  the   antecedei

-eedent  to  bave  been  nme-ienths.

-  .   _   ■     the  uneertaair  mnltip

aii

:_       -  -

.

:

ne  room.

Mr.     Got:  arafer

ependenthr    marks   tbe  I

say  the  nam  ads  as

:_1.~-  1j-    ^..-    -  -  ™    :...■?:■  :„:-•':-.    ■.■;     ?■■-. ::  z    ".ne   fonn    V    l  ^a:

:
.
wil  Tjd  decide  whose  statement  »  eorr

roneoiis  year.

-^ar   limit:    and   it  woui
jlly  uDwarrantab  §  tkuti  it  n  Mr-


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  205

Gurney  suggests  doing,  for  the  sake  of  including  a  known  instance.
However,  he  gives  up  the  case,  and  it  cannot  be  counted  at  all.

Case  201  (Vol.  I.,  p.  542).  A  lady  was  lying  down,  when  she
seemed  to  see  a  man  come  in  whom  she  afterwards  identified  with  an
old  servant,  the  decedent.  See  objections  4,  6,  7,  8,  and  9.  I  have
twice  mentioned  case  201  when  I  meant  case  240,  as  Mr.  Gurney
notes.

The  percipient  "  had  been  in  ill-health  for  some  years.'*  True  she
was  better  at  that  time  than  for  long  before,  so  that  she  says,  "  I
felt  a  strength  and  enjoyment  of  life  for  its  own  sake,  which  was  a
delight  to  me."  But  these  are  the  expressions  of  an  invalid  who  is
making  a  great  improvement,  and  not  those  of  a  person  in  good
health.

The  percipient  was  lying  down ;  and  she  herself  suspected  she
might  have  been  asleep.  She  applied  a  test,  and  so  far  deserves
credit ;  but  the  test  is  not  conclusive.

She  totally  failed  to  recognize  the  person.  Mr.  Gurney  says  I
have  misquoted  the  account.  I  have  merely  abridged  the  expression,
by  omitting  some  words  that  are  altogether  in  favor  of  my  view.
She  "  knew  the  face  quite  well,  but  could  not  say  whose  it  was,"
although  4*  the  suit  of  clothes  impressed  "  her  "  strongly  as  being  ex-
actly like  one  which  "  her  "  husband  had  given  to  a  servant  named
Ramsey  the  previous  year."  She  thus  appears  to  have  recognized
the  clothes  as  Ramsey's,  and  also  knew  the  face  quite  well ;  but
notwithstanding  this,  could  not  say  who  it  was  !  News  of  the  man's
death  having  arrived,  she  now  adds,  "  I  believe  the  face  of  the  man
I  saw  was  that  of  Ramse}'  as  I  had  known  him  at  first,  when  I
visited  him  as  a  dying  man  in  the  infirmary."  She  is  thus  not  sure
even  now.

The  date  of  the  apparition  is  wholly  uncertain.  It  occurred  "  about
March."

Mr.  Gurney  gives  up  the  case ;  and  I  am  not  inclined  to  give  it
any  weight.

Case  202  (Vol.  I.,  p.  544).  A  near-sighted  lady  sees  a  victoria,
horse,  driver,  lady,  and  child.     See  objections  4,  8,  and  9.

The  percipient  had  "  been  ordered  by  [her]  doctor  to  take  abso-
lute rest,  not  even  to  read  at  all,  and  to  do  no  work  whatever."  At
the  same  time,  she  was  apparently  allowed  to  drive  about  in  an  open
landau.  This  suggests,  at  least,  some  nervous  or  mental  derange-
ment. At  any  rate,  she  was  not  in  good  health  ;  so  that  the  ease  is
ruled  out.

She  is  also  near-sighted,  so  as  to  wear  glasses,  —  a  fact  which  is
mentioned  as  if  she  was  unable  to  recognize  anybody  without  them.


206  Mr,  Peirce's  Rejoinder,

Had  it  been  proved  that  the  lady  she  thought  she  saw  was,  for  ex-
ample, travelling  on  the  Continent  at  the  time,  she  would  doubtless
herself  have  concluded  the  incident  was  due  to  her  near-sightedness,
and  not  have  reported  it  in  answer  to  the  census-question  say  six
years  later,  had  she  answered  that  question.

The  agreement  of  the  date  is  doubtful,  especially  as  the  sole
witness  may  have  been  hysterical.  Mr.  Gurney's  thinking  the
probability  of  the  date  being  correct  is  "  very  high"  should  be  noted
in  connection  with  objection  18.

The  recognition  was  ambiguous.  That  is  to  say,  two  persons  were
seen  (besides  the  driver),  the  death  of  either  of  whom  would  be
counted  as  a  coincidence.

I  think  it  plainly  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.  I  have  often  re-
marked furs  worn  in  hot  weather  in  July  in  London.

Case  214  (Vol.  I.,  p.  563).  An  aunt,  on  receiving  delayed  news
of  the  sudden  death  of  her  niece,  falls  down,  and,  after  many  days
of  delirium,  unconsciousness,  or  oblivion,  not  having  been  out  of  bed
for  three  months,  at  length  declares  that  at  the  instant  of  the  death
she  saw  a  startling  apparition  of  the  decedent.  See  objections  2,  4,
8,  13,  and  15.

In  the  copy  of  my  criticism  sent  to  Mr.  Gurney,  owing  to  a  con-
fusion between  this  case  and  No.  236,  I  committed  an  oversight
(though  probably  not  a  misstatement)  in  enumerating  this  case  among
those  in  which  the  percipients  were  not  in  good  health.

Not  having  mentioned  the  apparition,  as  it  would  seem,  on  receiv-
ing news  of  the  death  a  week  after  it  occurred,  "  She  fell  off  from
the  chair,  remembering  no  more  until  da}s  afterwards  she  found  her-
self in  bed,  where  she  remained  "  for  about  three  months.  The  doctor
"  said  that  she  had  received  some  great  mental  shock,  and  for  some
time  he  feared  that  she  would  not  recover  from  it."  She  was  in  a  de-
lirious or  oblivious  condition  for  davs  ;  and  her  remaining  in  bed  for
three  months  in  consequence  of  a  mental  shock  suggests,  to  say  the
least,  some  nervous  or  mental  affection.

In  my  opinion,  it  is  altogether  uncertain  that  she  saw  any  vision
before  her  illness,  or,  if  she  did,  on  what  day  she  saw  it.  At  any
rate,  it  must  be  allowed  that  there  is  a  chance  amounting  say  to  1  in
100  that  this  is  the  case.  The  antecedent  probability,  then,  of  the
event,  —  perhaps  it  was  a  coincidence  and  perhaps  it  was  not,  —  is  at
least  1  in  100.  I  shall  give  the  case  this  weight,  although  Mr.  Gur-
ney gives  it  up  entirely.

Case  231  (Vol.  II.,  p.  47).  A  volunteer  officer  in  Zululand  fancies
he  sees  a  dying  comrade  standing  outside  his  tent.  See  objections
5  and  8.


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  207

The  percipient's  mind  was  not  free  from  anxiety.  It  may  not  have
been  of  a  kind  to  produce  hallucinations  ;  but  it  would  have  prevented
his  truthfully  answering  the  census-question  in  the  affirmative.  On
account  of  this,  I  will  multiply  the  probability  of  coincidence  by  3.

There  seems  to  have  been  an  interval  of  two  days  between  the
apparition  and  the  death.  Mr.  Gurney  admits  an  even  chance  of
this,  but  still  argues  that  the  case  might  be  included.  I  do  not  think
the  chance  as  great  as  one-half  ;  but  still  I  will  adopt  this  factor.

The  case  is  most  probably  a  mere  instance  of  a  dreadfully  fa-
tigued man  looking  at  one  person  and  fancying  him  another,  and
therefore  not  strictly  a  hallucination  at  all.  In  any  such  mistake
that  he  might  make  at  that  time,  he  would  be  quite  likely  to  think  he
saw  the  friend  concerning  whom  his  mind  had  been  worried.  We
may  take  two-thirds  as  the  antecedent  probability  of  this.

As  the  decedent  was  known  to  be  dreadfully  ill,  and  to  have  suf-
fered an  utter  collapse,  and  as  the  percipient  had  been  told  two  days
before  that  he  was  dying,  we  ma}7  assume  as  the  antecedent  proba-
bility of  death  on  that  day  one-third.  The  probability  of  the  coinci-
dence was  then,  antecedently,  two-ninths,  or  1  in  4.5.  In  other  words,
there  would,  in  the  long  run,  be  a  coincidence  as  remarkable  as  this
for  every  4.5  hallucinations.  But  there  is  an  even  chance  that  there
was  no  coincidence  ;  so  that  this  must  be  halved.  Then,  on  account
of  anxiet}7,  there  is  only  a  probability  of  one-third  that  the  case
should  be  counted,  so  that  the  number  must  again  be  divided  by  3,
which  reduces  it  to  less  than  unity,  so  that  the  case  is,  for  the  pur-
poses of  the  present  argument,  of  less  value  than  the  average  halluci-
nation.    Mr.  Gurney  gives  up  the  case  altogether.

Case  236  (Vol.  II.,  p.  52).  A  governess  fancies  she  sees  a  dark
figure  just  outside  the  [house?]  door,  in  the  evening,  which  reminded
her  of  her  brother.  See  objections  3  and  7,  and  Mr.  Gurney's  reply
under  the  latter  head.

The  percipient  had  had  for  weeks  a  sound  in  her  ears  like  the  tick-
ing of  a  watch,  and  shortly  before,  on  several  successive  nights,  had
heard  a  tremendous  crash  like  the  smashing  of  a  lot  of  china.  Mr.
Gurney  admits  that  these  were  symptoms  of  a  purely  physical  affec-
tion ;  and  they  certainly  seem  to  indicate  some  disease  of  the  brain.
They  render  a  hallucination  at  least  ten  times  as  probable  as  it  would
be  under  average  circumstances.

The  fright  and  weakness  caused  by  the  apparition,  although  it
was  only  a  dark  figure,  are  most  readily  explained  as  physiological,
and  go  to  show  that  a  genuine  hallucination  was  experienced.  The
previous  symptoms  also  render  this  probable.

The  percipient  does  not  say  she  saw  her  brother.     "  I  saw  what


208  Mr.  Peirces  Rejoinder.

appeared  to  me  to  be  a  dark  figure  standing  just  outside  the
door,  with  outstretched  arms."  Later  she  says,  "  The  apparition
did  remind  me  of  my  brother."  This  form  of  the  indicative  shows
that  she  had  either  been  shown  some  statement  to  that  effect  or  had
been  asked  some  leading  question  equivalent  to  the  exhibition  of
such  testimony.  (See  objection  18.)  In  any  case,  the  figure  was  not
recognized  as  being  her  brother ;  it  only  reminded  her  of  him.

In  my  opinion,  the  date  of  apparition  is  somewhat  uncertain,  as  it
was  not  recorded,  and  few  persons  remember  days  of  the  month  accu-
rately, especially  against  the  influence  of  a  mental  suggestion  tend-
ing to  error.  There  is  no  circumstance,  not  even  the  day  of  the
week,  to  corroborate  the  bare  memory  of  the  day  of  the  month.

The  second  witness  does  not  commend  herself  to  my  judgment  so
much  as  the  percipient  herself.  This  second  witness,  whose  testi-
mony is  not  in  every  respect  consistent  with  that  of  the  percipient,
says  the  latter  said  she  knew  something  must  have  happened  to  her
brother.  The  percipient  herself  mentions  no  such  effect ;  but  there
may  have  been  a  transitory  fear  for  him,  as  he  was  at  sea.

The  antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucination  would  refer  to  the
decedent  may  be  taken  as  nineteen-twentieths.  Assuming  the  brother
to  have  been  twenty-five  years  of  age,  his  chance  of  dying  on  a  given
day  would  normally  be  1  in  55,100.  But  his  being  a  sailor  would
double  this.  Hence,  there  would  be  one  coincidence  as  remarkable
as  this  in  28,000  hallucinations.  But  this  number  should  be  divided
by  2  on  account  of  the  defect  of  recognition,  and  again  by  2  on
account  of  the  doubt  about  the  date.  Finally,  it  should  be  divided  by
10  on  account  of  the  liability  to  hallucination.  Thus,  1  hallucination
out  of  700  would  be  as  extraordinary  as  this.

Case  23 ai  (Vol.  II.,  p.  54).  A  servant  girl  sitting  with  her
motlier  in  the  evening  and  reading  to  herself  distinctly  saw  a  dear
school-friend,  the  decedent.     See  objections  8  and  17.

We  are  obliged  to  trust  to  the  apparently  unaided  memory  of  one
witness  as  to  the  year.  She  sa3'S,  nearly  ten  years  after,  that  it
happened  in  1874.  If  it  really  occurred  in  1873,  of  which  there
may  perhaps  be  one  chance  in  ten,  it  does  not  come  within  the  twelve-
3'ear  period.

We  know  little  of  the  character  of  the  witness,  though  the  style  of
the  narrative  (if  she  wrote  it  unaided),  as  well  as  the  impression  she
made  on  Mr.  Gurney  in  a  single  interview,  were  very  favorable.

We  know  nothing  of  the  state  of  her  health,  which  ought  in  every
case  to  be  closely  inquired  into.

The  only  person  in  the  room  at  the  time,  her  mother,  thought  she
might   have   been  dreaming.      This   is  the  more  important,  as  the


Mr,  Peirce's  Rejoinder,  209

mother  is  not  convinced  by  the  occurrence,  but  continues  to  disbelieve
in  ghosts.  Had  there  been  no  coincidence,  the  daughter  would  prob-
ably in.  time  have  fallen  in  with  this  view,  and  would  consequently
not  have  reported  the  vision  in  answer  to  the  census-question.

After  the  lapse  of  ten  years,  it  is  impossible  to  be  certain  that  the
death  and  the  vision  occurred  within  twelve  hours  of  one  another,
there  being  no  record  of  either.  Most  persons'  memory  is  very
treacherous  about  coincidences.  Mr.  Gurnej^'s  thinking  the  proba-
bility that  there  was  a  12-hour  coincidence  "very  high"  is  remark-
able.

Not  so  much  as  the  name  of  the  decedent  is  given.

We  have  no  information  about  what  kind  of  a  room  it  was,  nor
have  we  any  means  of  assuring  ourselves  that  no  real  person  could
have  been  seen.  I  confess  it  seems  more  likely  to  have  been  a  hallu-
cination ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  established.

Mr.  Gurney  professes  to  consider  this  account  as  eminently  satis-
factory. But  the  story  is  too  bald.  From  this  point  in  the  list  on,
the  accounts  are  generally  too  meagre.  With  more  details,  some
other  explanation  might  offer  itself.

There  seems  to  have  been  no  particular  reason  why  the  decedent
shou'Id  have  been  the  object  of  the  hallucination  ;  so  that  we  fall  back
on  the  general  calculation  that  there  is  1  chance  in  17,000  of  a
coincidence.  But  owing  to  the  doubt  about  the  date,  I  multiply
this  by  3,  making  it  1  in  6,000.  Since,  if  non-coincidental,  it
might  have  been  set  down  as  a  dream,  I  multiply  this  again  by  2,
making  1  in  3,000.  And  on  account  of  the  baldness  of  the  story,  I
multiply  again  by  2,  making  1  in  1,500.  I  think  this  number,
though  I  will  adhere  to  it,  is  really  much  too  favorable  to  the
story.

Case  238  (Vol.  II.,  p.  55).  A  laborer's  wife  sees  her  husband  in
the  woods  and  speaks  to  him.     See  objection  2.

There  was  a  strong  hallucination,  with  faintness,  causing  the  per-
cipient to  fall.

I  assume  that  it  was  antecedently  certain  that  the  hallucination
would  refer  to  her  husband,  whom  she  seems  to  have  loved.  This  is
the  assumption  the  most  favorable  to  telepathy,  since  he  was  a  well
man.  The  probability  that  he  would  die  on  a  given  day  might  be
1  in  40,000  ;  but,  as  he  was  exposed  to  accidents,  I  will  take  it
at  1  in  30,000.  But  this  probability  is  so  microscopic  that  a  very
forced  explanation  is  to  be  preferred  to  it,  say,  for  instance,  that  the
whole  tale  has  been  concocted.  I  cannot  admit  that  the  chance  of
there  being  some  such  explanation  can  be  less  than  '  1  in  20,000,
which  value  I  will  therefore  adopt.


210  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder,

Case  240  (Vol.  II.,  p.  59).  Mrs.  Ellis  three  times  during  one
day  distinctly  saw  the  face  of  an  old  friend.  See  objections  5  and
17*.

The  apparition  occurred  first  at  10  A.M.  and  last  at  6  P.M.,  so  that
the  24-hour  period  within  which  death  would  be  considered  as  coinci-
dental ought  to  be  reckoned  from  2  A.M.  Only  the  date  of  the  death
being  known,  there  is  1  chance  in  12  that  it  did  not  fall  within  these
24  hours.

There  is  no  record  nor  independent  recollection  of  the  date  of  the
apparition.

Mr.  Gurney  says  there  was  probably  no  anxiety,  because  the
parties  "had  not  been"  on  friendly  terms.  But  the  pluperfect,
taken  with  the  context,  seems  to  signify  that  a  reconciliation  had
recently  taken  place.  The  mother  of  the  percipient,  at  the  decedent's
desire,  went  to  see  him  just  before  his  death.  There  was,  thus,  a
redintegration  of  friendship.

As  the  decedent  was  an  old  friend  and  known  to  be  near  death  [for
the  percipient  says,  "  Nor  did  I  know  that  he  was  so  near  death"],
it  may  be  taken  as  practically  certain  that  one  or  more  of  the  hallu-
cinations would  relate  to  him.  The  chance  that  he  would  die  on  that
day  may  have  been  1  in  5.  Owing  to  various  doubts,  I  will  call  it  1
in  4.     Mr.  Gurney  abandons  the  case.

Case  249  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  71,  xxiii).  This  is  the  case  depending  on
identification  by  means  of  a  man's  hat,  the  silver  hair  of  the  top  part
of  his  head,  and  the  droop  of  his  head,  seen  over  a  wall.  See  objec-
tions 7,  8,  and  12.

No  jury  would  hang  a  man  on  such  an  identification.  Far  less  can
such  a  theory  as  the  telepathic  be  accepted  on  such  evidence.  For
here  we  are  dealing  with  explanations  whose  antecedent  probabilit}7  is
microscopic.

My  hypothesis  of  a  slight  degree  of  intoxication  is  needless  and
too  gratuitous.  It  is,  however,  far  more  probable  than  the  telepathic
theory.

As  the  decedent  was  a  neighbor  of  the  percipient,  and  known  to  be
ill,  we  will  assume  the  antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucination
would  refer  to  him  was  one-half.  As  he  was  an  aged  man  and  ill,  we
will  assume  his  chance  of  death  was  ten  times  the  average.  As  he  had
silver  hair  and  his  head  drooped,  we  will  assume  his  age  was  eighty.
Then,  the  probability  that  he  would  die  on  a  given  day  was  1  in  256,
and  the  antecedent  probability  of  the  coincidence  was  1  in  500.  But
I  do  not  believe  there  was  any  hallucination  at  all,  and  cannot  admit
anything  more  extraordinary  than  1  in  100.

Case  298  (Vol.  II.,  p.  143).     A  woman  who  is  scrubbing  a  floor


Mr.  Pence's  Rejoinder.  211

thinks  she  sees  her  old  lover  looking  in  at  the  window.  See  objec-
tions 3  and  17.

The  percipient  has  "had  an  auditory  hallucination  on  one  other
occasion,  when  she  heard  herself  called  by  the  voice  of  her  husband,
who,  it  turned  out,  had  died  at  a  distance  two  clays  before."  Voices
of  absent  loved  ones  are  too  common  to  be  reported  duly  in  a  census.

There  is  little  evidence  that  the  percipient  did  not  really  see  the
person  she  thought  she  saw,  except  that  a  witness  says  that  the  de-
cedent's employers  in  the  city  said  that  they  had  received  neivs,  the
testimony  of  some  witness  in  Madras,  this  testimouy  itself  being  very
likely  second-hand,  that  that  person  had  died  on  that  day.  I  am  not
convinced  he  ever  went  to  India  at  all.

The  coincidence  of  date  is  not  certain.  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood
took  a  note  of  the  apparition,  May  16,  1878.  This  note  gives  the
time  as  "  one  Saturday  evening,  about  six  weeks  ago."  Six  weeks
before  May  16  was  April  4,  and  April  6  was  Saturday  ;  but  the  death
was  reported  to  have  occurred  on  Saturday,  March  30.

The  whole  circumstances  are  not  sufficiently  given.

The  probability  of  coincidence  would  be  1  in  17,000  ;  but,  owing  to
the  doubt  about  the  elate,  this  would  have  to  be  doubled.  I  prefer,
however,  the  supposition  that  she  saw  the  real  person,  since  I  do  not
think  the  probability  of  this  hypothesis  is  less  than  1  in  1,000.  This
measure  of  improbability  I  am  willing  to  allow.

Case  300  (Vol.  II.,  p-  146).  A  sailor  sees  his  father  on  a  voyage.
See  objections  11  and  17.

Women,  children,  sailors,  and  idiots  are  recognized  by  the  law  as
classes  peculiarly  liable  to  imposition.  If  sailors'  yarns  are  to  be  ad-
mitted, the  reality  of  ghosts  is  put  beyond  doubt  at  once,  and  further
discussion  is  superfluous.

The  story  is  meagre.  Mr.  Gurney  thinks  it  would  be  more  credible
if  still  more  so.  I  disagree  with  him,  I  shall  give  it  no  weight
whatever.

Case  350  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  244,  xxv).  This  is  the  ridiculous  tale  of  the
three  maid-servants  and  the  face  in  the  window.  See  objection  10.
My  explanation  given  above  is  complete  and  satisfactoiy  ;  and  Mr.
Gurney  has  not  been  able  to  pick  any  flaw  in  it  of  the  least  conse-
quence. As  tricksters  invent  strange  things,  and  do  not  tell  their
secrets,  I  am  at  liberty  to  draw  much  upon  my  imagination  in  this  kind
of  explanation.  Nor  is  it  at  all  necessary  to  suppose  all  the  details
of  the  testimony  true.  It  is  only  necessary  to  invent  an  explanation
which  will  strike  a  shrewd  person  as  not  utterly  preposterous,  and
as  sufficiently  accounting  for  the  stories  told  by  the  witnesses.  Every
amateur  juggler  will  agree  that  it  would  be  asking  too  much  to  re-


212  Mr.  P Circe's  Rejoinder.

quire  me  to  assume  the  witnesses  saw  precisely  what  they  thought
they  saw.  I  acknowledge  that  the  mistress  says  that  it  was  not
known  that  the  person  with  whom  the  apparition  was  identified  was
near  death.  But  that  docs  not  prove  that  the  servants  did  not  know
all  I  have  supposed  they  knew.    I  have  said  the  decedent  had  a  cancer.

1  may  have  confounded  the  case  with  27  ;  at  any  rate,  there  is  no
testimony  that  the  disease  was  a  cancer.  Mr.  Gurney  endeavors  to
make  much  of  this  possible  error;  but  it  is  quite  insignificant;  no
part  of  my  theory  is  based  upon  that.  He  also  thinks  that  I  have
taken  a  great  liberty  with  the  evidence  in  changing  the  phrases
"  trying  to  look  in"  and  having  u  come  up  [from  the  village]  to
make  game "  of  the  girls,  into  looking  in  and  smiling  at  the  girls,
where  I  use  no  quotation  marks.  It  seems  to  be  the  inferred  smiling
that  offends  him  so.  He  splits  hairs  to  find  a  weak  point  in  my
theory.  He  says  the  skuil  is  inconsistent  with  some  of  the  evidence,
as  if  we  were  bound  to  admit  that  ghost-seers  see  all  they  think
they  see  !  I  hope  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  case  and  see  which  hy-
pothesis he  judges  the  more  credible.  I  flatter  myself  common-sense
will  be  upon  my  side.

Case  355  (Vol.  II.,  p.  25G).  A  nautical  case  occurring  in  1853.
Mr.  Gurney  withdraws  it.

Case  605  (Vol.  II.,  p.  G93).  A  mother  sees  her  son,  who  had  died
eight  hours  previously  of  enteric  fever  in  the  Soudan.     See  objections

2  and  17.

A  meagre  storv,  told  at  second-hand.

We  know  nothing  of  the  state  of  health  of  the  percipient.

Her  husband  says  she  was  not  anxious  ;  but  this  is  hard  to  be-
lieve. It  is  more  likely  she  concealed  her  anxiety  in  order  not  to
alarm  her  husband.  The  son  had  dictated  a  letter  August  20,  to
say  he  had  enteric  fever,  and  had  dictated  another  September  7,  to
say  that  he  was  better  and  expected  soon  to  be  home.  There  was
nothing  more  till  October  12,  when  he  could  not  even  dictate  a  letter ;
but  a  Sister  Thomas  wrote  to  sa}T  that  he  had  been  very  ill,  but
"  is  getting  on  very  nicely  now."  This  last  letter  could  not  have  been
received  long  before  October  24,  the  date  of  the  apparition.  How
could  a  mother  fail  to  be  anxious?  Is  it  not  a  calumny  to  say  that
she  was  not  so?  And  if  the  hallucination  had  proved  non-coinci-
dental, would  it  not  have  been  attributed  to  anxiety,  and  so  not
reported  in  answer  to  a  census-question?

I  assume  that  it  was  antecedently  certain  that  the  hallucination
would  relate  to  her  son,  and  I  estimate  his  chance  of  dying  on  a
given  day  at  1  in  100,  which  is  therefore  the  antecedent  proba-
bility of  the  coincidence.


Mr.  Petrels  Rejoinder.  218

Case  697  (Vol.  II.,  p.  695).  The  "  practical"  wifeof  a  "  practical
business  man,"  who  informs  us  that  "  there  can  be  no  doubt  what-
ever that  there  is  some  transmission  for  which  no  explanation  has
yet  been  given  by  the  savants,"  sees,  one  night,  an  apparition  which,
the  following  evening,  she  recognizes  as  a  clerk  in  her  husband's
counting-house,  just  as  her  husband  is  about  to  announce  the  death
of  this  clerk.  See  objections  6  and  7,  and  Mr.  Gurney's  reply  under
the  latter  head.

The  percipient's  shivering  fright  lends  color  to  the  view  that  there
was  a  genuine  hallucination.

She  ma}-  have  heard  of  the  death  during  the  day,  before  she  had
made  up  her  mind  whom  the  apparition  resembled.  Mr.  Gurney
avers  that  this  had  not  happened ;  but  as  he  adduces  no  testimony
but  his  own,  the  statement  goes  for  nothing.

The  practical  business  man  gives  us  a  hint  when  he  says,  "  I  should
scarcely  have  believed  [the  story]  if  related  to  me  of  anyone  else."
I  am  somewhat  disposed  to  follow  his  example.

The  lad}*  had  seen  the  unfortunate  fellow  ;  and  the  husband's  ex-
pression, "  I  have  some  sad  news  to  tell  you,"  shows  that  her  pity  had
been  excited  ;  so  that  we  may  assume  that  the  antecedent  probability
that  her  hallucination  would  refer  to  the  decedent  was  one-fourth.
Considering  what  appears  to  have  been  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and
its  history  so  far  as  we  can  make  it  out,  the  antecedent  probability
that  he  would  die  on  a  given  day,  though  very  uncertain,  may  be
taken  at  1  in  200.  This  would  make  the  probability  of  the  coinci-
dence 1  in  800.

Case  702  (Vol.  II.,  p.  703).  The  percipient,  while  laid  up  with
Jamaica  fever,  had  a  dream,  which,  after  sudden  waking,  was  con-
tinued as  a  vision.  It  represented  an  old  lady  friend  of  his,  who
spoke.     See  objections  4,  5,  6,  and  8.

The  percipient,  in  his  first  account,  says,  I  "  believe  the  following
was  the  result  of  illness."  Although  he  has  since  been  converted
from  that  opinion  by  Mr.  Gurney,  it  is  clear  that  if  the  case  had  not
been  coincidental,  it  would  not  have  been  reported  in  answer  to  the
census-question,  with  its  good-health  clause.  Hence,  it  must  pos-
itively be  excluded  from  the  argument.

The  date  is  quite  in  doubt.  In  his  original  account  the  percipient
has  the  year  wrong.  He  now  alters  his  recollected  date  by  four  days,
in  order  to  make  it  accord  with  that  of  the  death.  There  is  no  inde-
pendent evidence,  and  he  was  so  ill  that  his  memory  was  not  to  be
trusted.  My  original  statement  conveys  an  entirely  correct  impres-
sion, except  that  I  may  have  misunderstood  the  altered  statement,
that  the  vision  took  place  "  a  few  minutes  past  midnight,  June  U."


214


Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.


My  professional  habits  led  me  to  understand  this  in  the  sense  in
which  an  astronomer  would  use  the  expression.  But  as  the  story
has  been  cooked,  I  suppose  the  intention  was  to  make  it  right.

An  unnumbered  case  (Vol.  I.,  p.  230,  note).  See  objection  17.
Mr.  Gurney  admits  that  the  story  is  told  in  so  meagre  a  form  that  it
has  no  evidential  value.     Still  he  retains  it.     I  cannot  do  so.

I  will  now  collect  and  sum  up  the  numbers  of  hallucinations  that
there  would  have  to  be  in  the  long  run,  to  have  among  them  thirty-
one  coincidences  as  extraordinary  as  these.  The  following  are  the
numbers  already  estimated  :  —


Case.

Number.

Case.                              Number.

Case.

Number.

26.     .     .     .

1,667

195.     .     .     .       200

249  ...     .

100

27.     .     .     .

156

197.

50

298  .     .     .

.    1,000

28.     .     .     .

2,000

199  .

0

300  .     .     .

0

29  ...     .

1,050

201.

0

350  .     .     .

0

170.     .     .

0

202.

0

355  ..     .

0

172.     .     .

0

214.

100

695  .     .     .

.       100

173  ..     .

0

231  .

1

697.     .     .

,       800

174 .     .     .

0

236.     ,

700

702  ..     .

0

175.     .     .

48

237.

.    1,500

Unnumbered

0

182.     .     .

.       400

238.     ,

20,000

184 .     .     .

25

240.  .

4

Total     .     .

29,851

Thus,  29,851  cases  of  hallucinations  are  called  for,  in  order  to
produce  as  remarkable  a  series  of  coincidences  as  these.  A  believer
in  telepathy  would,  no  doubt,  reckon  the  number  as  larger ;  on  the
other  hand,  I  have  ascertained  that  man}*  shrewd  and  experienced
men  would  hold  that  I  have  not  allowed  sufficient  weight  to  possi-
bilities of  fraud  and  concoction.  I  have,  of  course,  been  biassed  ;  but
I  have  endeavored  to  be  on  my  guard  against  my  bias.  I  am  sure  that
hypotheses  of  small" probability,  say  less  than  1  in  500,  have  not  been
allowed  their  due  weight.  Especially,  I  have  not  sufficiently  taken  into
account  the  possibilities  of  explanations  that  have  not  been  thought  of.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  Mr.  Gurne}T  has  not  constructed
the  strongest  possible  argument  of  the  same  general  nature.  We
can  only  conclude,  then,  that  30,000  coincidences  may  be  the  number
called  for.  Tf  we  suppose  that  hallucinations  are  four  times  as  common
as  the  census  shows,  the  30,000  coincidences  ought  to  have  occurred
in  a  population  of  two  millions ;  but  two-thirds  of  this  number  is
wanted  to  account  for    Mrs.  Duck's  case    alone,  and    no    probable


Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.  215

induction  can,  of  course,  be  based  on  a  single  instance.  This  case,
however,  comes  from  the  "Englishman"  newspaper,  which  may
recount  the  most  remarkable  experiences  of  more  than  a  million1  of
persons.  It  is  likely  that  some  of  the  other  more  valuable  cases,
such  as  26,  237,  etc.,  have  been  derived  from  the  advertisements,
which,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given,  must  have  drawn  the  most  re-
markable experiences  from  a  large  population,  going  up  perhaps  into
millions.  A  candid  consideration  of  the  whole  matter  will,  I  think,
convince  thereacler  that  until  the  telepathic  theory  of  ghost-stories
has  been  rendered  far  more  antecedently  probable  than  it  now  is,  it
is  useless  to  try  to  establish  it  as  a  scientific  truth  by  any  accumu-
lation of  unscientific  observations.


REPORT    OF     THE    COMMITTEE    ON    THOUGHT-TRANS-
FERENCE.

The  Committee  on  Thought- Transference  has  little  but  negative
results  to  report.  In  fact,  the  only  work  of  which  an  account  can  be
given  this  evening  is  a  set  of  experiments  undertaken  by  the  chairman
and  secretary  of  this  committee,  with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  W.  S.
Bigelow  and  some  observations  made  by  the  secretary,  or  communi-
cated to  him  in  response  to  the  last  request  for  cooperation.

Among  the  conditions  possibly  favorable  to  thought-transference,
supposing  it  to  be  a  genuine  phenomenon,  the  effect  of  a  sudden  and
unexpected  impression  made  on  the  mind  of  the  agent  seemed  particu-
larly worthy  of  investigation.  For  this  purpose  experiments  were
made  in  which  a  brilliantly  illuminated  figure  or  diagram  could  be
suddenly  displayed  to  the  agent  while  sitting  in  a  darkened  room.
This  was  effected  by  the  withdrawal  of  a  shutter,  either  permitting
the  agent  to  look  directly  upon  a  transparent  illuminated  surface
upon  which  the  figure  was  drawn,  or  allowing  the  figure  to  be
projected  by  a  beam  of  sunlight  and  a  lens  upon  a  screen  in  front
of  the  agent.

The  chairman  of  this  committee,  the  secretary,  Mr.  Hodgson,  and
Dr.  W.  S.  Bigelow  took  part  in  these  experiments,  which  were  twenty
or  thirty  in  number,  and  conducted  on  different  days  in  the  month  of
July  last.  As  absolutely  no  evidence  of  thought-transference  was
obtained,  the  details  of  the  experiments  may  be  omitted.

The  suggestion  made  in  the  last  report  of  this  committee  that  a
drug  might  be  discovered,  which  by  its  action  on  the  cerebral  centres
might  favor  thought-transference,  seemed  also  worth  testing.  For
this  purpose  experiments  were  tried  with  Mr.  Hodgson,  acting  both


216  Report  of  Committee  on  Thought- Transference.

as  agent  and  percipient,  while  acting  under  the  influence  of  ether  ;  but
the, results  differed  in  no  respect  from  those  obtained  when  he  was  in
the  normal  state,  and  were  not  suggestive  of  any  unusual  power  of
mind-reading.

Some  .further  thought-transference  experiments  have  been  made  by
the  secretary,  Mr.  Hodgson,  with  the  same  lady  and  her  nephew  (Mrs.
T.  and  R.  C.)  with  whom  the  committee  made  the  observations
described  on  page  110  (Vol.  I.,  No.  2)  of  these  Proceedings.  In  these
experiments  some  rather  striking  successes  attended  Mrs.  T.'s
attempts  to  give  the  suit  and  number  of  a  card  drawn  at  random  from
a  pack ;  but  the  conditions  were  not  sufficiently  rigid,  nor  were  the
experiments  sufficiently  numerous,  to  justify  any  conclusion  as  to  the
reality  of  thought-transference.

Some  trials  with  the  free  drawing  test  have  also  been  reported,  in
which  the  apparent  success  is  sufficient  to  warrant  a  continuation  of
the  investigation,  and  the  secretary  is  now  engaged  in  further  ex-
periments.

It  will  be  evident  to  those  who  have  followed  the  work  of  the
American  Society  thus  far,  that  the  attempt  to  obtain  evidence  as  to
the  reality  of  "  thought-transference  "  has  been  attended  with  very
meagre  results.  The  cases  which  have  appeared  to  suggest  this
method  of  communication  between  mind  and  mind  have  been  few  in
number,  and  the  apparent  success  which  attracted  attention  to  them
at  the  outset  has  not  attended  the  subsequent  experiments  which
have  been  made  whenever  practicable.  If,  therefore,  "  thought-trans-
ference "  be  a  genuine  psychological  phenomenon,  it  is  evident  that
the  conditions  favorable  to  its  manifestation  are  by  no  means
understood.  Judging  from  our  experience  thus  far,  it  would  seem
that  an  inquiring  attitude  of  mind  is  certainly  not  one  of  these  favor-
able conditions.  Nor,  indeed,  need  this  surprise  us,  for  it  is  one  of
the  best-established  laws  of  mental  action,  that  the  activity  of  one
portion  of  the  central  nervous  system  may,  and  not  infrequently  does,
check  or  inhibit  the  activity  of  another  portion.  Hence  when  two
individuals  undertake  to  ascertain,  by  direct  experiments  as  agent
and  percipient,  whether  they  can  influence  each  other's  minds  by
channels  other  than  those  of  the  senses,  their  failure  to  observe
"thought-transference,"  under  these  circumstances,  cannot  be  re-
garded as  evidence  against  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  ;  for  the
mental  activity  associated  with  an  experimental  inquiry  may  rea-
sonably be  expected  to  restrain  and  exclude  from  the  sphere  of
consciousness  those  feebler  psychic  influences  upon  which  thought-
transference,  if  it  exists  at  all,  may  naturally  be  supposed  to  depend.
If,  therefore,  success  cannot  fairly  be  hoped  for   when    agent   an;


Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.  217

percipient  are  consciously  engaged  in  investigating  the  phenomena  of
thought-transference,  it  is  worth  while  to  inquire  whether  better
results  may  be  expected  when  the  investigator  is  watching  for  and
studying  cases  of  telepathy,  occurring  more  or  less  spontaneously  in
his  presence.  Opportunities  for  this  sort  of  investigation  must,  of
course,  be  extremely  rare  ;  and  when  they  present  themselves  it  would
seem  to  be  quite  as  likely  that  the  mind  of  the  investigator  should
influence  the  telepathic  phenomena  taking  place  in  his  presence,  as
that  telepathy  itself  should  exist  between  the  agent  and  percip-
ient. Whether  the  nature  of  this  possible  influence  would  be  favor-
able or  unfavorable  to  the  production  of  these  phenomena  it  is,  of
course,  idle  to  speculate.

If  the  force  of  the  considerations  here  presented  be  admitted,  it  is
obvious  that  the  failure  to  obtain  experimental  evidence  in  favor  of
thought-transference  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  conclusive  argument
against  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon,  for  the  experimental  method
which  has  enabled  the  human  mind  to  achieve  its  grandest  triumphs
in  the  external  world  seems  much  less  applicable  in  a  research  in
which  the  mind  itself  of  the  investigator  is  the  object  of  study.

How,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  are  we  ever  to  discover  whether  thought-
transference  is,  or  is  not,  a  genuine  psychological  phenomenon?
The  study  of  cases  of  apparently  spontaneous  telepathy,  as  carried
on  by  the  English  Societ}'  and  our  own,  seems  likely  to  throw  some
light  upon  the  question  ;  but  it  may,  perhaps,  be  doubted  whether
evidence  will  ever  be  collected  in  sufficient  amount  to  cause  telepathy
to  be  generally  accepted  as  a  recognized  means  of  communication  be-
tween mind  and  mind.  If  a  general  conviction  of  the  reality  of  this
phenomenon  should  ever  be  produced,  it  will  probably  be  by  individ-
ual personal  experiences,  and  not  by  the  recorded  results  of  experi-
mental researches.

It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  hear  intelligent,  matter-of-fact
people  express  a  belief,  derived  from  their  own  personal  experiences,
that  there  must  be  such  a  thing  as  thought-transference,  though  these
experiences,  if  recorded,  would  probably  have  very  little  evidential
value  for  others.  It  is  also  sometimes  asserted,  by  those  who  claim
to  have  been  successful  in  thought-transference,  that  good  results
are  only  obtained  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment,  one  or  two
successes  being  always  followed  by  a  long  list  of  failures,  —  a  cir-
cumstance which  suggests  the  importance  of  studying  spontaneous
cases  of  telepathy  instead  of  trying  to  produce  them  experimentally.
The  duty,  therefore,  of  those  who  are  interested  in  this  branch  of
psychic  research  seems  to  be  not  so  much  to  institute  experimental
inquiries  as  to  keep  the  mind  on  the  alert  for  the   examination  of


218      Report  of  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.

such  cases  as  may  naturally  present  themselves,  avoiding,  however,
any  intense  mental  activity  which  might,  perhaps,  interfere  with  the
phenomenon  to  be  investigated.

Your  committee,  while  they  do  not  feel  that  their  belief  in  the
reality  of  thought-transference  has  been  strengthened  by  their  ex-
perience during  the  past  year,  yet  freely  admit  that  the  conditions
under  which  successful  experiments  are  sometimes  said  to  have  been
made,  are  those  which  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  mental  action
would  have  suggested  as  most  likely  to  be  favorable  to  such  a  phe-
nomenon.

H.   P.   BOWDITCH,

Chairman.


FIRST  REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  EXPERIMENTAL

PSYCHOLOGY.

The  committee  has  received  five  hundred  returns  of  Blank  F,1
with  the  answers  to  the  questions  concerning  superstitions,  and  five
hundred  and  fifty  postal  cards  with  the  diagrams  as  requested.  The
latter  promise  interesting  results,  but  in  order  to  tabulate  them  in
such  a  manner  as  to  permit  safe  deductions  it  is  necessary  to  spend
more  care  and  time  upon  them  than  has  been  possible  in  the  short
period  which  has  elapsed  since  the  collection  was  completed.  Your
committee,  therefore,  requests  permission  to  report  in  full  upon  the
drawings  at  a  subsequent  meeting  of  the  Society.

The  questions  on  Blank  F  were  intended  to  test  the  prevalence  of  a
tendeney  to  superstition  in  the  community.  The  first  three  questions
were  direct.  The  fourth  was  indirect,  in  that  the  answer  depended
upon  a  variety  of  factors  ;  a  number  of  persons  expressed  the  opinion
that  the  question  was  badly  put.  This  opinion  was  gratifying,  as  it
showed  that  the  nature  of  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the
answers  to  this  question  was  not  understood,  and  that  therefore  the
answers  were  more  likely  to  be  entirely  unbiassed.

It  is  evident  that  the  questions  1-3 2  inquire  not  only  whether  the
respondent  believes  in  the  superstition  named,  but  also  whether  he
has  that  form  of  half-belief,  with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  when  our
reason  approves  but  with  doubt,  or  even  actually  disapproves,  while

i See  p.  269.

2  Should  you  be  influenced  by  any  feeling  (whether  implying  a  belief  or  not,  is  immaterial)  in
regard  to :  —

1.  Sitting  down  thirteen  at  table?

2.  Beginning  a  voyage  on  Friday?

3.  Seeing  the  new  moon  over  your  left  shoulder?


Report  of  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.      219

there  lingers  in  the  mind  a  feeling,  perhaps  unreasonable  and  even
provoking  and  uncomfortable,  which  we  cannot  shake  off.  Thus  it
may  be  presumed  that  no  one  in  this  audience  believes  in  the  efficacy
of  witches'  love-potions  or  philters ;  but  there  are  probably  several
who  believe  in  the  occurrence  of  mind-reading,  or  the  reality  of
thought-transference  as  an  actual  possibility  ;  while  others,  though
they  do  not  thoroughly  believe  in  it,  yet  could  not  avoid  an  uncanny
feeling  if  they  encountered  an  instance  of  a  vision  of  a  distant  dying
person  appearing  to  a  friend.  These  examples  serve  to  illustrate
disbelief,  belief,  and  half-belief  respectively.  If  any  one  answered
our  questions  negatively  the  answer  implied  entire  disbelief ;  if
affirmatively,  then  the  answer  either  belief  or  half-belief.  The  form
of  the  questions  was  selected  purposely,  because  the  committee
regarded  these  superstitions  as  on  the  verge  of  extinction,  and
although  faith  in  them  was  almost  gone,  they  expected  to  find  a
certain  lingering  respect  for  them,  just  as  true  republicans,  despite
all  reason,  have  involuntarily  more  awe  for  a  king  than  a  president.
The  answers  show  that  the  tendency  to  superstition  is  much  more
prevalent  than  we  had  anticipated.

The  fourth  question,1  in  regard  to  haunted  houses,  would  naturally
be  answered  with  "Yes"  more  frequently,  because  not  only  the
factors  mentioned  for  the  three  previous  questions,  but  others  also,
would  lead  to  the  answer  "  Yes."  Some  persons  would  like  to  see  a
ghost ;  others  would  like  to  prove  that  the  haunting  is  all  nonsense,
and  to  secure  their  chance  would  prefer  the  haunted  house.  Others
would  fear  that,  though  the  house  could  not  be  haunted,  yet  it  might
be  the  secret  resort  of  disorderly  persons  whose  doings  had  given
rise  and  circulation  to  stories  about  the  house.  Still  others  would  be
influenced  by  the  expectation  of  difficulties  due  to  superstitions  of
servants.  The  discussion  of  these  and  similar  factors  leads  your  com-
mittee to  think  that  the  question  in  the  form  put  would  bring  out
affirmative  answers  from,  1st,  those  who  had  belief  or  half-belief  in
regard  to  haunting  of  houses  ;  2d,  those  who  thought  the  belief  to
have  a  sufficient  standing  in  the  community  to  earn  for  it  a  certain
degree  of  consideration.

Some  of  the  respondents  have  added  explanatory  remarks  to  their
answers.  A  few  of  these  remarks  are  quoted  here  as  verifications  of
what  has  been  said  in  regard  to  the  mental  attitudes  assumed  towards
the  questions :  —

1  Should  you  be  influenced  by  any  feeling  (whether  implying  a  belief  or  not  is  immaterial)  in
regard  1  o :  —

4.  Choosing,  on  your  own  account,  between  two  otherwise  equally  desirable  houses,  one  of
which  was  reputed  to  be  haunted?


220      Report  of  Committee  on  Experimental  JPsychology.

To  3,  "  I  have  no  idea  that  seeing  the  moon  over  either  shoulder
has  the  slightest  influence  on  anything  that  is  to  occur.  Still,  having
heard  the  thing  talked  of  when  I  was  younger,  I  almost  instinctively
try  to  see  the  new  moon  correctly."  To  1,  "Slight  feeling;  no
belief."  To  2,  "  Not  sufficient  to  stop  me  ; "  and  another,  "  I  should
not  mind  beginning  a  voyage  on  Friday  ;  but  in  making  any  experi-
ment, or  beginning  on  tmy  serious  and  to  me  important  work,  I  should
prefer  to  postpone  until  next  day."  To  3  again,  "  Yes  (slight  pass-
ing uneasiness)."

To  question  4,  about  the  haunted  houses,  come  many  answers  with
remarks  appended,  of  which  the  following  are  samples  :  '*  Yes,  not
only  because  hereditarj*  tendencies  are  more  prompt  than  ratiocina-
tions, but  also  because  I  would  not  want  to  be  bothered  with  finding
out  and  remedying  the  mechanical  causes." —  "  Practical  considera-
tions, such  as  servants,  etc.,  would  generally  make  me  reject  a
4  haunted  '  house." — "Yes.  Can't  sell  it  again.  Usually  means
rats." — "Personally  no;  although  I  might  be  influenced  by  likeli-
hood of  relatives  or  friends  disliking  to  visit  a  house  reputed  to  be
haunted."  —  u  I  have  thought  over  this  (question)  how  ridiculous  and
foolish  it  is,  yet  I  feel  as  though  I  must  say  yes."  —  "  Yes  ;  but  only
from  the  investment  point  of  view."  —  u  I  think  I  should  prefer  to
live  in  the  ghostless  house  unless  the  other  tenants  were  unusually
quiet.  My  wife  says,  however,  that  she  has  always  wanted  to  live
in  a  haunted  house."  —  "*I  should  choose  the  haunted  house,  so  it
might  afford  the  opportunity  of  exploding  the  superstition."  —  "I
should  suspect  some  cause  for  the  reputation  of  a  house  being
haunted,  like  rattling  blinds,  rats,  bad  drainage,  closeness,  etc.
Moreover,  I  would  rather  live  in  a  house  where  good  people  had  lived
than  low  and  vicious  ones.  I  have  felt  that  influence."  — "  Yes,  one
day  ;  no,  the  next."  —  "  I  have  no  fear  of  a  haunted  house.  I  fully
believe  in  their  existence."  —  "I  should  be  anxious  to  investigate."

The  answers,  then,  to  the  first  three  questions  would  indicate  the
prevalence  of  a  tendency  to  superstition,  while  the  answers  to  the
fourth  question  would  indicate  the  same,  plus  the  willingness  to  treat
a  certain  superstition  with  respect,  or  at  least  a  show  of  it.

The  answers  have  been  tabulated  according  to  sex  and  age,  as
shown  in  the  following  tables  :  —


Report  of  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology,      221


Table  I.     MEN.


Total

No.

Question.

Age.

1.

3.

3.

4.

Yes.

No.

Yes.

No.

Yes.

No.

Yes.

No.

12-15    .     .

3

0   .      .

3

0   .      .

3

1    .      .

2

1    .      .      .

2

16-20    .     .

14

2  .     .

12

1    .      .

13

2   .      .

12

8  .     .     .

6

21-25    .     .

50

4  .     .

46

5  .     .

45

7  .     .

42

24  .     .

26

26-30    .     .

60

6  .     .

.    54

4  .     .

56

5  .

55

24  .     .

36

31-35    .     .,

45

3  .     .

42

3  .     .

42

6  .     .

39

14  .     .

31

36-40    .     .

33

5  .     .

28

4  .     .     .

29

5  .     .

.    28

13  .     .

.     19

41-45    .     .

30

2  .     .

.  28

1  .     .

29

2  .     .

.    28

13  .     .

17

46-50    .     .

32

5  .     .

27

5  .     .

27

6  .     .

.    26

13  .     .

19

51-55    .

15

0  .     .

15

0  .     .

15

1  .     .

.    14

8  .     .

7

56-60    .     .

14

1  .     .

13

1  .     .

13

3  .     .

.    11

10  .     .

4

63-70    .     .

6

0  .     .

6

0  .     .

6

1  .     .

.      5

2  .     .

4

72-78    .     .

5

1  .     .

4

1  .     .

4

0  .     .

.      5

4  .     .

1

Not  given  .

2

0  .     .

2

0  .     .

2

0  .     .

2

2  .     .

0

Totals  .     .

309

28  .     .

.280

25  .     .

.284

39  .     .

279

136  .     .

172

Table  II.     WOMEN.


Total

No.

Question.

Age.

1.

Yes.

No.

2.

Yes.

No.

3.

Yes.

No.

4.

Yes.

No.

12-15    .     .

5

0   .      .

5

1   .      .      .

4

2  .     .

3

4  .     .     .

1

16-20    .     .

29

7  .     .

22

4  .     .

25

6  .     .

23

19  .     .

10

21-25    .     .

33

3  .     .

30

8  .     .

25

3  .     .

30

27  .     .

6

26-30    .     .

30

4  .     .

26

2  .     .

28

6  .     .

24

18  .     .

11

31-35    .     .

21

3  .     .

18

5  .     .

16

8  .     .

13

14  .     .

7

36-40    .     .

23

4  .     .

19

4  .     .

.    19

4  .     .

19

8  .     .

.     14

41-45    .     .

11

4  .     .

.      7

2  .     .

9

3  .     .

8

7  .     .

4

46-50    .     .

6

3  .     .     .

3

2  .     .

4

3  .     .

3

2  .     .

.       4

51-55    .     .

11

4  .     .

7

1   .     .

10

3  .     .

.      8

9  .     .

2

58-63    .     .

4

3  .     .     .

1

0  .     .

.      4

2  .     .

2

4  .     .

.       0

66-70    .     .

3

0  .     .

3

0  .     .

3

1  .     .

.      2

3  .     .

.       0

Not  given  .

15

5  .     .

10

4  .     .

.    11

4  .     .

11

11  .     .

4

Totals  .     .

191

40  .     .

151

33  .     .

158

45  .     .

.  146

126  .     .

63

222      Report  of  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.

The  comparison  of  these  tables  shows  at  once  a  marked  difference
between  the  men  and  the  women.  There  are  answers  from  309  men
and  191  women.  The  women  are  younger  than  the  men,  as  is
brought  out  in  detail  by

Table  III.

Age  .     .     .     12-15     16-20     21-25     26-30     31-35     36-40     41-45
Men  ...         3  14  50  60  45  33  30

Women  .     .         5  29  33  30  21  23  11

Age    ....     46-50    51-55     56-60     60-70     70-80     Not  given
Men    ....        32  15  14  6  5  2

Women    ...         6  11  0  4  3  15

The  average  of  all  the  ages  given  is  :  —

Men  :  —  36*16  years.
Women  :  —  25  82  years.

The  difference  is  presumably  related  to  the  character  of  the
answers.

Of  the  men  about  one-tenth  express  a  tendency  towards  supersti-
tion by  answering  questions  1,  2,  3  affirmatively.  There  being  309
respondents  one-tenth  would  be  nearly  31,  and  there  are  28,  25,  39
affirmative  answers  to  questions  1,  2,  and  3  respectively.  Of  the
women,  on  the  contrary,  about  one-fifth  answer  affirmatively.  The
total  number  of  women  is  191,  one-fifth  would  be  about  38  ;  the  women
answer  Yes  40,  33,  and  45  times  to  questions  1,  2,  and  3  respectively,
or  38|  times  on  the  average.

In  regard  to  question  4  the  result  is  similar ;  considerably  less
than  one-half  the  men  (136  out  of  308)  answered  Yes.  Of  the
women,  exactly  two- thirds   (126  out  of  189).

If  we  compare  next  the  fourth  question  with  the  preceding  we
see  that  the  number  of  affirmative  answers  to  question  4  is  for  men
over  four  times,  for  women  about  three  times  as  great  as  to  questions
1-3.

Another  point  to  be  noted  is  that  for  the  first  three  questions
there  is  an  order  of  precedence,  which  is  the  same  for  both  sexes  as
regards  the  affirmative  replies  :  —


Question.

Men.

"Women,

3

39

45

1

28

40

2

25

33

Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.  223

The  coincidence  is  probably  not  the  result  of  chance,  but  indicates
a  prevalent  order  of  preference,  and  we  may  say  that  there  is  more
frequently  a  tendency  to  superstition  about  seeing  the  new  moon  over
the  left  shoulder  than  about  sitting  down  thirteen  to  table  or  begin-
ning a  voyage  on  Friday.  The  superstitions  which  are  of  distinctly
Christian  origin  have  less  hold  than  the  one  which  is  purely  pagan,
at  least  by  general  repute.  This  curious  fact  will  awaken  several
interesting   questions    in   every  one's  mind.

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  said  that  so  far  as  our  statistics  go,  —
of  the  educated  portion  of  our  community,  about  one  man  in  ten
and  two  women  in  ten,  have  a  tendency  to  superstition,  and  that
about  four  men  in  ten,  and  six  women  in  ten,  are  inclined  to  pay
some  attention  to  a  superstition  actually  encountered.  These  pro-
portions are  not  only  very  large  in  themselves,  but  much  larger  than
your  committee  anticipated.  The  well-educated  class  of  New  Eng-
landers  is  probably  as  rationalistic  a  body  of  persons  as  any  geo-
graphical group  in  the  world.  The  results  of  our  statistics  may  be
considered  as  fairly  representative.  Hence  we  must  believe  that
even  in  the  most  rationalistic  community  there  is  to-day  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  individual  members,  especially  of  the  women,  whose
minds  inhabit  the  border-land,  at  least,  of  superstition.  This  dis-
covery, as  we  believe  our  conclusion  will  appear  to  many  of  you,  is
very  significant  in  view  of  the  work  which  has  been  undertaken  of
collecting  stories  from  the  public,  that  is  to  say,  from  members  of  the
public.  It  binds  us  to  greater  caution  than  ever,  for  reasons  that
are  too  obvious  to  require  further  exposition.

That  women  are  more  inclined  towards  superstition  is  probably  due
in  part  to  the  character  of  their  education,  in  part  to  the  absence  of
that  buffeting  with  the  world  which  brings  men  closer  to  actualities.
How  far  the  inclination  is  inherent  in  the  feminine  nature  we  leave
undecided.

CHARLES   S.   MINOT,  Cliairman.


REPORT    OF   THE    COMMITTEE    ON    APPARITIONS    AND

HAUNTED  HOUSES.

The  first  observation  which,  as  chairman  of  the  committee,  I  ven-
ture to  make  on  occasion  of  this  report  is  that  the  name  of  the  com-
mittee seems  to  me  personally  not  wholly  satisfactory.  The  name,
suggesting,  as  it  does,  that  our  time  as  a  committee  is  mainly  spent
in  visiting  haunted   houses  and   ghost-ridden  graveyards,  does  not


224  Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc,

describe  our  actual  office.  We  have  often  expressed  our  willingness
to  visit  haunted  houses,  or  to  pass  the  night  in  any  promising  place,
for  the  sake  of  seeing,  of  explaining,  or  of  converting  from  the  error
of  its  ways  any  genuine  ghost  in  the  city  or  in  the  neighborhood  of
Boston.  We  have  heard  of  several  houses  that  once  were  believed
to  be  haunted  ;  but  in  no  case  has  the  present  condition  of  these
houses  warranted  any  interference  on  our  part.  The  phenomena
have,  in  all  the  reported  cases,  ceased  for  some  time,  usually  for
many  years  before  your  committee  was  heard  of ;  and  it  seems  still
improbable  that  in  future  we  shall  be  very  frequently  called  upon  to
do  what  so  far  we  have  had  no  occasion  to  undertake,  i.e.,  to  visit
houses  now  inhabited  by  vivacious  and  demonstrative  ghosts.
While,  therefore,  I  indeed  see  no  ground  for  discontinuing  our
vigilance,  such  as  it  is,  in  watching  for  reports  of  haunted  houses,  I
must  confess  that  all  our  more  interesting  facts  belong  under  quite
another  category.

More  or  less  completely  and  objectively  verified,  or  at  an}^  rate
conceivably  verifiable  phantasms,  visions,  dreams,  or  presentiments
have  been  offered  to  us  by  various  correspondents.  These,  mainly
through  documents  obtained  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  have
already  been  examined  with  such  completeness  as  our  time  and  our
circumstances  h:ive  permitted.  The  incidents  that  have  been  most
frequently  brought  to  our  attention  are  such  events  as  a  dream  or  a
presentiment  that  is  believed  by  the  narrator  of  the  experience  to
have  been  verified  ;  or  a  vision  that  has  had  some  important  relation
to  persons  or  places  which  were  at  the  time  very  distant  from  the
subject  to  whom  the  vision  came.  I  need  not  say  to  any  one  ac-
quainted with  current  discussions  that  this  part  of  our  work  is  by
far  the  most  likely  to  furnish  results  which,  whether  positive  or
negative,  may  have  a  real  bearing  upon  important  modern  contro-
versies.

In  view  of  the  prominence  of  this  department  of  our  research,  I
venture,  then,  to  suggest  that  the  name  u  Committee  on  Apparitions
and  Presentiments"  might  be  a  more  instructive  one  than  our
present  name.  I  ought  to  add  that  I  make  this  suggestion  on  my
own  individual  responsibility.  The  rather  amusing  obloquy  that  of
course  attaches  to  the  name  "  Committee  on  Haunted  Houses"  has,
I  believe,  been  heartily  enjoyed  by  all  the  members  of  the  com-
mittee from  the  very  first.  My  only  reason  for  suggesting  the  change
is  the  possibly  greater  clearness  of  the  new  name.  •

Passing  to  our  cases  themselves,  it  is  a  very  natural  result  of  our
public  request  for  facts  that  the  most  of  the  cases  which  have  been
submitted  to  us  by  our  correspondents  are  narratives  dependent  for


Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.  225

their  verification  not  so  much  upon  documents  as  upon  the  memory
of  certain  persons.  For  instance,  A  remembers  having  suffered  from
some  accident  several  years  ago.  B  remembers  having  had  either  a
presentiment  of  the  nature  of  this  accident  to  A,  or  a  vision  of  the
scene  at  the  moment  of  the  accident.  B  also  remembers  going  to
hunt  for  A  at  once,  or  passing  a  sleepless  night  because  A  was  too  far
away  to  be  reached.  B  still  further  remembers  mentioning  his  expe-
rience to  some  third  person,  C,  before  word  could  come  from  A.  C  also,
on  the  basis  of  his  own  memory,  confirms  the  story  of  B  as  to  this
latter  point.  Finally  all  three  remember  comparing  their  various
experiences  when  they  first  met  after  the  accident  and  remarking  on
the  closeness  of  the  coincidence.  Thus  the  presentiment  is  regarded
by  them  all  as  verified.

Stories  of  this  kind,  from  persons  of  undoubted  sincerity,  are  of
course  very  valuable.     The  English  Society  has  collected  many  hun-
dreds of  them  ;  we  have  received  a  respectable  number,  sometimes  with
yet  more  evidence  than  in  the  supposed  case  above  described  ;  this
evidence,  however,  resting  solely  upon  the  memories  of  our  narrators.
The  desirability,  meanwhile,  of  getting  yet  better  evidence  than  the
memories  of  even  a  considerable  number  of   the  best  of   witnesses
has  often  been  pointed  out  to  the  Society.     We  want,  indeed,  to  hear
of  all  sorts  of  cases,  and  even  of  purely  subjective  and  unverified  ex-
periences and  impressions,  when  they  fall  within  our  scope  at  all.
We  undertake  to  decide  nothing  d,  priori.     We  cordially  welcome  all
accounts   by  sincere  and  intelligent   persons.     What  such  accounts
may  in  the  end  prove  we  shall  not  know  until  the  evidence  is  all  in.
But  we  want  once  more  to  insist  upon  the  obvious  fact,  sometimes
forgotten  by  our  correspondents,  that  an  authentic  letter  or  diary  in
the  hand  is  worth  not  only  two  but  twenty  remembered  facts  in  the
bush.     If  A  himself,  or  some  one  else,  recorded  at  the  time  the  date
and  the  hour  of  his  accident,  and  if  B  can  show  an  authentic  contem-
porary record  of  his  presentiment,  then  the  only  possible  alternative
to  the  hypothesis  of  a  true  causal  relation  between  the  two  experi-
ences is  the  hypothesis  of  a  chance  coincidence,  and  this  latter  hypoth-
esis might  in  time  be  virtually  eliminated  by  a  sufficient    number  of
close  and  elaborate  coincidences.     I  hardly  need  say  that  as  yet  no
such  number  of  coincidences  is  in  our  hands.     Yet  already  we  have
several  cases  of  the  required   sort.     Documentary  evidence  is,  then,
sometimes  forthcoming,  and    this  fact    encourages   us    to  beg  most
earnestly  for  cooperation  in  obtaining  yet  more  cases  of  that  sort.
Our  net  is  large,  and  is  spread  for  many  kinds  of  fish  ;  but  the  largest
fish  are  of  course  the  most  welcome  to  us,  since  we  are  looking  once
for  all  for  curious  things.


226  Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.

As  examples  of  cases  of  the  documenta^  type  I  here  give  two  that,
taken  alone,  would  of  course  seem  to  be  mere  chance  coincidences  ;
but,  if  such  cases  were  of  daily  occurrence  to  us  all,  the  hypothesis
of  mere  coincidence  would  at  last  become  absurd.  Whereabouts  the
line  could  be  drawn  were  the  actual  cases  to  appear  more  and  more
numerous  as  our  work  goes  on,  it  is  impossible  to  predict,  because  so
much  depends  upon  the  quality  of  the  coincidences,  as  well  as  upon
their  quantity  ;  and  it  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  the  recent  at-
tempt of  the  authors  of  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living"  to  apply  the
theory  of  probability  to  their  facts  has  not  yet  taken  a  logically
satisfactory  form.  But  it  is  not  scientific  to  lay  down  beforehand
what  we  shall  admit  to  be  demonstrable  by  a  long  series  of  complex
facts  not  yet  examined.  Let  us  get  the  facts  if  we  can,  and  talk
about  the  Irypothesis  of  chance  coincidence  afterwards.

The  first  of  the  two  documentary  cases  that  I  want  here  to  report,
by  way  of  mere  specimens  of  the  type,  is  an  amusing  case  as  to  the
nature  of  the  coincidence,  so  free  from  any  ghostly  horror  and  of
any  sublimity  is  this  coincidence.  Yet  the  case  is  precisely  of  a  sort
of  which  we  should  be  glad  to  get  ten  thousand  authentic  and  recent
examples,  if  they  exist ;  for,  if  we  got  so  many,  we  might  be  on  the
high  road  to  some  very  interesting  results.

A  lady  of  Boston,  whose  position  is  an  absolute  guarantee  of  per-
fect good  faith,  wrote  from  Hamburg,  in  Germatvy,  on  the  23d  of
June  last,  to  her  sister,  who  was  at  that  time  in  Boston.  Of  a  part
of  this  letter  we  have  an  authentic  copy  in  our  own  possession.  "  I
very  nearly  wrote  from  the  Hague,"  says  the  letter,  "  to  say  that  I
should  be  very  thankful  when  we  had  a  letter  from  you  of  the  18th  of
June,  saying  that  you  were  well  and  happy.  ...  In  the  night
of  the  17th  I  had  what  I  suppose  to  be  a  nightmare,  but  it  all  seemed
to  belong  to  you  .  .  .  and  to  be  a  horrid  pain  in  your  head,  as  if
it  were  being  forcibly  jammed  into  an  iron  casque,  or  some  such  pleas-
ant instrument  of  torture.  The  queer  part  of  it  was,  my  own  dissocia-
tion from  the  pain,  and  conviction  that  it  was  yours.  I  suppose  it  was
some  slight  painful  sensation  magnified  into  something  quite  severe
by  a  half-asleep  condition.  It  will  be  a  fine  example  of  what  the  So-
ciety for  Psychical  Research  ought  to  be  well  supplied  with,  —  an
AJinnng  which  came  to  nothing."

The  originality  and  freshness  of  just  this  experience  of  a  double
dream-personalit}7  is  at  once  plain  to  any  one  who  has  experienced  or
has  studied  any  of  the  various  sorts  of  double  personality  shown  in
some  dreams  in  certain  forms  of  delirium  and  in  other  abnormal
states.  The  letter,  written  from  Europe  six  days  after  the  night-
mare, leaves  no  room  for  supposing  that  any  now-forgotten  corre-


Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.  227

spondence  had  passed  meanwhile.  It  is,  therefore,  interesting  to  find
on  a  bill  made  out  by  a  prominent  dentist  of  Boston,  under  date  of
June  19  of  this  }'ear,  and  addressed  to  the  husband  of  the  lady  to
whom  the  foregoing  letter  was  written,  an  item  for  1§  hours'  work
on  June  17.  It  is  also  interesting  to  learn  from  the  lady  in  ques-
tion that  this  work  was  performed  for  herself,  and  was  done  upon  a
large  and  decidedly  painful  filling.  The  discomfort  succeeding  this
work  continued  as  a  dull  pain  for  some  hours,  in  such  wise  that,  dur-
ing the  afternoon  of  the  17th,  the  patient  could  not  forget  the  diffi-
culty at  all.  She  slept,  however,  as  usual  at  night.  The  nightmare
in  Europe  followed  the  operation  in  Boston  by  a  good  many  hours  ;
but  then  the  pain  of  the  tooth  returned  daily  for  some  three  weeks.
The  coincidence  is  therefore  close  enough  to  be  quite  noteworthy,
and  the  facts  themselves  are  beyond  question.  No  single  case  alone
proves,  or  even  makes  probable,  the  existence  of  telepathic  tooth-
aches ;  but,  if  there  are  any  more  cases  of  this  sort,  we  want  to  hear
of  them,  and  that  all  the  more  because  no  folk-lore  and  no  supernat-
ural horrors  have  as  yet  mingled  with  the  natural  and  well-known
impressions  that  people  associate  with  the  dentist's  chair.  What  one
case  cannot  do,  many  cases  together  might  accomplish,  if  they  would
only  come  to  hand.

The  other  case  above  referred  to  is  once  more  a  case  of  physical
pain.  Chance  coincidence  is  especially  suggested  by  some  of  the
facts  as  narrated,  yet  the  other  facts  are  more  noteworthy.

On  Jan.  31,  1886,  at  10  A.M.,  Mrs.  T.,  a  lady  living  in  a  town  in  the
West,  writes  to  a  member  of  Congress,  the  husband  of  her  daughter,
in  Washington.  We  have  an  authentic  copy  of  this  letter,  whereof
the  original  has  been  seen  by  Mr.  Hodgson  and  myself.  The  letter
explains  a  telegram  which  Mrs.  T.  had  sent  only  three  hours  before,
inquiring  about  her  daughter's  health.  The  original  of  this  telegram
has  also  been  in  our  hands.     The  telegram  reads:  u  To  the  Hon.

,  House  Representatives,  Washington,  D.C.     I  can.

Will  come  if  Nell  needs  me."  The  signature  is  the  mother's  name.
Mrs.  T.'s  contemporaneous  letter  of  explanation  first  says  that  she
had  been  for  some  days  anxious  about  her  daughter  "  Nellie's  "  health,
although  there  had  been  no  actual  illness  of  late.  Letters  from
Washington  had  been  lacking  for  some  days  ;  the  last  one  had  re-
ported the  daughter  as  having  just  returned  from  making  fifteen  calls,
"very  tired,"  and  "nearly  frozen."  There  was  therefore  some
ground  for  a  mother's  anxiety.  But  it  is  the  vividness  of  the  mother's
experience  that  makes  the  coincidence  at  least  suggestive.  "  I
waked,"  says  Mrs.  T.,  "  last  night,  between  12  and  1  o'clock,  deeply
impressed  with  the  feeling  that  Nell  needed  me.     Wanted  to  get  up


228  Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.

and  send  L.  with  a  telegram.  I  had  never  before  thought  of  the
possibility  of  such  a  thing  happening.  If  I  had  consulted  or  followed
my  own  inclinations,  I  would  have  dressed  and  gone  down  to  the
sitting-room."  Later,  however,  Mrs.  T.  went  to  sleep  again.  But
in  the  morning  the  vivid  impression  returns.  At  7  A.M.  Mrs.  T.
dispatched  the  telegram,  and  writes  apparently  before  she  receives  an
answer  ;  for  only  in  the  margin  of  the  letter  is  added  before  mailing:,
the  note  :  "  Telegram  here  ;  thank  goodness  you  are  well."  Exactly
what  this  return  telegram  said  we  do  not  know  from  a  direct  sight  of
it ;  but,  as  a  fact,  the  lady  in  Washington,  whose  mother  in  the  West
had  had  so  vivid  an  experience,  had  been  seriously  ill  during  the  same
night,  although  the  morning  had  found  her  much  better.  Her  attack
was  a  very  sudden  one.  She  describes  it  from  memory  as  "  neuralgia
of  the  lungs,"  with  a  "  hard  chill,"  and  gives  the  date  as  January  30.
"  It  must  have  been  about  the  hour  mentioned  in  my  mother's  letter,
that  I  at  hist  exclaimed,  4  Oh,  don't  you  wish  ma  was  here  !  I  shall
send  for  her  to-morrow  if  I  am  not  better.'  "  In  the  morning  comes
the  telegram  from  the  West.  But  the  patient  is  much  better,  and,
according  to  her  memory,  both  she  and  her  husband  as  well  as  her
brother-in-law,  who  had  come  in  near  the  time  when  the  telegram
was  received,  were  puzzled  at  the  mother's  uneasiness,  and  replied
by  telegram  :  "  We  are  all  [well?]  ;l  what  is  the  matter  with  you?"
From  both  the  husband  and  the  brother-in-law  we  have  accounts  in
substantial  agreement  with  the  foregoing,  adding  details  as  to  the
circumstances  of  the  illness,  and  as  to  the  surprise  caused  by  the
telegram.

Here,  again,  is  a  case  from  which  the  folk-lore  element,  at  least,  is
absent.  The  presumption  of  a  mere  chance  coincidence  is  at  the
least  somewhat  obscured  by  the  vividness  and  quality  of  the  mother's
impression,  although,  of  course,  for  an}'  single  case  of  the  sort,  chance
coincidence  is  the  natural  explanation.  But  our  problem  is  to  find
whether  such  cases  are  as  purely  sporadic  as  they  ought  to  be  if
the3T  are  only  chance  coincidences  ;  and,  as  has  been  said  above,  one
cannot  estimate  such  complex  probabilities  d,  priori.  We  must  first
get  the  cases.

These  are  two  cases  only  from  a  number,  many  of  which  are
highly^  important  and  interesting ;  and  I  cite  these  cases  here,  not  as
if  they  were  thrilling,  but  because  they  indicate  what  we  want.  Your
committee  lias  absolutely  no  pet  hypotheses  to  defend.  What  we
are  longing  for  is  -that  mass  of  facts  which  would  be  necessary  as  a
basis  for  any  hypothesis.     Our  report   ought  at  least  to  show   you

1  This  word,  or  its  equivalent,  is  omitted  in  the  letter  written  to  us  by  the  daughter.


Report  of  Committee  on  Apparitions,  Etc.  229

what  we  want,  and  that  in  our  way,  and  with  our  very  limited  time,
we  are  trying  to  do  our  work.

The  amount  of  correspondence  now  done  for  us  by  the  Secretary
of  the  Society  is  gratifyingly  large  and  is  increasing  ;  and  it  promises
more  and  more  to  yield  valuable  fruit.  For  my  part,  while  I  am  not
yet  at  all  prepared  to  accept  the  hypothesis  of  genuine  telepathy,  I
regard  most  of  the  accounts  received,  even  when  they  relate  to  purely
subjective  experiences,  as  decidedly  and  deeply  important.  Even  if
a  given  narrative  is  unverifiable,  even  if  it  is,  as  Prof.  Stanley  Hall
has  lately  asserted  concerning  the  stories  in  the  "Phantasms  of  the
Living,"  only  an  instance  of  the  mylhopoietic  tendency  in  its  modern
form,  I  still  find  in  the  examination  of  these  subjective  cases,  granted
only  that  they  are  sincerely  reported,  a  basis  for  further  research  in
comparative  psychology  which  we  ought  to  be  glad  to  help  in  laying.
Call  a  given  mental  experience  slightly  abnormal,  and  you  at  once
give  it  a  place  in  that  still  dark  but  always  intensely  interesting  and
vastly  significant  region  of  psychical  life  which  lies  between  the  dry  and
sober  regions  of  bare  common  sense  and  the  wildernesses  of  insanity.
The  merely  sane  man,  in  his  more  public  and  simpler  aspects,  is
fairly,  though  still  very  superficially,  known  to  science.  The  insane
man  proper  has  for  years  been  studied  by  the  specialists.  But  of
the  fantastic  man,  of  the  dreamer,  of  the  man  who  lives  a  perfectly
sane  life  in  all  but  just  some  one  or  two  realms  of  his  mind,  but  who
in  those  realms  indulges  in  some  sort  of  abnormal  fancies,  or  is  the
helpless  prey  of  some  oppressive  and  diseased  emotion  or  dream,  of
him  we  know  in  a  scientific  way  far  too  little.  Yet  of  such  men  the
larger  half  of  modern  civilized  humanity  is  probably  made  up.  This
wide  and  vast  border- land  region  of  human  consciousness  we  need  to
study.  Hypnotism  has  lately  opened  a  new  and  highly  important
path  for  explorations  in  that  field.  But  as  I  now  suggest:  quite
apart  from  the  objective^  verifiable  phantasms  and  presentiments,
those  which  are  not  veritable  may  be  found  to  follow  types  and  to
show  laws  whose  study  shall  lead  us  into  yet  other  parts  of  that
romantic  and  unexplored  country.  No  one  who  realizes  how  closely
the  normal  and  the  abnormal  are  joined  in  human  life,  how  complex
and  delicate  are  their  relations,  how  subtle  and  significant  are  their
mutual  influences,  should  hesitate  to  aid  in  any  promising  research  in
so  profoundly  and  tragically  important  a  province  of  the  human
spirit.

JOSIAH   ROYCE,  Chairman.


230       Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMITTEE   ON   MEDIUMISTIC

PHENOMENA.

The  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena  desire  to  submit  to
the  Society  the  following  report :  —

Since  October,  1886,  this  committee,  or  at  least  a  portion  of  its
members,  has  devoted  considerable  time  to  the  investigation  of
mediumistic  phenomena,  and  although  many  of  the  facts  are  not  yet
in  a  suitable  shape  for  presentation  to  the  Society,  they  feel  justified
in  making  the  following  statements  :  —

I.  That  it  is  in  their  opinion  inadvisable  to  undertake  further
investigation  in  regard  to  professional  paid  materializing  mediums,
inasmuch  as  all  the  materializing  stances  yet  attended  by  them  have
been  held  under  conditions  which  rendered  any  scientific  investiga-
tion impossible.

II.  That  if  at  an}7  time  mediums  of  reasonably  honest  antece-
dents can  be  found,  who  are  willing  to  attempt  to  materialize  spirits
under  conditions  acceptable  to  the  committee,  the  committee  will
be  happy  to  undertake  a  thorough  examination  of  the  phenomena
which  occur.

III.  That  the  committee,  however,  believe  that  there  are  certain
cases  of  alleged  "  mediumship  "  which  are  worthy  of  investigation,  but
they  are  compelled  to  state  that  no  thorough  or  scientific  investiga-
tion can  be  undertaken  by  them  until  much  more  money  is  placed  at
their  disposal.

The  committee  have,  for  example,  already  partially  investigated  a
"  medium "  who  has  made  a  decidedly  favorable  impression  on
certain  members.  Such  reports  of  sittings  with  her  as  are  already  in
the  possession  of  the  committee  are,  however,  not  sufficient  to  enable
them  to  arrive  at  a  definite  conclusion.  It  is  very  desirable  that
more  sittings  should  be  held  and  that  exact  stenographic  reports
thereof  should  be  made.  This,  lack  of  funds  at  present  prevents  on:
undertaking.

IV.  That  the  committee  have  had  much  difficulty  in  finding  persons
not  professional  mediums  who  were  willing  to  give  stances  in  which
41  mediumistic  phenomena"  took  place,  and  that  in  those  cases  where
such  stances  were  given,  the  results  were  negative.  The  committee
would  therefore  beg  all  interested  in  this  subject  to  send  to  the
Secretary  of  the  Society  the  names  of  any  persons,  not  professional,
who  would  be  willing  to  exert  their  powers  in  this  direction  in  the
presence  of  one  or  more  members  of  the  committee  and  subject  to
conditions  suitable  to  a  scientific  investigation.


Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena,       231

THE    BASIS    OF    INVESTIGATION    OF    MEDIUMISTIC   PHENOMENA.1

In  order  that  an  investigation  of  mediumistic  phenomena  should  be
of  real  value  it  must  be  undertaken  as  far  as  possible  in  an  entirely
unprejudiced  and  unbiassed  frame  of  mind,  and  the  investigators
should,  as  far  as  is  possible  in  human  nature,  be  equally  willing  that
their  results  should  be  found  on  either  side.  They  must,  on  the  one
hand,  overcome  the  natural  tendency  of  all  persons  to  desire  and
believe  the  marvellous  without  thorough  investigation,  and  on  the
other  hand  they  must  not  through  a  too  narrow  conservatism  close
their  eyes  to  facts  which  are  inexplicable  by  ordinary  causes.

The  committee,  in  considering  this  subject,  have  felt  that  they  had
a  certain  basis  to  start  from  in  the  investigation  of  these  facts.  This
basis  is  the  same  as  that  from  which  we  should  start  on  any  other
scientific  investigation,  and  it  is  in  our  belief  the  only  basis  on  which
a  scientific  investigation  can  be  made.  It  is  a  fundamental  rule  of
all  science  that  no  phenomenon  shall  be  ascribed  to  a  new  law — a
new  order  of  things,  a  new  principle  of  the  universe  —  unless  it  can
be  shown  that  it  is  not  capable  of  explanation  by  any  of  the  now
known  and  accepted  laws.  This  holds  in  every  branch  of  science,  in
physics  as  well  as  in  logic,  in  mediumistic  phenomena  as  well  as  in
geology.  This  law  is  of  universal  application  and  must  always  be
considered  by  any  scientific  observer.

In  the  present  investigation  its  application  is  obvious.  We  are
brought  face  to  face  with  assumed  facts  and  phenomena  which,  ac-
cording to  their  honest  defenders  (the  dishonest  ones  may  be  put
aside,  clever  as  they  often  are),  are  not  explicable  by  any  ordinary
and  known  laws  of  nature.  From  our  stand-point  our  first  duty  is  to
determine  the  truth  of  these  statements,  and  our  work  is  at  the  very
beginning  divided  into  two  great  branches.

I.  To  test  and  determine  the  existence  of  these  facts  and
phenomena.

II.  Their  existence  being  determined,  to  see  if  they  are  not  capable
of  some  explanation  in  accordance  with  known  laws.

And  it  is  not  until  we  have  both  determined  the  existence  of  these
phenomena  and  have  exhausted  and  proved  iucorrect  every  explana-
tion by  known  laws  or  forces,  that  we  have  a  scientific  right  to  con-
sider the  possible  existence  of  some  hitherto  undetected  law.

First,  in  regard  lo  the  existence  of  the  facts  and  phenomena  vouched
for  by  presumably  honest  and  intelligent  witnesses.  This  is,  of
course,  the  primary  branch  of  the  subject.     If  the  facts  are  not  true,

1  The  following  paper,  by  the  chairman,  Dr.  W.  N.  Bnllard,  was  approved  by  the  committee,
and  is  added  to  their  report.


232       Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena,

and  the  phenomena  do  not  exist,  our  inquiry  ends  at  once.  It  might
seem,  and  undoubtedly  does  seem,  to  many  people  that  facts  vouched
for  by  so  many  witnesses,  some  of  the  highest  moral  character  and
some  of  great  scientific  attainment,  must  be  true,  and  that  it  would
simply  be  loss  of  time  to  seek  a  further  proof  of  their  existence.  But
he  who  goes  slowly  is  at  least  more  likely  to  go  safely,  and  science
takes  nothing  for  granted.  As  we  examine  more  carefully  the  value
of  human  testimony  we  are  surprised  to  detect  how  frequent  and  how
serious  are  its  lapses.  How  often  is  it  that  the  things  which  we  see
with  our  eyes  and  hear  with  our  ears  and  feel  with  our  hands  are  not
so  as  we  have  seen  and  heard  and  felt.  That  this  is  very  often  so  is
one  of  the  sad  and  solemn  facts  of  life,  but  it  is  a  fact.  Fortunately
for  us,  it  does  not  occur  so  often  in  regard  to  things  to  which  we  are
accustomed  and  in  relation  to  which  we  draw  daily  conclusions,  but  it
does  occur  very  frequently  in  regard  to  certain  classes  of  phenomena,
and  especially  in  regard  to  classes  which,  if  not  identical  with,  at
least  bear  a  great  similarity  to,  those  which  we  are  called  upon  to  in-
vestigate. It  is  not  our  desire  to  enter  here  upon  the  vast  subject  of
human  credibility,  or,  in  other  words,  of  the  value  of  human  testimony,
but  we  cannot  pass  it  over  altogether,  especially  in  what  relates  to
our  subject.  Casting  aside  at  once  and  as  valueless  all  that  testimony
in  favor  of  mediumistic  phenomena  which  we  have  reason  to  suppose
is  either  fraudulent  or  hired, —  in  other  words,  in  regard  to  the  honesty
of  which  we  have  any  suspicion, —  we  are  at  once  brought  face  to  face
with  a  large  mass  of  perfectly  honest  but  unskilled  testimony,  the
ordinary  testimony  of  the  average  honest  man  and  woman.  What  is
to  be  done  with  such  testimony  as  this?  It  would  undoubtedly  seem
at  first  sight  to  be  irrefutable  ;  that  we  must  take  the  facts  as  they
are  stated  without  further  comment.  But  a  little  further  personal
investigation  shows  the  error  of  this.  We  find  not  only  the  average
amount  of  error  in  the  testimony  of  persons  of  this  class,  who  are  with
us  accidentally  or  otherwise  in  our  investigations,  but  we  find  certain
special  sources  of  error  in  the  consideration  of  these  phenomena,
special  and  peculiar  to  the  conditions  under  which  the  phenomena
occur.

The  first  source  of  error  is  a  much  more  frequent  one  than  might
be  supposed,  and  affects  nearly  every  person,  skilled  or  unskilled,
stupid  or  clever,  susceptible  or  insusceptible,  who  is  witness  to  or
present  at  these  exhibitions.  This  is  the  natural  and  inherent  ten-
dency of  the  human  race  to  delight  in  mysteiy,  to  take  pleasure  in  what
it  cannot  understand,  and  in  its  readiness  to  attribute  that,  of  which
the  significance  and  the  explanation  are  not  clear,  to  supernatural
agencies.  This  tendency  is  unfortunately,  indeed,  at  times  played  upor


Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.       233

b}7  certain  persons,  sometimes  themselves  deluded,  but  sometimes  only
fraudulent  impostors,  and  perhaps  most  frequently  half  self-deluded,
who  assure  and  assert,  and,  by  mixing  hysterical  fancies,  actual  facts,
and  mystical  ideas,  and  spreading  over  the  whole  the  protection  of
a  religious  belief,  produce  a  hodge-podge  or  medley  of  fact  and  fic-
tion, which  in  many  cases  can  never  be  more  than  partially  un-
ravelled, and  which  they  attempt  only  too  frequently  to  withdraw  from
investigation  under  the  pretence  of  its  sanctity.  This  affectation  or
pretence  of  sanctity  unquestionably  prevents  man^7  persons  from  going
farther  in  doubt.  They  accept  unhesitating!}'  a  thing  which  under
other  circumstances  they  would  investigate,  because  it  is  unholy  to
doubt  and  because  it  offends  other  people's  religious  beliefs.  More-
over, the  mystery  and  the  religion  act  and  react  upon  each  other.

Thus  are  many  honest  persons  rendered  utterly  incapable  of  giv-
ing accurate  testimony.  The}'  are  told  that  they  must  receive
things  on  faith;  they  do  receive  them  on  faith  (partially  of  course),
and  finally  they  come  to  really  believe  not  only  the  theories  they  are
taught,  but,  as  an  accompaniment  and  corollary,  that  the  phenomena
they  see  are  what  they  are  said  to  be.  The  extent  to  which  this  can
be  carried,  even  with  people  of  at  least  ordinary  intelligence  in  other
directions,  is  perfectly  extraordinary,  and  almost  incredible  to  those
who  have  not  studied  this  side  of  human  nature.  For  example,  we
have  not  once  only  been  told  by  persons,  to  all  appearance  true
believers,  that  they  had  seen  and  conversed  with  relatives  from  the
spirit-land,  but  that  these  relatives  did  not  in  the  least  resemble  what
they  were  when  on  earth.  They  recognized  them,  not  by  sight  nor  by
any  known  means  of  recognition,  but  by  a  sensation  that  it  was  they.
We  have  seen  figures  recognized  by  persons,  whom  we  have  no  rea-
son to  suspect  of  dishonesty,  as  their  near  relatives,  at  stances  where
later  the  principal  performers  were  shown  to  have  been  simply  skilful
impostors,  and  the  figures  either  the  medium  herself  or  trained  and
hired  accomplices.

Another  source  of  error  is  physical.  It  is  due  to  the  ina-
bilit}'  of  the  very  large  majority  of  persons  to  perceive  accurately
the  details  of  even  a  moderately  complicated  occurrence,  or  at  any
rate  to  be  able  to  recall  these  details  immediately  after  the  occur-
rence has  taken  place.  Very  few  people  realize  this  inability  in
themselves  or  even  in  others,  and  the  majority  would  become  ex-
tremely indignant  if  told  of  it  as  applied  to  themselves.  Neverthe-
less it  exists,  and  its  existence  can  be  proved.  Of  course  the  more
complicated  the  occurrence  and  the  longer  its  duration  the  greater
the  difficulty,  other  things  being  equal.  Naturally,  in  cases  where
practised  persons  are  using  their  skill  to  throw  their  audience  off  the


234       Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

track,  the  difficulty  is  enormously  increased.  Not  only,  however,
is  the  average  person  unable  to  relate  accurately  every  detail  of
an  ordinary  occurrence,  but  even  when  his  attention  is  especially
called  to  the  subject  and  he  devotes  his  whole  mind  to  observation,
even  then  a  certain  number  of  actions  and  events  either  escape
his  notice  or  their  real  significance  is  not  perceived.  Many  an  action
is  unquestionably  perceived  by  us,  which  produces  a  very  feeble
mental  impression,  often  scarcely  rising  into  consciousness  or  ab-
solutely not  doing  S£>,  being  put  aside,  probably,  from  the  uncon-
scious persuasion  of  its  unimportance  and  want  of  bearing  upon  the
subject  of  our  thoughts,  or  upon  our  general  life.  But  even  suppos-
ing our  perception  to  be  perfect, —  and  for  the  sake  of  argument  we
are  willing  to  make  this  assumption, —  supposing  that  every  important
fact  has  been  perceived,  we  have  only  reached  the  very  first  step.  It
is  not  facts  themsejves,  but  the  deductions  from  facts,  which  form  our
basis  of  life.  If  we  know  all  the  facts  in  the  world,  and  draw  false
deductions  from  them,  our  conclusions  will  be  falsely  reached.  In
regard  to  the  ordinary  facts  of  life,  our  conclusions,  having  been  con-
firmed empirically  thousands  of  times,  are  likely  to  be  correct ;  but  when
we  cross  the  boundary  line  of  ordinary  experience,  and  turn  our
attention  to  unknown  and  peculiar  phenomena,  we  have  no  such  guar-
antee. Our  deductions,  to  have  real  value,  must  receive  some  corrob-
oration, if  not  absolute  proof.

A  wain,  as  the  time  of  an  event  or  series  of  events  or  occurrences
grows  more  distant,  man  becomes  not  only  less  and  less  able  to  recall
the  details  which  impressed  him  least,  but  he  is  liable  to  many  abso-
lute errors.

Still  another  form  of  error  is  dependent  on  the  class  of  phenomena
which  we  are  called  upon  to  observe,  and  the  conditions  under  which
they  exist.  As  has  already  been  said  elsewhere,  the  conditions  under
which  the  phenomena  are  offered  for  observation  are  unhappily  almost
always  such  as  entirely  to  preclude  any  satisfactory  examination,  and
in  many  cases  even  the  use  of  the  ordinary  senses  is  denied.  Most
unfortunate1 '?/,  also,  the  conditions  are  usually  those  which  will  most
tend  to  further  and  aid  imposture  and  fraud.  Spirits  who  can
only  appear  in  the  dark  and  only  to  those  who  already  either  believe  or
are  predisposed  to  believe,  who,  when  they  do  appear,  reveal  nothing
of  any  importance  to  mankind,  nothing  that  was  not  either  known
before  or  might  readily  be  guessed  or  is  entirely  insusceptible  of  proof
so  that  assertion  or  denial  is  alike  vain  and  useless,  such  spirits  will
always  appear  suspicious.

Since  fraud  has  so  often  been  discovered  among  professional  me-
diums, fraud  must  always  be  suspected  ;  and  no  investigations  in  which


Report  of  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.       235

a  rational  possibility  exists,  or  in  which  such  conditions  are  demanded,
that  fraud  is  rendered  safe  and  undetectable,  are  worthy  of  scien-
tific consideration.  Not  only  are  in  many  cases  the  conditions  of  the
phenomena  such  that  they  are  incapable  of  any  scientific  value,  but
the  character  of  the  phenomena  themselves  is  often  a  very  doubtful
one.  There  are  few  or  none  of  the  ordinary  physical  phenomena
which  are  not  capable  of  being  produced  b}^  trickery.  For  the  inves-
tigation, therefore,  of  these,  not  only  must  the  observer  be  specially
accurate  as  regards  his  facts,  not  only  must  he  most  carefully  distin-
guish between  his  facts  and  his  deductions,  not  only  must  he  possess
a  peculiarly  retentive  memory  and  special  facult}7  for  exact  recollec-
tion, but,  in  addition  to  all  this,  he  must  have  a  certain  amount  of
special  knowledge,  —  knowledge  which  is  not  usually  acquired  even
by  the  most  learned  scientific  men.

This  brings  us  to  another  branch  of  our  subject.  Thus  far  we
have  only  considered  the  causes  which  affect  the  trustworthiness  of
the  great  mass  of  testimony  in  favor  of  mediumistic  phenomena.
There  are,  however,  a  certain  number  of  men,  eminent  for  their  scien-
tific attainment  and  of  undoubted  integrity,  whose  judgment  on  many
scientific  subjects  would  be  considered  conclusive,  and  who  have  pub-
licly stated  that  the  evidence  was  clear  to  their  miuds  in  favor  of  the
reality  of  spiritualistic  phenomena,  that  is,  of  phenomena  which  could
not  be  explained  by  the  ordinary  known  laws  of  nature.  What  can
be  said  in  regard  to  the  evidence  of  such  men  as  these  ?  First  and
most  important  in  relation  to  the  value  of  their  evidence  is  the  fact
that  it  is  entirely  personal  and  in  its  nature  insusceptible  of  proof.  If
these  same  observers  stated  a  scientific  fact  they  would  scarcely
expect  its  acceptance  unless  they  produced  proof  with  it.  As  it  is
we  have  onl}7  their  personal  belief.  In  science  it  has  alwa}Ts  been  an
accepted  fact  that  personal  belief  without  proof  is  of  little  value,  ex-
cept as  the  basis  of  an  hypothesis.

Let  us  examine,  however,  a  little  more  closely.  Are  the  personal
beliefs  of  these  men  of  any  more  special  value  than  those  of  other
equally  honest  men  of  no  special  scientific  attainment?  We  are  quite
willing  to  say  that  we  believe  that  this  can  be  answered  on  the  whole
in  the  negative  Valuable  as  is  the  possession  of  scientific  accuracy
and  scientific  habits  of  thought,  this  is  in  certain  cases  more  than
counterbalanced  by  the  possession  of  other  qualities,  and,  moreover,
it  has  been  abundantly  shown  that  many  who  have  attained  to  great
eminence  in  certain  departments  of  science  have  proved  themselves
to  be   utterly  ignorant  of  nearly  allied  subjects.

In  making  these  statements  in  regard  to  the  proper  basis  of  investi-
gation for  mediumistic  phenomena  the  committee  do    not  desire  to


236  Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.

appear  to  act  too  stringently,  or  to  demand  more  than  is  absolutely
necessary.  They  wish  to  hold  themselves  in  a  perfectly  neutral
position.  They  would  be  pleased  to  obtain  evidence  in  favor  of  the
existence  of  the  phenomena,  but  they  believe  that  the  same  rules  must
be  applied  to  these  as  to  any  other  phenomena  occurring  under  similar
conditions.

WILLIAM   N.    BULLARD,   Chairman.


DEDUCTIONS    SUGGESTED    BY   THE     STUDY    OF    HYP-
NOTIC PHENOMENA.

The  phenomena  of  the  somnambulistic  state  are  spontaneous
during  ordinary  sleep  ;  but  in  some  people  a  similar  state  can  be
artificially  induced  by  what  is  known  as  hypnotism.

Unfortunately,  until  within  a  very  few  years,  most  people  considered
the  hypnotic  state  to  exist  only  in  the  imagination  of  its  supporters,
and,  when  convinced  of  the  fact  that  such  peculiar  conditions  did  un-
doubtedly exist,  immediately  attributed  them  to  supernatural  agency,
or  at  least  to  the  possession  of  some  unusual  power,  whereb}r  the
mind  of  the  subject  was  controlled  or  influenced.  Modern  investi-
gation has  shown  the  fallacy  of  such  conclusions.

Only  certain  people  can  be  affected  to  such  a  degree  as  to  cause
entire  insensibility,  but  many  are  more  or  less  susceptible  ;  although
some  so  slightly  that  they  are  unwilling  to  admit  being  affected  at  all.
In  Heidenhain's  experiments  upon  his  class  it  was  found  that  onty  one
in  twelve  was  capable  of  being  affected.  Charcot  found  the  average
much  larger  ;  but  his  field  of  investigation  was  confined  in  a  great
degree  to  women,  and  the  proportion  of  good  subjects  is  greater  in  the
female  than  in  the  male.  My  own  investigations  have  shown  that
about  one-eighth  of  the  female  subjects  experimented  with  were  sus-
ceptible, but  many  of  these  were  not  what  is  called  good  "sensi-
tives."

During  the  past  three  years  the  writer  has  experimented  with  one
hundred  and  sevent}r-three  persons,  and  of  that  number  twenty-four
were  found  to  be  sensitives.  Of  these,  one  hundred  and  forty-eight
were  women  and  girls,  and  twenty-three  men  or  boys.  Of  the
former,  twenty-two  were  found  to  be  good  subjects,  and  only  two
of  the  latter.

It  is  not  improbable  that  the  antecedent  condition  favorable  to
the  development  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  an  unstable  condition  of
the  nervous  system ;  it  is  well  known   that  continual  repetition   of


/Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena,  237

experiments  with  the  same  subjects  renders  them  s'dll  more  suscep-
tible.

Very  man}7  different  methods  are  used  in  producing  the  hypnotic
state.  A  well-known  method  is  that  of  gently  passing  the  hand
downward,  smoothing  the  forehead  and  temples  with  the  tips  of  the
fingers  or  with  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Gazing  steadily  at  a  bright
object  placed  considerably  above  the  line  of  vision  is  sufficient
to  produce  this  condition  in  many  people.  It  is  claimed  that  \>y
merely  sitting  still,  closing  the  eyes,  and  thinking  steadily  that  an
ailment  is  about  to  disappear  or  a  pain  to  pass  away,  is  sufficient,  in
some  cases,  to  produce  the  desired  condition.  Here  we  have  an  ex-
ample of  what  may  be  known  as  the  mind-cure,  which,  it  is  claimed,
has  been  so  successful  with  many  people,  and  which,  acting  entirely
upon  imagination,  produces  a  state  analogous  to  the  higher  phases  of
hypnotic  somnambulism.  In  many  cases  hysteria,  so  common  with
women,  can  be  relieved  immediately,  if  trie  subject  can  be  hypnotized,
by  causing  her  to  sleep  a  few  moments.  Upon  awaking,  the  ner-
vous excitement  has  entirely  passed.

An  extreme  case,  showing  the  effect  of  imagination,  came  under
my  own  observation.  A  lady  who  was  often  afflicted  with  severe  head-
aches went  to  a  so-called  mind-doctor,  and,  according  to  her  state-
ment, was  entirely  relieved.  Several  visits  followed,  whenever  the
headaches  returned,  and  in  each  case  it  is  claimed  the  cure  was
immediate.  On  one  occasion  this  lady,  being  absent  from  the  city,
was  taken  with  one  of  her  usual  headaches,  and  telegraphed  to  the  so-
called  doctor  to  inquire  what  she  should  do  to  alleviate  her  suffer-
ings. She  received  an  answer,  stating  that  five  minutes  after  reading
the  telegram  she  would  be  entirely  cured.  The  headache  almost  im-
mediately left  her.  Here  is  a  case  where  the  subject  has  been  so  used
to  being  influenced,  as  she  supposed,  by  a  certain  person,  although
she  would  not  admit  that  it  was  at  all  due  to  the  imagination,  that  the
mere  reading  of  a  telegram,  stating  that  she  would  be  cured,  produced
the  same  effect  that  concentration  of  attention  would  have  done  in  the
presence  of  the  operator  under  different  circumstances.  This  is  some-
what analogous  to  the  experiments  which  I  have  tried  with  those  sensi-
tives who  were  thoroughly  under  control,  of  telling  them  that  at  such
and  such  an  hour  they  would  enter  the  hypnotic  state,  and  impressing
upon  their  minds  that  I  would  surely  cause  them  to  sleep  at  the  hour
mentioned  ',  although  at  the  time  I  might  be  occupied  with  some  other
work,  and  nothing  was  farther  from  my  thoughts  than  the  person  to
whom  I  had  made  the  statement,  yet,  upon  the  occasion  of  our  next
meeting,  he  would  tell  me  that  the  experiment  had  been  perfectly
successful,  and  that  he  had  gone  to  sleep  at  the  time  mentioned,  and


238  Study  of  Hypnotic  >  Phenomena.

remained  insensible  for  several  hours.  Here  we  have  imagination
producing  all  the  effects  which  could  be  induced  by  the  presence  of
the  operator.

The  religious  excitement  produced  in  many  people  at  camp-meet-
ings, salvation-army  gatherings,  etc.,  is  probably  another  analogous
manifestation  of  an  influence  due  to  hypnotic  suggestion.

The  duration  of  the  hypnotic  sleep  is  very  variable  in  different  sub-
jects ;  some  wake  within  a  few  moments  of  the  time  of  being  put  to
sleep,  others  remain  insensible  for  hours,  passing  into  the  natural
sleep  before  awaking.

When  it  is  desirable  to  wake  the  subject  of  an  experiment,  a  rever-
sion of  the  movements  by  which  the  sleep  was  induced  is  usually
sufficient ;  that  is  to  say,  let  us  suppose  we  have  put  a  person  to  sleep
by  a  downward  movement  of  the  hand,  producing  a  gentle  friction
on  the  forehead ;  now,  to  awaken  this  person  an  upward  movement
of  the  hand  is  sufficient.  Here  we  have  a  most  interesting  condition  of
the  mind  ;  sleep  was  suggested  and  impressed  upon  the  mind  of  the
individual  during  the  downward  passes  of  the  hand ;  sleep  was
associated  with  the  downward  passes  of  the  hand.  At  the  moment
the  upward  passes  have  commenced,  the  mind  of  the  sensitive  recog-
nizes something  not  associated  with  sleep.  In  many  cases  it  is
sufficient  to  perform  the  upward  passes  without  suggesting  to  the
person  that  he  is  to  wake.  Some  will  not  awaken  without  being
told  to  do  so  ;  but  it  is  not  necessaiy,  in  producing  the  hypnotic  sleep,
to  use  these  upward  or  downward  passes.  Generally,  after  a  subject
has  been  repeatedly  hypnotized,  the  simple  statement  that  he  is  to
sleep  or  that  he  is  to  wake  will  be  sufficient.

The  hypnotic  state  is  commonly  recognized  as  being  separated
into  three  rather  broad  types,  —  the  cataleptic,  the  lethargic,  and  the
somnambulic.  In  the  first  the  limbs  of  the  subject  will  remain  in
any  position  in  which  they  are  placed  by  the  operator ;  the  skin
becomes  insensible  to  feeling,  but  sight  and  hearing  are  sometimes
partially  present.  While  in  the  so-called  cataleptic  state,  there  is
often  great  rigidity  of  the  limbs  and  body  ;  in  this  condition,  if  the
head  of  the  subject  is  placed  in  one  chair  and  the  heels  upon
another,  the  entire  weight  of  the  body  will  be  supported  much  the
same  as  if  it  was  a  wooden  figure  placed  upon  two  chairs.

The  lethargic  is  represented  by  apparent  insensibility,  relaxed
muscles,   and  slow  respiration.

In  the  somnambulic  state  the  senses  are  exalted  in  a  wonder-
ful degree  in  certain  sensitives.  I  say  certain  sensitives,  because  it
must  be  understood  that  not  all  hypnotics  are  capable  of  entering
this  state.     Many  whom  I  have  experimented  with  are  totally  unable


Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  239

to  remain  in  the  intermediate  state  between  coma  and  their  normal
condition  ;  upon  being  awakened  they  would  immediately  come  to  full
possession  of  their  senses,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  enter  the
state  desired,  but  would  immediately  become  insensible  upon  again
being  hypnotized.

A  number  of  experiments  which  have  been  tried  show  the  ex-
alted sense  of  temperature,  sight,  and  hearing  in  a  most  interest-
ing manner.  Take,  for  example,  a  dozen  coins  placed  upon  the
table  ;  the  operator  takes  one  up  and  holds  it  a  moment ;  then,  plac-
ing it  among  the  others,  the  sensitive  is  told  to  pick  from  among  the
coins  the  one  which  has  been  held  in  the  operator's  hand.  He  ap-
proaches the  table,  takes  eaeh  coin  in  his  fingers  singly,  until  he
holds  the  one  which  has  been  selected  by  the  operator.  In  three
cases  out  of  five,  when  the  experiment  was  tried  with  thirteen  coins,
the  subject  selected  the  right  one.  Here  we  have  a  sense  of  tem-
perature so  delicate  that  the  difference  in  the  warmth  of  the  coins
was  easily  appreciated.  When  four  or  five  of  the  coins  were  handled
by  the  operator  the  subject  was  at  fault,  but  generally  selected  one
of  those  five ;  when  one  of  the  coins  was  picked  up  by  the  operator,
and  four  or  five  others  by  people  in  the  room,  the  subject  would  se-
lect any  one  of  the  coins  touched  ;  when  all  the  coins  were  picked  up
b}r  different  people,  the  one  held  longest,  no  matter  by  whom,  was
selected  in  one  case,  and  the  subject  was  at  fault  in  two  other  in-
stances.

Experiments  showing  delicacy  of  what  is  probably  visual  discrimi-
nation in  the  somnambulic  condition  are  especially  interesting.  A
series  of  volumes  in  a  bookcase  were  shown  for  a  moment  to  the
subject,  not  sufficiently  long,  apparently,  for  him  to  study  in  any
way  the  management  of  the  volumes.  Upon  one  of  these  volumes
being  slightly  changed,  the  subject  was  able  to  distinguish  the  differ-
ence and  point  out  the  volume  which  had  been  moved ;  this  experi-
ment succeeded  seven  times  in  thirteen  attempts,  although  the  change
in  the  position  of  the  book  was  very  slight.

Again  ;  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  is  shown,  with  one  pencil-mark  drawn
upon  it,  and  the  subject  is  told  that  there  is  no  line  on  the  paper,
but  that  the  operator  is  about  to  draw  some  lines  upon  it,  and  wishes
him  to  count  them  ;  here  the  slight  irregularities  in  the  line  already
drawn  upon  the  paper  are  seen  and  fixed  in  the  mind  of  the  subject,
who,  upon  being  told  that  it  does  not  exist,  associates  it  with  the
paper,  and  upon  the  other  lines  being  drawn  around  it  carelessly,
will  invariably  count  all  the  lines  except  the  one  originally  drawn
upon  the  paper.  But  if  the  original  line  is  perfectly  ruled  and  half-a-
dozen  other  lines  afterwards  ruled  as  nearly  as  possible  to  exactly


240  Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.

resemble  the  first,  so  that  the  difference  between  the  lines  is  so  slight
that  it  is  impossible  for  the  subject  to  distinguish  them,  he  imme-
diately counts  all  the  lines,  including  the  one  originally  drawn.
Another  experiment  of  similar  character  was  tried  with  a  Mr.  R.  S.
Twelve  new  lead-pencils  were  selected  apparently  alike  ;  one  of  these
was  slightly  nicked  with  a  knife  near  the  end  and  placed  upright
upon  a  marble  mantel-piece  from  which  everything  else  had  been  re-
moved. Mr.  S.,  who  wasjn  a  somnambulic  condition,  was  told  that
there  was  nothing  upon  the  mantel-piece,  and  to  look  carefully  to
satisfy  himself  that  this  was  so.  He  replied  that  he  saw  nothing  upon
the  mantel-piece.  Eleven  other  pencils  were  then  placed  in  a  row
beside  the  nicked  pencil  already  there.  Upon  being  asked  to  count
the  pencils,  Mr.  S.  counted  eleven.  A  ruler  was  then  taken  and
held  in  front  of  the  pencils  so  as  to  conceal  the  ends  covering  the
nick ;  Mr.  S.  was  again  asked  to  count  the  pencils,  and  counted  the
entire  twelve.

Again  ;  if  a  red  wafer  be  placed  upon  white  paper  in  sunlight,  and
the  subject  told  to  look  fixedly  at  the  paper  at  the  spot  where  the  wafer
is,  but  told  that  the  paper  is  blank  and  that  there  is  nothing  upon
it,  upon  being  asked  if  he  sees  anything  upon  the  paper,  the  re-
sponse will  always  be  "  No."  Now,  snap  the  red  wafer  from  the
paper,  and  ask  if  anything  can  be  seen  ;  in  most  cases  the  answer
will  be  "  Yes,"  and  the  subject  will  assert  that  he  can  see  a  green-
ish or  a  "bluish  spot."  Here  we  have  an  experiment  in  which  the
complementary  color,  which  was  not  originally  associated,  as  the
red  wafer  was,  with  the  paper,  is  easily  distinguished  by  the  subject,
while  the  suggestion  that  the  red  wafer  did  not  exist  was  sufficient
to  associate  it  in  the  mind  of  the  subject  with  the  paper  itself.,

All  these  experiments  tend  to  show  the  need  of  suggestion  in  some
way  by  the  operator  before  any  result  can  be  obtained  from  the
sensitive ;  that  the  suggestion  may  be  conve}Ted  by  some  slight
action  or  manner,  so  slight,  in  fact,  that  it  may  be  entirely  involun-
tary on  the  part  of  the  operator,  is  not  only  possible,  but  probable ;
but  there  must  be  suo^estion.

In  some  cases  the  sensitive  imagines  that  such  and  such  an  experi-
ment is  about  to  be  tried,  and  the  result  is  the  same  as  if  the  operator
himself  hud  suggested  it.

The  writer  proposes  to  give  his  deductions  under  different  head-
ings, which  will  be  followed  by  a  short  account  of  one  or  more  experi-
ments ;  which  are  selected  from  a  large  number  to  illustrate  what  the
writer  assumes  to  be  reasonable  ground  for  his  hypotheses.

(A.)  That  the  peculiar  condition  which  in  some  people  admits  of
the  induction  of  what  is  known  as    the  hypnotic  state  may  be  at-


Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  241

tributed  to  an  abnormal  constitution  of  the  nervous  system,  possibly
representing  a  form  of  disease.

(B.)  That  only  a  comparatively  small  percentage  of  people  can
be  hypnotized.

(C.)  That  the  condition  is  produced  entirely  by  suggestion  or  asso-
ciation, and  that  no  one  can  be  hypnotized  without  being  Grst  informed,
or  in  some  way  made  to  suspect,  he  is  about  to  be  made  the  object
of  an  experiment.

(D.)     That  the  condition  may  be  self-induced.

(E.)  That  some  people,  in  certain  phases  of  the  hypnotic  state,
are  insensitive.

The  following  experiments  are  selected  as  examples  of  many,
which  led  to  the  foregoing  conclusions :  —

Experiment  (C,  1.)  Miss  Z.,  a  young  lady  I  had  often  hypno-
tized, was  introduced  to  Prof.  A.,  and  told  that  he  had  never  tried
to  experiment  with  any  one,  but  would  like  to  do  so.  Miss  Z.
expressed  her  doubt  as  to  the  ability  of  Prof.  A  to  make  her  sleep.
Prof.  A.  tried  and  failed.  I  then  told  her  that  I  would  draw  a  glass
of  water  in  another  room,  which,  being  handed  to  her,  would  imme-
diately cause  her  to  sleep.  Prof.  A.  and  myself  went  to  another
room,  where  Prof.  A.  drew  a  glass  of  water  and  carried  it  to  Miss
Z.,  telling  her  I  sent  it  to  her.  Upon  drinking  it- Miss  Z.  almost
immediately  fell  asleep.

(C,  2.)  The  same  experiment  tried  with  Miss  X.,  except  that  in
this  case  the  brother  of  the  young  lady  assisted  me.  Later  the
brother  tried  to  hypnotize  Miss  X.,  but  failed  ;  she  asserted  that  he
could  not  do  so.

(C,  3.)  Same  experiment,  except  that  I  drew  the  water  and  took
it  to  Miss  X.  myself,  telling  her  it  was  sent  to  her  by  her  brother,
who  said  that  it  would  make  her  sleep  in  the  same  way  as  that  which
I  had  sent  to  her  previously.  Miss  X.  laughed,  and  drank  the  water  ;
no  effect.

(C,  4.)  Miss  L.  is  requested  to  go  into  another  room  and  sit
down,  being  told  that  within  five  minutes  she  will  go  to  sleep.  At
the  expiration  of  five  minutes,  upon  entering  the  room,  Miss  L.  is
found  to  be  asleep.

(C,  5.)  Mi>s  L.  is  told  by  her  sister,  Miss  A.,  the  next  day,  that
I  am  in  the  parlor  down-stairs  and  desire  to  try  the  experiment  of
putting  her  to  sleep  without,  seeing  her.  In  a  few  moments  Miss  L.
sleeps,  although  I  am  not  in  the  house  at  the  time  and  did  not  know
when  the  experiment  would  be  tried.

Miss  A.  tries  to  hypnotize  her  sister  the  following  day  in  my  pres-
ence, but  fails.    Tries  again  when  alone  with  her  sister,  and  fails  again.


242  Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.

(C,  6.)  I  called  on  Miss  A.  and  secreted  myself  behind  a  screen  in
the  parlor.  In  a  few  minutes  Miss  L.  enters  and  seats  herself  about
ten  feet  from  the  screen,  with  her  back  towards  me.  She  remained
about  fifteen  minutes  and  then  left  the  room  showing  no  signs  of
being  sleepy.

(C,  7.)  A  repetition  of  the  last  experiment.  I  waited  nearly
twenty  minutes.     No  success.

(C,  8.)  Mr.  R.  has  a  servant  whom  he  had  repeatedly  hypnotized,
and  invited  a  number  of  his  friends  to  see  his  supposed  powers.  The
girl  had  been  made  the  subject  of  an  experiment  so  often  that  the
presence  of  a  stranger  in  my  friend's  study,  when  she  was  called  into
it,  would  naturally  suggest  the  idea  of  being  hypnotized.  Mr.  R.
claimed  that  he  could  make  the  girl  sleep  when  she  did  not  know  that
he  was  trying  to  do  so.  Upon  being  asked  to  prove  this  Mr.  R.  will-
ingly agreed.

Mr.  R.  called  the  girl,  whom  we  will  call  Mary,  into  his  study,  I  being
present.  The  girl  entered  and  stood  near  the  door,  and  Mr.  R.  told
her  to  sit  down  while  he  finished  a  note  which  he  wished  her  to  mail.
In  a  few  minutes  the  girl  closed  her  eyes  and  became  apparently  in-
sensible. Upon  being  questioned  Mr.  R.  admitted  that  it  was  not  the
usual  duty  of  the  girl  to  mail  his  letters,  and  that  customarily  he
would  not  ask  her  to  sit  down.  He  also  admitted  that  he  always
tried  his  experiments  with  the  girl  in  that  room,  and  generally  invited
some  friend  to  assist  him.

(C,  9.)  On  another  occasion  Mr.  R.  was  hidden  behind  a  large
screen,  and  Mary  was  sent  for.  I  asked  her  to  wait  until  Mr.  R.
returned,  as  we  desired  to  try  some  experiments,  and  in  the  mean  time
to  assist  me  in  sorting  some  colored  worsteds  which  we  intended  to
use  in  our  proposed  experiments  ;  this  she  did,  sorting  the  colors  cor-
rectly, and  then  walked  to  the  window  and  stood  looking  out.  At
the  expiration  of  ten  minutes  from  the  time  she  entered  the  room
she  asked  me  if  she  could  not  go  and  attend  to  her  duties,  and  be
sent  for  when  Mr.  R.  returned.  Mr.  R.  then  came  from  behind  the
screen,  but  accounted  for  his  failure  by  the  fact  that  Mary's  atten-
tion was  occupied  b}'  looking  out  of  the  window.

(D,  1.)  Miss  L.  was  given  a  silver-plated  pencil-case,  and  told  to
look  at  it  fixedly  for  five  minutes.  She  stated  that,  after  looking  at
it  steadily  for  a  short  time,  it  seemed,  as  she  expressed  it,  to  "go
away  "  from  her,  and  she  went  to  sleep,  usually  sleeping  from  twenty
minutes  to  three  hours.

Similar  results  were  obtained  with  nine  other  "  sensitives,"  using
coins,  the  pencil-case,  and  a  pearl-handled  pocket-knife.  In  several
of  these  cases  the  hypnotic  state  was  not  actually  self-induced,  be-


Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  243

ing,  perhaps,  the  result  of  suggestion  ;  but  in  three  cases  the  subject
tried  the  experiment  alone,  merely  from  curiosity,  having  seen  or
heard  of  others  trying  it.

(E,  1.)  Miss  L.  was  hypnotized  and  the  points  of  a  coil  battery
applied  to  her  hands  with  apparently  no  sensation  and  no  effect
beyond  the  usual  reflex  action.  Strong  ammonia  was  then  held
beneath  her  nose,  and  a  slight  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the
throat  was  perceptible.  Upon  waking,  Miss  L.  remembered  nothing  of
what  had  taken  place,  but  complained  of  her  eyes  smarting  slightly.

(E,  2.)  Mr.  J.  R. ,  being  apparently  insensible,  the  lighted  end  of  a
cigar  was  suddenly  applied  to  his  left  hand,  slightly  burning  the  skin  ;
no  apparent  discomfort  was  experienced  at  the  time  ;  upon  being
awaked  he  mentioned  a  smarting  sensation  in  his  left  hand,  and
became  very  indignant  when  told  that  he  had  been  burned.

Numerous  surgical  operations  have  been  performed  upon  hypno-
tized persons,  perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  which  are  some  of  those
described  by  Dr.  Esdaile  as  having  been  performed  in  India,  and
others  recorded  in  the  Zoist.

It  is  well  known  that  in  those  people  who  are  termed  "  sensitives"
the  hypnotic  condition  ma}T  be  induced  by  any  one  whom  they  believe
capable  of  inducing  it.1  In  many  cases  people  cannot  be  hypno-
tized by  their  relatives  because  the)'  believe  it  to  be  impossible,  and
do  not  concentrate  their  minds  upon  the  idea  that  they  are  about  to
be  put  to  sleep.  I  have  known  a  gentleman  to  fail  repeatedly  when
trying  to  hypnotize  his  sister  (who  was  a  fine  sensitive),  but  who
was  perfectly  successful  with  a  }roung  lady  who  did  not  know  him,
and  believed  in  his  ability  to  perform  the  experiment.

In  another  paper  the  writer  proposes  to  treat  of  experiments  in
producing  local  antesthesia,  the  possibility  of  benefiting  insane  people,
and  investigations  concerning  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  which  are  of
too  great  length  to  be  included  in  the  present  paper.

Numerous  experiments  of  much  interest  have  been  tried  illustrating
peculiar  phases  of  the  so-called  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  Several  of
the  most  interesting  cases  are  given  below,  without  attempting  to
comment  upon  the  results  obtained.

1.  Having  hypnotized  Miss  B.,  she  was  told  to  remember  three
cards,  the  Ace  of  Clubs,  Queen  of  Diamonds,  and  Four  of  Spades,  and

1  Great  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  being  deceived  by  the  subjects  into  the  belief  that  they  are
asleep  when  they  may  only  be  in  the  lighter  stages  of  the  somnambulic  condition,  or  even  entirely
simulating.  This  is  especially  to  be  guarded  against  in  paid  subjects,  and  no  experiment  should  be
considered  of  value  with  any  person,  who  has  not  been  thoroughly  tested  to  prove  the  genuineness
of  the  condition.  The  battery  seems  to  be  tbe  most  convenient  test,  although  it  is  claimed  that  the
apparatus  invented  by  M.  Riebet  for  testing  the  breathing  of  the  subject  is  the  most  positive.
The  points  of  the  wires  being  placed  upon  the  moistened  hands  of  the  subject  produce  a  pain
too  great  to  be  borne  easily,  and  it  leaves  no  after  ill  effects.


244  Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.

when  asked  to  name  three  cards  to  mention  those  in  the  order  given.
Upon  being  awaked  and  asked  if  she  remembered  what  I  said  to  her,
she  replied  that  she  remembered  nothing  after  hearing  me  tell  her
to  go  to  sleep.  An  hour  later,  when  the  father  and  mother  of  the
young  lady  were  present,  I  said  I  should  like  to  try  an  experiment  in
thought-transference,  and  requested  Miss  B.  to  write  the  names  of
three  cards  and  to  show  them  to  her  father  while  she  stood  at  the
other  end  of  the  room.  I  then  told  her  that  the  three  cards  which  she
had  written  were  the  Ace  of  Clubs,  Queen  of  Diamonds,  and  Four  of
Spades.  This  was  correct,  except  that  Miss  B.  had  reversed  the
order,  writing  Four  of  Spades,  Queen  of  Diamonds,  Ace  of  Clubs.
Miss  B.  assured  her  father  that  I  had  never  mentioned  a  card  to  her,
and  she  was  apparently  as  much  surprised  as  any  one  at  my  success.

2.  I  hypnotized  Miss  B.,  and  told  her  to  take  a  key,  which  I  gave
her,  and  secrete  it  somewhere  in  the  house.  After  she  had  hidden
it  she  was  to  return,  seat  herself  in  the  same  chair  which  she  then
occupied,  and  immediately  go  to  sleep.  Miss  B.  took  the  key  and,
rising,  walked  slow7 ly  to  the  door  and  went  up  the  stairs  to  the  floor
above.  In  a  few  minutes  she  returned,  and,  seating  herself  in  the
chair,  sighed  and  almost  immediately  became  apparently  insensible.
I  then  awoke  her  and  asked  if  she  knew  where  she  had  hidden  the
key.  She  remembered  nothing,  and  refused  to  believe  she  had  gone
up  the  stairs.  Several  days  afterwards  I  hypnotized  Miss  B.  in  the
same  room  and  told  her  to  get  the  key  which  she  had  hidden.  She
rose  and  Went  up  the  stairs.  We  followed  her  and  saw  her  enter  a
room  and  go  directly  to  a  small  table  on  which  stood  a  case  of  cut-
glass  perfume  bottles.  One  of  these  she  turned  upside  down  and  out
dropped  the  key  into  her  hand.  Miss  B.  again  descended  and  seated
herself,  holding  the  key  in  her  hand,  and  almost  immediately  went  to
sleep.

3.  Miss  M.  and  Miss  B.  were  hypnotized  and  told  that  upon  the
following  day,  at  five  o'clock,  they  would  write  letters  to  each  other.
This  experiment  failed,  as  neither  wrote  to  the  other,  but  Miss  M.  went
to  Miss  B.'s  house  at  about  that  time.

4.  Miss  E.,  after  being  hypnotized,  was  told  that  when  I  seated
myself  in  a  chair  she  would  see  her  sister  enter  the  room  and  would
say  to  her,  "  Why,  Bertha,  how  did  you  come  here? "  After  waking
her  I  stood  for  some  time  leaning  against  the  mantel  conversing  with
Mr.  R.  H.  and  Miss  E.  Upon  eventually  seating  myself  in  a  chair,
Miss  E.  started  and  looked  fixedly  at  the  door.  She  then  rose  and
moved  slowly  towards  the  door,  saying,  ".  Why,  Bertha  ;  "  she  said  no
more,  but  staggered,  and  would  probably  have  fallen  had  I  not  as-
sisted her.     For  some  time  after  she  wras  again  seated  she  seemed  to


Study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena.  245

be  terrified  at  something,  covering  her  eyes  and  trembling.  She  was
made  thoroughly  awake  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  Miss  E.
remembered  nothing  of  her  sister  Bertha,  but  distinctly  remembered  a
dreadful  dream  in  which  she  thought  she  saw  her  sister's  child  being
run  over  by  a  railroad  train.

5.  Miss  E.  was  hypnotized  and  told  that  when  she  awoke,  after
I  had  turned  over  eleven  pages  in  a  book,  she  was  to  cross  the  room
and  light  a  candle  which  was  upon  the  mantel-piece.  Shortly  after
I  awoke  her  and  she  conversed  with  Mr.  R.  H.  while  I  looked  over  a
book  at  the  other  end  of  the  room.  I  turned  the  pages  slowly,  and,
upon  turning  the  eleventh,  Miss  E.  partly  rose,  but  reseated  herself,
seeming  not  to  notice  what  was  going  on  about  her,  and  with  her  e3*es
fixed  upon  the  candle.  She  sat  for  more  than  a  minute,  clasping  and
unclasping  her  hands  and  looking  furtively  at  the  candle.  I  asked
her  what  she  was  thinking  of,  and  she  blushed  and  hesitated,  but
finally  said  that  she  could  not  imagine  what  made  her  think  of  such
a  silly  thing ;  but  that  she  had  had,  when  she  partly  rose,  a  great
desire  to  light  the  candle  opposite  to  her,  and,  although  she  knew
we  must  think  her  crazy,  she  still  had  the  desire  stronger  than  ever.
Would  we  mind  if  she  lighted  it?  The  candle  was  taken  to  her,  and
she  lighted  it,  laughing  as  she  did  so.

CHARLES  B.  CORY,

Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Hypnotism.


246  Reaction- Time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance,


REACTION-TIME   IN   THE   HYPNOTIC   TRANCE.

The  time  which  intervenes  between  the  giving  of  an  expected
signal  and  the  making  of  a  movement  (previously  determined  upon)
in  response  thereto,  is  called  in  the  works  on  physiology,  "  the  simple
reaction-time  "  of  the  subject  experimented  on.  This  reaction-time
varies  from  one  subject  to  another,  and  varies  in  the  same  subject
when  certain  conditions  vary.  It  ranges,  in  ordinary  subjects,  from
one-tenth  to  three- tenths  of  a  second,  or  more.

One  of  the  conditions  which  makes  it  vary  seems  to  be  the  hyp-
notic state.  In  a  suggestive  paper  published  in  u  Mind  "(Vol.  VIII.,
p.  170,  1883)  by  Professor  G.  Stanley-Hall,  the  normal  and  hyp-
notic reaction-times  of  a  certain  subject  are  given  (averaged)  as
follows  :  —


Before  hypnotization.

Hypnotized.

After  waking.

0.328  Sec.

0.193  Sec.

0.348  Sec.

In  the  spring  of  1885  I  made  similar  measurements  on  three  differ-
ent hypnotic  subjects,  with  results  different  from  Professor  Hall's.
I  have  kept  them  until  now,  hoping  to  be  able  to  add  to  them  ;  but
as  there  seems  small  immediate  prospect  in  that  direction,  I  publish
what  I  have  ascertained.

The  subjects  were  Seniors  in  Harvard  College,  intelligent,  and
apparently  quite  normal  men.  I  will  call  them  A,  C,  and  M,  re-
spectively. I  had  hypnotized  them  all  several  times  before  these
observations  were  made,  and  they  went  off  easily  when  a  few  "  passes"
were  made  before  their  face.  The  signal  was  the  sound  of  a  smart
stroke  which  closed  a  galvanic  circuit.  The  reaction  consisted  in
raising  the  hand  from  a  telegraph  key  and  thereby  opening  the  same
circuit.  A  magnetic  pen,  interposed  on  the  circuit,  marked  the
instants  of  its  closing  and  opening  upon  the  smoked  paper  of  a  re-
volving drum  (Baltzar's  Kymograph)  ;  whilst  a  tuning-fork,  vibrating
fifty  times  a  second,  transmitted  to  the  same  paper  a  line  of  waves
which  served  as  measurer  of  time.  With  A,  three  experiments  were
made  on  three  different  days.  C  and  M  were  each  tried  twice,  on
different  days.  .In  all,  806  reactions  were  traced.  The  results  are
as  follows,  times  being  expressed  in  thousandths  of  a  second :  —


Reaction- Time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance.


247


"  Subject "  and  Date.

O  <a

<D   3

IS

Average
times
before

Trance.

O  oo

u  a
a>  o

S  a)

l

Average

times

during
Trance.

O    ID

t.  a
a>  o

3  ai

Average
times
after

Trance.

A.     May  1     .     .     .
May  5     .     .     .
May  19  .     .     .

27
63
53

306
207
204

32

74
54

294
203
304

52

163

C.     May  1     .     .     .

May  19  .     .     .

21

45

199

282

51
21

340
546  1

55

166

M.     May  5    .     .     .
May  15 .     .     .

31

46

214
224

75
53

292

286

57

209

1  This  figure  is  less  than  the  real  average,  as  the  21  reactions  counted  were  only  a  part  of
those  made  and  embraced  all  the  shorter  ones,  the  rest  being  omitted  to  save  the  toil  of  the
counting.

What  one  first  remarks  upon  reading  tbese  figures  is  the  irregularity
of  the  results.  In  five  of  the  seven  observations  made,  the  reaction-
time  during  trance  was  considerably  longer  than  the  normal  reac-
tion-time  taken  before  hypnotizing  the  subject.  In  the  other  two
observations  it  was  a  very  little  shorter.  The  two  trances  in  which
it  was  shortened  occurred  in  the  same  subject,  A,  in  whom,  on  another
occasion,  it  was  considerably  lengthened.  This  shows  that  the  idio-
syncrasy of  the  subject  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter,  but  that  it
depends  on  some  change  of  inward  condition.

In  the  three  observations  in  which  the  reaction -time  after  trance
was  recorded,  it  fell  not  only  below  the  trance-time  but  below  the
normal  time  before  trance.  In  one  subject,  C,  the  fall  was  very
marked.  In  Professor  Hall's  subject,  the  reactions  were  made  half-
an-hour  after  waking  the  subject,  whilst  mine  were  made  but  five  or
six  minutes  later.  Taking  my  three  observations  as  they  stand,  one
might  well  interpret  them  by  saying  that  the  hypnotic  trance  inhibits
neural  processes,  and  makes  them  slower,  and  that  when  the  trance
goes  off  the  release  from  the  inhibited  condition  expresses  itself  in  a
proportionate  acceleration.  This  would  sound  pretty.  But  the  case
of  A  on  Ma}T  19  forbids  one  to  range  it  under  any  such  simple  con-
ception. In  point  of  fact,  A  seemed  wide-awake  when  he  began  his
reactions  after  the  trance.  But  we  found,  after  he  had  ended  them,
that  he  had  relapsed  into  the  trance  during  their  performance.  It
was  not  outwardly  apparent  at  what  moment  the  relapse  occurred,
for  all  the  reactions  I  am  describing  were  executed  with  closed  eyes,
so  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  concentration  of  the  attention  on  the
acoustic  signal.      If  we  average  the  first  and  second  halves  of  the


248  Reaction-Time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance.

*

record  separately,  we  find  0.175  seconds  for  the  time  of  the  first  26
reactions  and  0.152  for  the  last  26  reactions.  The  rapider  half  of
the  record  must  have  contained  the  trance-reactions.  The  slowest
reactions  after  trance  of  all  were  in  this  case  at  the  very  beginning
of  the  record,  namely  (counted  in  vibrations  of  the  fork)  :  33,  26|,
20,  21,  221,  i7?  22,  21.  Only  two  reactions  later  among  the  whole
54  rose  into  the  twenties.

To  sum  up,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  simple  hypnotic  state  which
can  be  quoted  as  having  a  determinate  effect  on  the  reaction-time.
There  are  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  states  which  vary  very  much,
and  some  of  which  retard,  whilst  others  quicken,  the  reactions.1
These  states  may  very  likely  shade  rapidly  into  each  other.  Of
other  marks,  by  which  to  discriminate  them,  we  know  nothing.

Professor  Hall  found  the  deviations  from  the  average  time  to  be
less  when  his  subject  was  hypnotized,  than  when  awake.  In  my  obser-
vations the  opposite  was  the  case,  so  far  as  I  have  made  the  calcu-
lations. In  C's  record  on  May  19  one  need  only  look  at  the  tracings
to  see  how  much  more  the  several  trance-reactions  differ  from  each
other  than  do  the  several  normal  actions  from  each  other.  The
least  average  error  in  C's  record  on  this  day  is  when  his  times
were  shortest,  namely,  after  waking  from  the  trance.  A  bare
inspection  of  the  record  shows  this.  I  averaged  all  the  deviations
above  (-|-)  and  all  those  below  ( — )  the  average  reaction-time  of  the
case  of  A  on  May  19.     They  run  as  follows  in  seconds  :  —


Before  Trance.

During  Trance.

After  Trance.

+  0.032
—  0.018

+  0.095
—  0.053

+  0.023
—  0.075

I  can  thus,  so  far  as  I  have  examined  my  data,  draw  no  general
conclusions  from  them  about  the  average  deviation.  The  onlv  lesson
of  the  facts  I  report  seems  to  be  that  we  should  beware  of  making
rash  generalizations  from  few  cases  about  the  hypnotic  state.  That
name  probably  covers  a  very  great  number  of  different  neural  condi-
tions. The  general  drift  of  recent  investigation  has  tended  to  bring
this  into  clearer  and  clearer  light ;  and  the  little  peppercorn  of  tes-
timony which  I  herewith  offer  will  perhaps  not  be  regarded  as
entirely  worthless  if  it  be  considered  as  corroborative  of  what  more
important  investigations  have  in  their  way  shown.

WILLIAM  JAMES.

1  For  instance,  Prof.  Hall's  subject  was  an  admirably  prompt  and  varied  histrionic  subject,
who  would  copiously  act  out  every  suggestion.  But  my  subject  C,  although  he  could  easily  be
hallucinated  in  any  desired  way,  seemed  always  very  drowsy  and  slow  of  response  during  his
trance.    If  left  to  himself  he  invariably  fell  fast  asleep.


The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.  249


THE   CONSCIOUSNESS   OF   LOST    LIMBS.

Many  persons  with  lost  limbs  still  seem  to  feel  them  in  their  old
place.  This  illusion  is  so  well  known,  and  the  material  for  study  is
so  abundant,  that  it  seems  strange  that  no  more  systematic  effort  to
investigate  the  phenomenon  should  have  been  made.  Dr.  Weir
Mitchell's  observations  in  his  work  on  "Injuries  to  the  Nerves"
(1872)  are  the  most  copious  and  minute  with  which  I  am  ac-
quainted. They  reveal  such  interesting  variations  in  the  conscious-
ness in  question,  that  I  began  some  years  ago  to  seek  for  additional
observations,  in  the  hope  that  out  of  a  large  number  of  data,  some
might  emerge  which  would  throw  on  these  variations  an  explanatory
light.

The  differences  in  question  are  principally  these  :  —

1.  Some  patients  preserve  consciousness  of  the  limb  after  it  has
been  lost ;  others  do  not.

2.  In  some  it  appears  always  in  one  fixed  position;  in  others  its
apparent  position  changes.

3.  In  some  the  position  can  be  made  to  seem  to  change  by  an
effort  of  will ;  in  others  no  effort  of  will  can  make  it  change  ;  in  rare
cases  it  would  even  seem  that  the  very  attempt  to  will  the  change
has  grown  impossible.

I  have  obtained  first-hand  information  from  a  hundred  and  eighty-
five  amputated  persons.  Some  of  this  was  gained  by  personal  inter-
views ;  but  much  the  larger  portion  consists  of  replies  to  a  circular  of
questions  of  which  I  sent  out  some  eight  hundred  copies  to  addresses
furnished  me  by  some  of  the  leading  makers  of  artificial  limbs.1

The  results  are  disappointing,  in  that  they  fail  to  explain  the
causes  of  the  enumerated  differences.  But  they  tell  certain  things
and  suggest  reflections  which  I  here  set  down  for  the  use  of  future
inquirers.2

First,  as  to  the  relative  frequency  of  the  feeling  of  the  lost  parts.
It  existed  at  the  time  of  answering  my  interrogatories  in  about  three-
quarters  of  the  cases  of  which  I  have  reports.     I  say  in  about  the

1  For  these  addresses  I  have  to  thank  Messrs.  Fisk  &  Arnold,  of  Boston;  Marks,  and
Wicket  &  Bradley,  of  New  York;  Clement,  and  Osborne,  of  Philadelphia;  and  Douglass,  of
Springfield,  Mass.

2  One  lesson  from  them  is  that  in  a  delicate  inquiry  like  this,  little  is  to  be  gained  by  dis-
tributing circulars.  A  single  patient  with  the  right  sort  of  lesion  and  a  scientific  mind,  carefully
cross-examined,  is  more  likely  to  deepen  our  knowledge  than  a  thousand  circulars  answered  as
the  average  patient  answers  them,  even  though  the  answers  be  never  so  thoroughly  collated  by
the  investigator.  This  is  becoming  apparent  in  many  lines  of  psychological  inquiry ;  and  we
shall  probably,  ere  long,  learn  the  limits  within  which  the  method  of  circulars  is  likely  to  be  used
with  fruit.


250  The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.

proportion  of  cases,  for  many  of  the  answers  were  not  quite  clear.
It  had  existed  in  a  much  larger  proportionate  number,  but  had  faded
out  before  the  time  of  answering.  Some  had  ceased  to  feel  it
"  immediately, "  or  "an  hour  or  two"  after  the  amputation.  In
others  it  had  lasted  weeks,  months,  or  years.  The  oldest  case  I
have  is  that  of  a  man  who  had  had  a  thigh  amputation  performed
at  the  age  of  thirteen  years,  and  who,  after  he  was  seventy,  affirmed
his  feeling  of  the  lost  foot  to  be  still  every  whit  as  distinct  as  his
feeling  of  the  foot  which  remained.  Amongst  my  one  hundred  and
seventy-nine  cases  only  seven  are  of  the  upper  extremity.  In  all  of
these,  the  sense  of  the  lost  hand  remained.

The  consciousness  of  the  lost  limb  varies  from  acute  pain,  prick-
ing, itching,  burning,  cramp,  uneasiness,  numbness,  etc.,  in  the
toes,  heel,  or  other  place,  to  feelings  which  are  hardly  perceptible,
or  which  become  perceptible  only  after  a  good  dead  of  "  thinking."
The  feeling  is  not  due  to  the  condition  of  the  stump,  for  in  both
painful  and  healthy  stumps  it  may  be  either  present  or  absent.
Where  it  is  distinct  both  the  lost  foot  or  hand  and  the  stump  are
felt  simultaneously,  each  in  its  own  place.  The  hand  and  foot  are
usually  the  only  lost  parts  very  distinctly  felt,  the  intervening  tracts
seeming  to  disappear.  A  man,  for  example,  whose  arm  was  cut  off
at  the  shoulder-joint  told  me  that  he  felt  his  hand  budding  imme-
diately from  his  shoulder.  This  is,  however,  not  constantly  the  case
by  any  means.  Many  patients  with  thigh-amputation  feel,  more  or
less  distinctly,  their  knee,  or  their  calf.  But  even  where  they  do  not,
the  foot  may  seem  separate  from  the  stump,  though  possibly  located
nearer  it  than  natural.  A  second  shoulder-joint  case  says  his  arm
seems  to  lie  on  his  breast,  centrally  with  fingers  closed  on  palm  just
as  it  did  eight  or  ten  hours  before  amputation.

It  is  a  common  experience,  during  the  first  weeks  after  amputa-
tion, for  the  patient  to  forget  that  his  leg  is  gone.  Many  patients  tell
how  they  met  with  accidents,  by  rising  suddenly  and  starting  to  walk  as
if  their  leg  were  still  there,  or  by  getting  out  of  bed  in  the  same  way.
Others  tell  how  they  have  involuntarily  put  down  their  hand  to  scratch
their  departed  foot.  One  man  writes  that  he  found  himself  preparing
with  scissors  to  cut  its  nails,  so  distinctly  did  he  feel  them.  Gener-
ally the  position  of  the  lost  leg  follows  that  of  the  stump  and  artifi-
cial leg.  If  one  is  flexed  the  other  seems  flexed  ;  if  one  is  extended  so
is  the  other ;  if  one  swings  in  walking  the  other  swings  with  it.  In
a  few  correspondents,  however,  the  lost  leg  maintains  a  more  or
less  fixed  position  of  its  own,  independent  of  the  artificial  leg.  One
such  man  told  me  that  he  felt  as  if  he  had  three  legs  in  all,  getting
sometimes  confused,  in  coming  down  stairs,  between  the  artificial  leg


The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.  251

which  he  put  forward,  and  the  imaginary  one  which  he  felt  bent
backwards  and  in  danger  of  scraping  its  toes  upon  the  steps  just
left  behind.  Dr.  Mitchell  tells  of  certain  arms  which  appeared
fixedly  in  the  last  painful  attitude  they  had  occupied  before  amputa-
tion. One  of  my  correspondents  writes  that  he  feels  constantly  a
blister  on  his  heel  which  was  there  at  the  time  of  his  accident ;
another  that  he  had  chilblains  at  the  time  of  the  accident,  and  feels
them  still  on  his  toes.

The  differences  in  the  apparent  mobility  of  the  lost  part,  when
felt,  are  strange.  About  a  hundred  of  the  cases  who  feel  (say)  their
feet,  affirm  that  they  can  u  work"  or  "wiggle"  their  toes  at  will.
About  fifty  of  them  deny  lhat  they  have  any  such  power.  This
again  is  not  due  to  the  condition  of  the  stump,  for  both  painful  and
healthy  stumps  are  found  equally  among  those  who  can  and  among
those  who  cannot  "  work  their  toes."  Almost  always  when  the  will
is  exerted  to  move  the  toes,  actual  contraction  may  be  perceived  in
the  muscles  of  the  stump.  One  might,  therefore,  expect  that  where
the  toe-moving  muscles  were  cut  off,  the  sense  of  the  toes  being
moved  might  disappear.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  I  have  cases  of  thigh
amputation,  in  which  all  the  foot-moving  muscles  are  gone,  and  yet  in
which  the  feet  or  toes  seem  to  move  at  will.  And  I  have  cases  of  lower-
leg  amputation  in  which,  though  the  foot-moving  muscles  contract
in  the  stump,  the  toes  or  feet  feel  motionless.

But  although,  in  a  gross  sense,  we  are  thus  forced  to  conclude  that
neither  the  state  of  the  stump  nor  the  place  of  the  amputation
absolutely  determines  the  differences  of  consciousness  which  different
individuals  show,  it  is  nevertheless  hard  to  believe  that  they  are
not  among  the  more  important  influencing  conditions  of  the  illusion
which  we  are  studying.  On  a  priori  grounds  it  seems  as  if  they
must  be  so.  What  is  the  phenomenon?  It  is  what  is  commonly
known  as  the  extradition,  or  projection  outwards,  of  a  sensation
whose  immediate  condition  is  the  stimulation  of  a  central  organ  of
perception  by  an  incoming  nerve  or  nerves.  As  the  optical  centres
respond  to  stimulation  by  the  feeling  of  forms  and  colors,  and  the
acoustic  centres  by  that  of  sounds,  so  do  certain  other  centres
respond  by  the  feeling  of  a  foot,  with  its  toes,  heel,  etc.  This  feel-
ing is  what  Johannes  Muller  called  the  "  specific  energy  "  of  the
neural  tracts  involved.  It  makes  no  difference  how  the  tracts  are
excited,  that  feeling  of  a  foot  is  their  only  possible  response.  So  long
as  they  feel  at  all,  what  they  feel  is  the  foot.1     In  the  normal  state  the

1  It  -would  seem  that,  even  in  the  case  of  congenital  defect  of  the  extremities,  the  hrain-centres
might  feel  in  the  usual  ancestral  way.    "  A  nineteen-year-old  girl  and  a  man  in  the  forties,  who


252  The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs,

foot  thus  felt  is  located  where  the  eye  can  see  and  the  hand  touch  it.
When  the  foot  which  the  eye  sees  and  the  hand  touches  is  cut  off,
still  the  immediate  inner  feeling  of  it  persists  so  long  as  the  brain-
centres  retain  their  functions  ;  and,  in  the  absence  of  any  counter-
motive,  it  ought,  one  would  think,  to  continue  located  about  where  it
used  to  be.  There  would  be  a  counter- motive,  if  nerves  which  in  the
unamputated  man  went  to  the  foot  and  were  excited  every  time  the
foot  was  touched,  were  to  find  themselves,  after  the  amputation,
excited  every  time  the  stump  was  touched.  The  foot-feeling  (which
the  nerves  would  continue  to  give)  being  then  associated  with
the  stump-contacts,  would  end  (by  virtue  of  a  law  of  perception  of
which  I  made  mention  in  u  Mind  "  for  1887,  p.  196)  by  locating  itself
at  the  place  at  which  those  contacts  were  believed,  on  the  testimony  of
the  eye  and  the  hand,  to  occur.  In  other  words,  the  foot-feeling
would  fuse  with  the  feeling  resident  in  the  stump.  In  but  few  cases
does  this  seem  to  occur ; 1  and  the  reason  is  easily  found.  At  the
places  where  the  amputation  is  apt  to  be  made,  the  nerves  which
supply  the  foot  are  all  buried  deeply  in  the  tissues.  Superficial
contact  with  the  stump  never  excites,  therefore,  the  sensibility  of
the  foot-nerves.  All  ordinary  contacts  of  the  stump,  thus  failing  to
awaken  the  foot- feeling  in  any  noticeable  way,  that  feeling  fails  to
grow  associated  with  the  stump's  experiences  ;  and  when  (on  excep-
tional occasions)  deep  pressure  of  the  stump  awakens  not  only  its
own  local  cutaneous  feeling  but  the  foot-feelings  due  to  the  deeper-
lying  nerve,  the  two  feelings  still  keep  distinct  in  location  as  in
quality.

There  is,  usually,  in  fact,  a  positive  reason  against  their  local
fusion.  More  than  one  of  my  correspondents  writes  that  the  lost  foot
is  best  felt  when  the  end  of  the  stump  receives  the  thrust  of  the
artificial  leg.  Whenever  the  old  foot  is  thus  most  felt  at  the  moment
when  the  artificial  foot  is  seen  to  touch  the  ground,  that  place  of  con-
tact (being  both  important  and  interesting)  should  be  the  place  with
which  the  foot-feeling  would  associate  itself  (by  virtue  of  the  mental

had  each  but  one  normal  hand,  the  other,  instead  of  fingers,  having  only  little  prominences  of
skin  without  bones  or  muscles,  thought  they  bent  their  absent  fingers  when  they  bent  the  de-
formed stump.  Tickling  these  eminences,  or  binding  a  string  about  the  fore-arm,  caused  the
same  sensations  as  in  amputated  persons,  and  a  pressure  on  the  ulnar  nerve  made  the  outer
fingers  tingle.  In  the  same  way  persons  born  with  a  much  shortened  arm  have  stated  the  length
of  this  member  to  be  greater  than  it  really  was.  An  individual  whose  right  fore-arm  almost
entirely  failed,  po  that  the  dwarfed  hand  seemed  to  spring  from  the  elbow,  was  conscious  of  the
misshapen  arm  as  normal  and  almost  as  long  as  the  other."  1  quote  this  remarkable  passage
from  Valentin's  "  Lehrbuch  der  Physiologie,"  Vol.  II.,  p.  609.  Valentin  gives  a  number  of  refer-
ences to  the  contemporaneous  literature  of  the  subject,  and  his  own  remarks,  which  occupy
several  pages,  are  well  worth  reading,  even  now.

1I  have  found  none.  Dr.  Mitchell  reports  one  at  least,  in  which  the  lost  hand  lay  "  seemingly
within  the  stump  "  (p.  356.   Cf.  also  p.  351).     This  was  an  upper-arm  amputation.


The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.  253

law  already  referred  to).  In  other  words,  we  should  project  our
foot-feeling  upon  the  ground,  as  we  used  to  before  we  lost  the
member,  and  we  should  feel  it  follow  the  movements  of  the  arti-
ficial limb.1  An  observation  of  Dr.  Mitchell's  corroborates  this
view.  One  of  his  patients  "  lost  his  leg  at  the  age  of  eleven,
and  remembers  that  the  foot  by  degrees  approached,  and  at  last
reached  the  knee.  When  he  began  to  wear  an  artificial  leg  it  reas-
sumed  in  time  its  old  position,  and  he  is  never  at  present  aware
of  the  leg  as  shortened,  unless  for  some  time  he  talks  and  thinks  of
the  stump,  and  of  the  missing  leg,  when  ....  the  direction
of  attention  to  the  part  causes  a  feeling  of  discomfort,  and  the  sub-
jective sensation  of  active  and  unpleasant  movement  of  the  toes.
With  these  feelings  returns  at  once  the  delusion  of  the  foot  as  being
placed  at  the  knee."2

The  latter  half  of  this  man's  experience  shows  that  the  principles  I
have  invoked  (though  probably  quite  sound  as  far  as  they  go)  are
not  exhaustive,  and  that,  between  fusion  with  the  stump  and  pro-
jection to  the  end  of  the  artificial  limb,  the  intermediate  positions  of
the  foot  remain  unaccounted  for.  It  will  not  do  to  call  them  vague
remains  of  the  old  normal  habit  of  projection,  for  often  they  are  not
vague,  but  quite  precise.  Leaving  this  phenomenon  on  one  side,
however,  let  us  see  what  more  our  principles  can  do.

In  the  first  place  they  oblige  us  to  invert  the  popular  way  of  look-
ing at  the  problem.  The  popular  mind  wonders  how  the  lost  feet
can  still  be  felt.  For  us,  the  cases  for  wonder  arc  those  in  which
the  lost  feet  are  not  felt.  The  first  explanation  which  one  clutches
at,  for  the  loss,  is  that  the  nerve-centres  for  perception  may  degen-
erate and  grow  atrophic  when  the  sensory  nerve-terminations  which
normally  stimulate  them  are  cut  off.  Extirpation  of  the  eyeballs  causes
such  atrophy  in  the  occipital  lobes  of  the  brain.  The  spinal  cord  has
been  repeatedly  found  shrunken  at  the  point  of  entrance  of  the  nerves
from  amputated  limbs.  And  there  are  a  few  carefully  reported  cases
in  which  the  degeneration  has  been  traced  ascending  to  the  cortical
centres,  along  with  an  equal  number  of  cases  in  which  no  such  ascend-
ing degeneration  could  be  found.3  A  degenerated  centre  can  of  course
no  longer  give  rise  to  its  old  feelings  ;  and  where  the  centres  are  de-
generated, that  fact  explains  ail-sufficiently  why  the  lost  member  can
no  longer  be  felt.     But  it  is  impossible  to  range  all  the  cases  of  non-


1  The  principle  here  is  the  same  as  that  by  which  we  project  to  the  extremity  of  any  instrument
with  which  we  are  probing,  tracing,  cutting,  etc.,  the  sensations  which  the  instrument  comma,
nicates  to  our  hand  when  it  presses  the  foreign  matter  with  which  it  is  in  contact.

2  Injuries  of  Nerves,  Philadelphia,  1872,  p.  352.

3  Francois-Franck  :  Lecons  sur  les  Fonctions  Motrices  du  Cerveau,  1887,  p.  291.


254  The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.

feeling  under  this  head.  Some  of  them  date  from  the  first  hours
after  the  operation,  when  degeneration  is  out  of  the  question.  In
some  the  perceptive  centres  are  proved  to  be  there  by  exciting
electrically  the  nerve-trunks  buried  in  the  stump.  4t  I  recently  fara-
dized,"  says  Dr.  Mitchell,  kt  a  case  of  disarticulated  shoulder  without
warning  my  patient  of  the  possible  result.  For  two  years  he  had
altogether  ceased  to  feel  the  limb.  As  the  current  affected  the
brachial  plexus  of  nerves  he  suddenly  cried  aloud,  '  Oh  the  hand, —
the  hand  ! '  and  attempted  to  seize  the  missing  member.  The  phantom
I  had  conjured  up  swiftly  disappeared,  but  no  spirit  could  have  more
amazed  the  man,  so  real  did  it  seem." 1

In  such  a  case  as  this  last,  the  only  h}Tpothesis  that  remains  to  us
is  to  suppose  that  the  nerve-ends  are  so  softly  embedded  in  the  stump
as,  under  ordinary  conditions,  to  carry  up  no  impressions  to  the  brain,
or  none  strong  enough  to  be  noticeable.  Were  they  carried,  the  patient
would  feel,  and  feel  a  foot.  Not  feeling  the  foot,  and  yet  being  ca-
pable of  feeling  it  (as  the  faradization  proves) ,  it  must  be  either  that
no  impressions  are  carried,  or  else  that  for  some  reason  they  do  not
appeal  to  conseiousness.  Now  it  is  a  general  law  of  consciousness  that
feelings  of  which  we  make  no  practicable  use  tend  to  become  more
and  more  overlooked.  Helmholtz  has  explained  our  habitual  insensi-
bility to  double  images,  to  the  so-called  muscae  volilantes  caused  by
specks  in  the  humors  of  the  eye,  to  the  upper  harmonics  which  ac-
company various  sounds,  as  so  many  effects  of  the  persistent  abstrac-
tion of  our  attention  from  impressions  whieh  are  of  no  use.  It  may
be  that  in  certain  subjects  this  sort  of  abstraction  is  able  to  complete
our  oblivescence  of  a  lost  foot ;  our  feeling  of  it  has  been  already  re-
duced almost  to  the  vanishing  point,  by  reason  of  the  shielded  condi-
tion of  the  nerve-ends,  just  assigned.  The  feeling  of  the  lost  foot
tells  us  absolutely  nothing  which  can  practically  be  of  use  to  us.2  It
is  a  superfluous  item  in  our  conscious  baggage.  Why  may  it  not  be
that  some  of  us  are  able  to  cast  it  out  of  our  mind  on  that  account?
Until  a  few  years  ago  all  oculists  believed  that  a  similar  superfluity,
namely,  the  second  set  of  images  seen  by  the  squinting  eye  in  squinters,
was  cast  out  of  consciousness  so  persistently  that  the  eye  grew  actually
blind.  And,  although  the  competency  of  the  explanation  has  probably
been  disproved  as  regards  the  blindness,  yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  it
is  quite  competent  to  prove  an  almost  invincible  unconsciousness  of
the  images  cast  upon  a  squinting  e}Te.

Unconsciousness  from  habitual  inattention  is,  then,  probably  one
factor  in  the  oblivescence  of  lost  extremities, —  a  factor  which,  how-

i  Op.  cit.  p.  349.

2  Except  the  approach  of  6torms;  hut  then  it  is  iu  cases  where  the  feeling  is  preserved.


The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.  255

ever,  we  must  regard  as  unavailing  where  impressions  from  the  nerve-
ends  are  strong.1

Let  us  next  consider  the  differences  in  regard  to  the  illusion  of
voluntary  movement  in  the  lost  parts.  Most  of  the  patients  who  seem
to  themselves  able  to  move  their  lost  feet,  hands,  etc  ,  at  will,  produce
a  distinct  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  stump  whenever  they  make
the  voluntas  effort.  As  the  principle  of  specific  energies  easily  ac-
counted for  the  consciousness  of  the  lost  limb  being  there  at  all,  so
here  another  principle,  almost  as  universally  adopted  by  psychologists,
accounts  as  easily  for  the  consciousness  of  movement  in  it,  and  leaves
the  real  puzzle  to  reside  rather  in  those  cases  in  which  the  illusion  of
movement  fails  to  exist.

The  principle  I  refer  to  is  that  of  the  inheritance  of  ancestral
habit.  It  is  all  but  unanimously  admitted  at  the  present  day
that  any  two  experiences,  which  during  ancestral  generations  have
been  invariablv  coupled  together,  will  have  become  so  indissolubly
associated  that  the  descendant  will  no^be  able  to  represent  them  in
his  mind  apart.  Now  of  all  possible  coupled  experiences  it  is  hard
to  imagine  an}r  pair  more  uniformly  and  incessantly  coupled  than  the
feeling  of  effected  contraction  of  muscles,  on  the  one  hand,  and  that
of  the  changed  position  of  the  parts  which  they  move,  on  the  other.
From  the  earliest  ancestors  of  ours  which  had  feet,  down  to  the
present  day,  the  movement  of  the  feet  must  always  have  accompanied
the  contraction  of  the  muscles  ;  and  here,  if  anywhere,  habit's  heredi-
tary consequences  ought  to  be  found,  if  the  principle  that  habits
are  transmitted  from  one  generation  to  another  is  sound  at  all.2  No
sooner  then  should  the  brain-centres  for  perceiving  muscular  contrac-
tions be  excited,  than  those  other  centres  functionally  consoli-
dated with  them  ought  to  share  the  excitement,  and  produce  a
consciousness  that  the  foot  has  moved.  If  it  be  objected  to  this  that
this  latter  consciousness  ought  to  be  ideal  rather  than  sensational  in

il  have  quoted  my  hundred  and  forty-odd  patients  as  feeling  their  lost  member,  as  if  they  all
felt  it  positively.  But  many  of  those  who  say  they  feel  it  seem  to  feel  it  dubiously.  Either  they
only  feel  it  occasionally,  or  only  when  it  pains  them,  or  only  when  they  iry  to  move  it;  or  they
only  feel  it  when  they  "  think  a  good  deal  about  it "  and  make  an  effort  to  conjure  it  up.
When  they  "grow  inattentive,"  the  feeling  "flies  back,"  or  "jumps  back  to  the  stump."
Every  degree  of  consciousness,  from  complete  and  permanent  hallucination,  down  to  something
hardly  distinguishable  from  ordinary  fancy,  seems  represented  in  the  sense  of  the  missing  ex-
tremity which  these  patients  say  they  have.  Indeed  I  have  seldom  seen  a  more  plausible  lot  of
evidence  for  the  view  that  imagination  and  sensation  are  but  differences  of  vividness  in  an
identical  process,  than  these  confessions,  taking  them  altogether,  contain.  Many  patients  say
they  can  hardly  tell  whether  they  feel  or  fancy  the  limb.

2In  saying  that  if  it  is  sound,  then  the  explanation  which  I  offer  follows,  I  wish  to  retain
reserved  rights  as  to  the  general  question  of  its  soundness,  regarding  which  evidence  seems  to  me
as  yet  somewhat  incomplete.  But  the  explanation  which  I  offer  could  base  itself  on  the
invariable  associations  of  the  individual's  experience,  even  if  the  hereditary  transmission  of
habitual  associations  proved  not  to  be  a  law  of  nature.


256  The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.

character,  and  ought  therefore  not  to  produce  a  fully  developed
illusion,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  to  what  happens  in  many  illusions
of  the  same  type.  In  these  illusions  the  mind,  sensibly  impressed  by
what  seems  a  part  of  a  certain  probable  fact,  forthwith  perceives  that
fact  in  its  entirety.  The  parts  supplied  by  the  mind  are  in  these
cases  no  whit  inferior  in  vividness  and  reality  to  those  actually  im-
pressing the  sense.1  In  all  perception,  indeed,  but  half  of  the  object
comes  from  without.  The  larger  half  usually  comes  out  of  our  own
head.  We  can  ourselves  produce  an  illusion  of  movement  similar  to
those  which  we  are  studying  by  putting  some  unyielding  substance
(hard  rubber,  e.g.)  between  our  back  teeth  and  biting  hard.  It  is
difficult  not  to  believe  that  our  front  teeth  approach  each  other,
when  we  feel  our  biting  muscles  contract.2  In  ourselves  the  feel-
ing  of  the  real  position  of  the  jaws  persists  unchanged  to  contradict
the  false  suggestion.  But  when  we  recall  that  in  the  amputated  no
such  positive  contradiction  can  occur,  since  the  parts  are  gone,  we
see  how  much  easier  it  must  be  in  their  case  for  the  false  sense  of
movement  to  flourish  unchecked.3

But  how,  then,  comes  it  that  there  can  be  anjr  patients  who  lack  the
false  sense  in  question?  In  one  hundred  and  forty  of  my  cases,  about
fifty  lacked  it  completely  ;  and  even  when  the  stump-muscles  contract
violeutly,  man}'  patients  are  unable  to  feel  any  change  at  all  in  the
position  of  the  imaginary  extremity.  This  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that
fhe  amputation  is  made  above  the  origin  of  the  hand-or-foot-moving
muscles  ;  for  there  are  eleven  cases  where  these  muscles  remain  and
contract,  but  yet  no  sense  of  movement  exists.  I  must  say  that  I
can  offer  no  clear  solution  of  this  anomaly.  It  must  be  left  over,
together  with  those  obstinate  cases  of  partial  apparent  shortening  of
which  we  spoke  above,  for  future  investigators  to  treat.

1  They  are  vivid  and  real  in  proportion  to  the  inveterateness  of  their  association  with  the  parts
which  impress  the  sense.  The  most  perfect  illusions  are  those  of  false  motion,  relief,  or  concavity,
changed  size,  distance,  etc.,  produced  when,  by  artificial  means,  an  object  gives  us  sensations,  or
forces  us  to  move  our  eyes  in  ways  ordinarily  suggestive  of  the  presence  of  an  entirely  different
object.  We  see  then  the  latter  object  directly,  although  it  is  not  there.  The  after-image  of  a
rectangular  cross,  of  a  circle,  change  their  shapes  when  we  project  them  on  to  an  oblique  surface;
and  the  new  shape,  which  is  demonstrably  a  reproduction  of  earlier  seuse-impressions,  feels
just  like  a  present  sense-impression.

2  See  for  another  example  Sternberg,  in  Pfluger's  Archiv.,  Bd.  37,  S.  1.  The  author  even  goes
so  far  as  to  lay  it  down  as  a  general  rule  that  we  ordinarily  judge  a  movement  to  be  executed  as
soon  as  we  have  given  the  impulse.

3  Out  of  the  ninety-eight  of  my  cases  who  feel  their  limbs  to  move,  there  are  forty- three  who
can  produce  no  feeling  of  movement  in  the  lost  extremity  without  visibly  contracting  the
muscles  of  the  stump.  But  (leaving  out  doubtful  cases)  twelve  of  the  others  positively
affirm  that,  after  the  most  careful  examination,  no  contractions  cau  be  detected  in  the  stump,
whilst  yet  the  extremity  seems  to  move  at  will.  One  such  case  I  observed  myself.  The  man
had  an  amputation  of  the  upper  arm.  He  seemed  to  himself  to  flex  his  fingers  at  will;  but  I
could  perceive  no  change  whatever  in  the  stump.  The  thought  of  the  movement  seemed  here  a
sufficient  suggestion ;  as  in  those  anaesthetic  cases  where  the  patient  thinks  of  a  movement  and
a\  ills  it,  and  then  (if  his  eyes  are  closed)  fancies  it  executed,  even  though  the  limb  be  held  still
by  the  bystanders.


The   Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs.  257

«
One    reflection,    however,   seems    pertinent   to    the   entire    set   of

phenomena  we  have  studied.  They  form  a  group  in  which  the  varia-
tions from  one  individual  to  another,  if  they  exist  at  all,  are  likely  to
become  extreme.  Darwin  notices  that  no  organs  in  animals  are  so
subject  to  variation  as  rudimentary  organs.  Being  functionless,  se-
lection has  no  hold  on  them,  the  environment  exerts  no  influence  to
keep  them  up  (or  down)  to  the  proper  standard,  and  the  consequence
is  that  their  aberrations  are  unchecked.  Now  phantasms  of  lost
legs  and  arms  are  to  the  mental  organism  just  what  rudimentary
organs  are  to  the  bodily  organism.  They  have  no  longer  any  real
relations  with  the  environment,  being  mere  vestiges  of  something
which  formerly  had  real  relations.  The  environment  does  not  correct
such  a  phantasm  for  any  odd  course  it  may  get  into.  If  it  slips  away
altogether,  the  environment  lets  it  go,  and  doesn't  call  it  back.  If
it  happen  "by  accident"  to  harden  itself  in  a  fixed  position,  or
shorten  itself,  or  to  dissolve  connection  with  its  ancestral  associ-
ates in  the  way  of  muscular  feeling,  the  accident  is  not  repaired  ;
and  experience,  which  throughout  the  rest  of  our  mental  life  puts
prompt  bounds  to  too  great  eccentricity,  here  lets  it  luxuriate  unre-
buked.  I  do  not  know  how  far  one  ought  to  push  this  idea.  But
(what  we  can  call  by  no  better  name  but)  accident  or  idiosyncrasy
certainly  plays  a  great  part  in  all  our  neural  and  mental  processes,
especially  the  higher  ones.  We  can  never  seek  among  these  processes
for  results  which  shall  be  invariable.  Exceptions  remain  to  every
empirical  law  of  our  mental  life,  and  can  only  be  treated  as  so  many
individual  aberrations.  It  is  perhaps  something  to  have  pointed  out
the  department  of  lost-limb-consciousness  as  that  in  which  the  aber-
rant individuals  are  likely  to  reach  their  maximum  number.

The  apparent  changes  of  temperature  of  the  lost  parts  form  an  in-
teresting chapter,  which,  however,  I  will  not  discuss.  Suffice  it  to
say,  that  in  many  patients  the  lost  foot  can  be  made  to  feel  warm  or
cold  by  warming  or  cooling  the  stump.  A  draught  of  air  on  the
stump  produces  the  feeling  of  a  draught  on  the  foot.  The  lost  foot
also  sympathizes  sometimes  with  the  foot  which  remains.  If  one  is
cold,  the  other  feels  cold.  One  man  writes  that  whenever  he  walks
through  puddles  and  wets  his  sound  foot,  his  lost- foot  feels  wet  too.

My  final  observations  are  on  a  matter  which  ought  to  interest
students  of  "  psychic  research."  Surely  if  there  be  any  distant
material  object  with  which  a  man  might  be  supposed  to  have  clair-
voyant or  telepathic  relations,  that  object  ought  to  be  his  own  cut-off
arm  or  leg.     Accordingly,  a  very  wide-spread    belief  will  have  it,


258  The  Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs,

that  when  the  cut-off  limb  is  maltreated  in  any  way,  the  man,  no
matter  where  he  is,  will  feel  the  injury.  I  have  nearly  a  score  of  com-
munications on  this  point,  some  believing,  more  incredulous.  One
man  tells  of  experiments  of  warming,  etc.,  which  the  doctor  in  an
adjoining  room  made  on  the  freshly  cut-off  leg,  without  his  knowl-
edge, and  of  which  his  feelings  gave  him  no  suspicion.  Of  course,
did  such  telepathic  rapport  exist,  it  need  not  necessarily  be  found  in
every  case.  But  in  none  of  the  cases  of  my  collection  in  which  the
writers  seek  to  prove  it  does  their  conclusion  inspire  confidence.
All  (with  perhaps  one  exception  which,  unfortunately,  I  have  lost)
are  vaguely  told ;  and,  indeed,  among  all  the  pains  which  come  and
go  in  the  first  weeks  of  amputation,  it  would  be  strange  if  some
did  not  coincide  with  events  happening  to  the  buried  or  "  pickled  "
limb.  One  man  writes  me  that  he  has  dug  up  his  buried  leg  eight
times,  and  changed  its  position.  He  asks  me  to  advise  him  whether
to  dig  it  up  again,  sa}dng  he  "  dreads  to."

In  concluding,  I  repeat  that  I  have  been  able  to  throw  no  new
light  of  a  positive  sort  on  those  individual  differences,  the  explana-
tion of  which -was  the  aim  of  my  inquiry.  I  have,  perhaps,  by  in-
voking certain  well-known  principles,  succeeded  in  making  the
fundamental  illusions,  that  of  the  existence,  and  that  of  the  move-
ment of  the  lost  part,  seem  less  paradoxical,  and  the  exceptions  to
these  illusions  less  odd  than  they  have  hitherto  appeared.  But,  on
the  whole,  I  leave  the  subject  where  I  took  it  up  from  Dr.  Weir  Mit-
chell's hands  ;  and  one  of  the  main  effects  of  the  investigation  on  my
own  mind  is  admiration  for  the  manner  in  which  he  wrote  about  it
fifteen  years  ago.

WILLIAM   JAMES.


Request  for  Cooperation,  259


AMERICAN  SOCIETY  FOE  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


EEQUEST  FOR  COOPERATION.

Issued  by  the  Council.

5  Boylston  Place,  May,  1887.

The  object  of  the  Society  is  described  in  the  first  article  of  its  Con-
stitution as  "  the  systematic  study  of  the  laws  of  mental  action."
The  results  which  the  American  Society  has  so  far  achieved  have
not  been  so  great  as  anticipated,  aud  the  Council  thinks  it  desirable
to  circulate  a  brief  account  of  the  lines  of  research  now  being  inves-
tigated by  the  various  committees,  and  to  make  an  appeal  for  a  more
zealous  cooperation  of  the  members  and  associates  of  the  Society.
One  form  which  this  cooperation  of  our  members  might  profitably
take,  is  the  distribution  of  this  Request  among  their  friends,  with  a
view  to  the  acquirement  of  new  members,  and  to  the  arousing  of  fresh
interest  in  the  investigation.

The  American  Society  was  constituted  at  the  end  of  1884,  for  the
purpose  of  making  an  exact  study  of  that  border-land  of  human  expe-
rience, to  the  investigation  of  which  the  efforts  of  an  English  Society
had  already  been  devoted,  and  in  which  that  Society  claimed  to
have  achieved  some  positive  progress.  The  objects  of  the  English
Society  have  been  described  as  follows :  —

The  Society  for  Psj^chical  Research  was  formed  at  the  beginning  of  1882,
for  the  purpose  of  making  an  organized  and  systematic  attempt  to  investi-
gate various  sorts  of  debatable  phenomena  whieh  are  primd  facie  inexplica-
ble on  any  generally  recognized  hypothesis.  From  the  recorded  testimony
of  many  competent  witnesses,  past  and  present,  including  observations
recently  made  by  scientific  men  of  eminence  in  various  countries,  there
appears  to  be,  amidst  much  illusion  and  deception,  an  important  body  of
facts  to  which  this  description  would  apply,  and  which,  therefore,  if  incon-
testably  established,  would  be  of  the  very  highest  interest.  The  task  of  ex-
amining such  residual  phenomena  has  often  been  undertaken  by  individual
effort,  but  never  hitherto  by  a  scientific  society  organized  on  a  sufficiently
broad  basis.  The  following  are  the  principal  departments  of  work  which
it  is  proposed  to  undertake :  —

1.   An  examination  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  any  influence  which

may  be  exerted  by  one  mind  upon  another,   otherwise  than

through  the  recognized  sensory  channels.


260  Request  for   Cooperation.

2.  The  study  of  hypnotism  and  mesmerism ;  and  an  inquity  into  the

alleged  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.

3.  An  inquiry  as  to  the  existence  of  relations,  hitherto  unrecognized

by  science,  between  living  organisms  and  magnetic  and  electric
forces,  and  also  between  living  and  inanimate  bodies.

4.  A  careful  investigation  of  any  reports,  resting  on  strong  testimony,

of  apparitions  occurring  at  the  moment  of  death  or  otherwise,
and  of  disturbances  in  houses  reputed  to  be  haunted.

5.  An  inquiry  into  various  alleged  physical  phenomena  commonly

called  "  spiritualistic.1'

6.  The  collection  and  collation  of  existing  materials  bearing  on  the

history  of  these  subjects.

The  aim  of  the  Society  is  to  approach  these  various  problems  without
prejudice  or  prepossession  of  any  kind,  and  in  the  same  spirit  of  exact  and
unimpassioned  inquiry  which  has  enabled  science  to  solve  so  many  prob-
lems, once  not  less  obscure  nor  less  hotly  debated.  The  founders  of  the
Society  have  always  fully  recognized  the  exceptional  difficulties  which  sur-
round this  branch  of  research ;  but  they  nevertheless  believe  that  by  patient
and  systematic  effort  some  results  of  permanent  value  may  be  attained.

The  research  work  of  the  American  Society  is  at  present  divided
between  five  committees  :  —

1.  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.

2.  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses.

3.  Committee  on  Hypnotism  (Mesmerism).

4.  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

5.  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.

1.     Committee  on  Thought-Transference.

The  Committee  for  investigating  the  subject  of  Thought  Transfer-
ence,—  that  is,  for  ascertaining  whether  "  a  vivid  impression  or  a
distinct  idea  in  one  mind  can  be  communicated  to  another  mind  with-
out the  intervening  help  of  the  recognized  organs  of  sensation," —  is
grateful  for  the  response  made  by  members  of  the  Society  to  the  cir-
culars already  issued ;  but  desires  to  institute  a  new  series  of  experi-
ments, in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  much  wider  cooperation  in  this
branch  of  the  Society's  work.

From  the  returns  received  by  the  committee,  it  appeared  that  in  at
least  two  cases  the  results  were  such  as  to  suggest  the  operation  of
thought-transference  of  the  kind  reported  by  the  English  Society ;
but  in  these  cases,  unfortunately,  it  became  impossible  to  secure
opportunities  for  a  fuller  investigation.  The  committee  will  be  very
glad  to  hear  of  any  persons  who  are  believed  to  be  sensitive  to
thought-transference.


Request  for   Cooperation.  261

It  has  been  asserted  by  Professor  Charles  Richet,  of  Paris,  that
experiments  made  in  large  numbers  indicate  the  actuality  of  thought-
transference,  by  showing  that,  when  one  person  guesses  in  the  pres-
ence of  another  person  who  knows  what  is  to  be  guessed,  the  guesses
are  more  often  right  than  when  neither  of  the  two  knows  what  is  to  be
guessed.  Now,  if,  as  has  been  maintained,  there  are  persons  who
have  the  faculty  of  mind-reading  to  a  high  degree,  it  is  possible  that
there  are  many  persons  who  possess  it  to  a  slight  degree.  The  sta-
tistics already  collected  by  the  committee,  with  the  view  of  testing
this,  have  not  supported  those  obtained  by  Professor  Richet ;  but  the
committee  desires  to  test  this  yet  further,  by  gathering  a  fresh  series
of  statistics,  and  at  the  same  time  to  stimulate  the  members  and  as-
sociates to  new  experiments  among  themselves  and  their  friends  for
the  purpose  of  discovering,  if  possible,  any  persons  who  are  specially
sensitive  to  thought-transference.

Explanations  and  suggestions  are  here  given  as  to  the  manner  of
conducting  the  experiments.

The  objects  recommended  for  experiment  are  :  —

I.  —  Playing-cards.

II.  —  Free  drawings.

III.  —  Numbers,  Words,  Names.
IV.— Colors.

The  person  who  guesses  the  object  thought  of,  is  called  the  percip-
ient; the  persons  who  think  of  the  object  are  called  agents.  If  suc-
cessful results  are  obtained  where  more  than  one  agent  is  engaged  in
the  experiments,  further  trials  should  be  made  with  each  agent  acting
alone,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  the  impression  pro-
duced upon  the  percipient  is  due  to  one  agent  rather  than  another.
The  persons  engaged  in  the  experiments  should  remain  quiet  and  un-
disturbed. The  agent  should  concentrate  his  attention  as  intensely
as  possible  upon  the  object,  upon  which  a  good  light  should  be
thrown ;  the  percipient  should  remain  as  passive  as  possible,  his  eyes
covered  with  a  dark  bandage,  attending  only  to  any  impression  which
he  may  appear  to  receive  as  it  were  from  without.

The  strain  upon  the -agent's  attention  is  considerable,  if  the  exper-
iments are  properly  made,  and  the  percipient,  as  a  rule,  should  not
wait  longer  than  two  or  three  minutes  before  guessing  the  object.
On  the  other  hand,  the  percipient  should  not  unduly  hurry  his  guess.
The  series  of  experiments  should  not  be  continued  after  either  exper-
imenter is  tired  or  otherwise  unable  to  fix  his  mind  on  the  work.
Owing  to  the  strenuous  mental  exertion  required  of  the  agent,  the
committee  suggests  that  any  particular  series  should  rarely  be  pro-
longed after  ten  or  twelve  trials.


262  Hequest  for   Cooperation.

m

The  experimenters  should  use  every  precaution  to  avoid  the  pas-
sage from  agent  to  percipient,  by  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  of
an}7  intimation,  conscious  or  unconscious,  of  the  object  to  be  guessed.
The  general  conditions  of  the  experiments,  such  as  the  relative  posi-
tions occupied  by  the  agent  and  percipient,  the  date  and  duration  of
each  series  of  trials,  etc.,  should  in  every  case  be  recorded.  Some
instances  which  have  been  reported  suggest  the  advisability  of  first
making  experiments  tvith  contact,  the  agent  placing  his  hand  upon
that  of  the  percipient,  and  afterwards  repeating  the  experiments
without  contact.  Special  care  should  be  taken  to  record  in  each  case
whether  the  experiment  has  been  made  without  contact  or  not.

All  the  observations  (both  successful  and  unsuccessful)  made  in
any  series  should  be  sent  in.  The  agent  and  percipient  should  both
sign  the  record,  not  necessarily  for  publication,  but  as  a  pledge  of
their  good  faith.  All  series  of  experiments,  positive  or  negative,  are
acceptable  to  the  committee,  one  of  whose  objects  is  to  ascertain
whether  thought-transference  occurs  with  many  persons,  and,  if  so,
to  what  degree  and  in  what  proportion.

The  experimenters  are  requested  to  state  their  views  concerning
the  exact  nature  of  any  impressions  that  may  be  produced,  and  also
concerning  the  comparative  success  of  experiments  made  at  different
times,  in  different  moods,  with  one  agent,  or  with  several,  with  per-
sons connected  by  blood  or  by  any  special  sympathy.  When  the
percipient  feels  a  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  certain  of  the
guesses,  this  fact  should  be  noted  in  each  case,  provided  that  it  can
be  done  before  the  result  is  verified.  Any  communication  which  may
throw  light  upon  the  sensitiveness  of  the  percipient,  or  upon  any  pe-
culiarity in  the  mental  activity  of  the  agent,  will  be  welcomed   by

the  committee.

I.  —  Playing-Cards.

The  agent  holds  a  pack  of  playing-cards,  shuffles  it,  says  Ready,
then  cuts  or  opens  the  pack  at  random,  and  concentrates  his  attention
upon  the  card  thus  disclosed,  with  the  determination  to  impress  the
full  appearance  of  the  card  upon  the  mind  of  the  percipient.  The
card  guessed  by  the  percipient  should  be  named  aloud  by  him,  and
written  clown  by  the  agent  in  a  right-hand  Column,  as  in  the  following
Form.  The  a«;ent  should  then  enter  the  true  designation  of  the  card
in  a  left-hand  column.     The  suits  may  be  indicated  by  initial  letters.

The  agent  should  thoroughly  shuffle  the  pack  before  each  trial,  so
as  to  make  the  cutting  a  pure  matter  of  chance.  Care  should  be
taken  that  the  pack  is  complete.  (It  may  be  found  advisable  to  with-
draw the  face-cards  from  the  pack.  Where  this  is  done  a  statement
should  be  made  in  the  record  to  that  effect.)


Bequest  for   Cooperation.


263


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.
pla  ying-cards.

Age?it.  —  Joim  Smith.

Percipient.  —Mary  Smith  (Sister  of  Agent).

May  6,  1887,  5  P.M.  —  6.20  P.M.


Card  selected.

Card  named.

1.

10  of  spades.

1.

9  of  diamonds.

2.

5  of  diamonds.

2.

5  of  hearts.

3.

6  of  hearts.

3.

10  of  spades.

4.

8  of  hearts.

4.

8  of  clubs.

5.

4  of  spades.

5.

3  of  clubs.

6.

9  of  clubs.

6.

No  impression  after  about  four

7.

3  of  spades.

minutes .

8.

3  of  clubs.

7.

1  of  diamonds.

8.

4  of  hearts.

y.    3  of  spades.

10.  4  of  spades.

11.  King:  of  diamonds.


(Rest  for  ten  minutes.)

9.  10  of  clubs.

10.  7  of  spades.

11.  2  of  clubs.


1.  3  of  clubs.

2.  6  of  spades.

3.  8  of  hearts.

4.  4  of  hearts.

5.  6  of  hearts.

6.  3  of  diamonds.

7.  9  of  diamonds.


May  9,  1887,  9  P.M.  -  9.35  P.M.
1.     5  of  spades.


2.  7  of  spades.

3.  8  —  suit  not  seen.

4.  4  of  hearts.

5.  6  of  spades.

6.  1  —  suit  not  seen.

7.  6  of  hearts.


In  the  above  experiments,  the  percipient  was  blindfolded  and  seated  in  a
chair  with  her  back  to  the  a°;ent,  who  sat  about  three  feet  behind  the
percipient.     No  contact  in  any  case.

Signed,-  JOHN  SMITH.

MARY  SMITH.

II.  —  Free  Drawings.

In  these  experiments,  the  agent  makes  any  drawing  he  chooses,
and  the  percipient,  without  knowing  the  drawing  made  by  the  agent,
tries  to  make  a  reproduction  of  it  on  another  sheet.  The  agent
should  avoid  taking  suggestions  for  his  drawings  from  surrounding
objects,  or  from  objects  which  are  specially  likely  to  be  present  to
the  mind  of  the  percipient.  The  percipient  should  not  be  allowed,
while   the   agent  is  drawing,  to  see  the  motion  of  any  part  of  the


264


Request  for   Cooperation.


pencil,  or  hear  any  sound  from  it.  Similarly  the  agent  should  not
see  the  reproduction  made  by  the  percipient  until  it  is  completed.
Two  rooms,  if  possible,  should  be  used  for  the  experiments.
The  percipient  should  be  seated,  blindfolded,  in  one  room,  while
the  agent  is  drawing  a  figure  in  another  room.  The  agent  should
return  with  his  drawing,  enclosed  in  a  book  or  folio,  take  his  seat
-behind  the  percipient,  say  ready,  and  then  open  the  drawing  on  a
stand  fixed  for  the  purpose  close  behind  the  chair  of  the  percipient,


as  in  the  accompanying  illustration.  Silence  should  be  maintained
during  the  experiment.  When  the  percipient  announces  that  he  is
ready  to  draw,  the  agent  should  enclose  the  figure  as  before,  and  take
it  with  him  into  the  other  room.  The  percipient  should  then  remove
the  bandage,  and  make  the  reproduction,  adding  any  notes  concern-
ing his  impressions.  The  committee  suggests  that  the  drawings
should  be  about  two  or  three  inches  in  size,  and  that  the  agent  should
draw  his  lines  thickly  with  soft  lead  pencil,  or,  better  still,  black
chalk  pencil,  on  white  paper  or  card,  which  should  be  placed  against
a  dark  background  for  the  experiment.  The  sheets  of  diagrams
should  be  numbered  at  the  top  after  each  experiment,  as,  Original  1 ,
Reproduction  1,  Original  2,  Reproduction  2,  etc.

III.  — Numbers,  Words,  and  Names.

These  should  be  written  clearly  as  in  the  free-drawing  experiments,
and  guessed  aloud  by  the  percipient  as  in  the  card  experiments.  A
record  should  be  kept  as  in  the  card  experiments.

IV.  —  Colors.
A  set  of  six  cards,  black,  white,  yellow,  blue,  red,  and  green,  may
be  obtained  on  application  to  the  Secretary.     Trials  should  be  made
as  in  the  experiments  with  playing-cards,  care  being  taken  to  shuffle
the  six  cards  after  each  trial.


Request  for   Cooperation.  265

The  committee  cannot  too  strongly  emphasize  the  fact  that  selected
results  are  not  desired ;  the  committee  will  be  glad  to  receive  any
records  even  of  a  small  series  of  experiments,  whether  successful  or
unsuccessful,  on  any  of  the  lines  indicated.

Records  of  experiments  should  be  sent  to  the  Secretary,  Richard
Hodgson,  5  Boylston  place,  Boston,  Mass.

H.  P.  BOWDITCH,

Chairman,

2.     Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted    Houses.

This  committee  wishes  to  collect  accounts  from  trustworthy  sources,
of  apparitions  of  absent  or  deceased  persons, — of  premonitions,
whether  these  occur  in  dreams  or  in  the  waking  state,  by  voices  heard,
or  figures  seen,  or  any  kind  of  extraordinary  experience,  —  and  also  of
disturbances  in  houses  described  as  "  haunted."  It  is  well  known  that,
from  time  to  time,  there  are  related  or  published  accounts  of  people
who  are  said  to  have  had  such  experiences,  and  to  have  learned,
through  them,  about  some  otherwise  unknown  facts,  afterwards  veri-
fied ;  such,  for  instance,  as  death  or  illness  or  some  other  calamity
which  has  actually  happened,  at  or  near  the  time  of  an  apparition,  to
the  distant  person  whose  figure  is  said  to  have  been  seen.  The  com-
mittee will  be  especially  glad  to  hear  directly  from  the  persons  them-
selves, whether  connected  with  the  Society  or  not,  who  have  had  any  such
experiences,  and  strongly  urges  upon  those  who  belong  to  the  Society
that  they  should  render  active  assistance  to  the  committee  by  col-
lecting such  accounts,  and  by  obtaining  such  further  information  as
will  enable  the  committee  to  verify  them  in  as  much  detail  as  possible
by  the  accounts  of  other  witnesses,  the  use  of  documents,  or  other
collateral  testimony.  The  names  and  addresses  of  the  persons  con-
cerned should  be  appended  to  the  accounts  as  a  pledge  of  good  faith  ;
but  these  will  be  kept  strictly  private  by  the  committee,  unless  special
permission  is  given  for  their  publication.  Communications  should  be
addressed  to  the  Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boylston  place,
Boston,  Mass.

JOSIAH    ROYCE,

Chairman.

3.     Committee  on  Hypnotism.

The  work  in  which  this  committee  is  most  interested  concerns  the
causes  and  the  psychical  modifications  of  the  various  phases  of
hypnotic  (mesmeric)  trance,  together  with  their  physiological  accom-
paniments. The  committee  is  especially  anxious  to  discover  whether,
as  is  commonly  alleged  in  connection  with  hypnotic  phenomena,  there


266  Request  for   Cooperation.

may  exist  any  possibility  of  thought-transference  between  the  operator
and  his  subject,  and  whether  any  cases  can  be  obtained  of  what-  is
termed  clairvoyance,  where  the  subject  is  said  to  show  a  knowledge  of
persons,  or  scenes,  or  hidden  objects,  in  a  way  that  seems  to  suggest
the  operation  of  some  unusual  power  of  perception.  The  com-
mittee begs  the  assistance  of  members  and  associates  of  the  Society,
and  any  other  persons,  in  collecting  accounts  of  such  cases  from  reli-
able sources  ;  but  the  committee  is  still  more  desirous  of  obtaining
references  to  any  persons  who  are  either  available  at  the  present  time
for  direct  experiment,  or  are  willing  to  become  hypnotic  subjects.
Communications  should  be  sent  to  the  Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson.
5  Boylston  place,  Boston,  Mass.

C.  B.  CORY,

Chairman.

4.     Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.

This  committee  is  chiefly  concerned  with  the  experimental  investi-
gation of  the  phenomena  commonly  described  as  "  spiritualistic, "  and
is  particularly  desirous  of  obtaining  opportunities  for  investigation  with
private  and  unpaid  ''mediums,"  or  other  persons  in  whose  presence
"mediumistic"  phenomena  occur.  Under  this  head  we  place  table-
tippings  or  movements  of  other  objects,  automatic  writing,  as  by  plan-
chette  or  otherwise,  voices,  unexplained  noises,  lights,  and  cognate
phenomena.  Private  persons  who  themselves  experience  such  phenom-
ena are  earnestly  requested  to  communicate  accounts  of  them  to  the
committee,  the  members  of  which  would  be  especially  grateful  for
opportunities  of  witnessing  personally  the  occurrences  described.
The  committee  will  further  be  glad  to  investigate  any  phenomena  of
similar  character  alleged  to  occur  in  the  presence  of  professional
mediums,  when  these  can  be  submitted  to  a  scientific  scrutiny.
Communications  should  be  addressed  to  the  Secretary,  Richard
Hodgson,  5  Boylston  place,  Boston,  Mass.

WILLIAM  N.  BULLARD,

Chairman,

5.     Committee  on   Experimental   Psychology.

This  committee  is  at  present  desirous  of  testing  the  feasibility  of
making  some  successful  investigations  in  folk-thought  or  the  study  of
sociology  in  its  psychological  aspects.  It  seeks  to  ascertain  not  so
much  the  psychical  peculiarities  exhibited  by  individuals  qud  indi-
viduals, as  the  psychical  characteristics  which  many  individuals  may
possess  in  common  in  virtue  of  their  being  members  of  particular  races


Request  for   Cooperation.  267

or  comra  unities.  There  are  many  beliefs  and  habits  of  thought  by  which
one  nation  is  distinguished  from  another,  and  the  people  of  one  epoch
from  those  of  earlier  and  later  epochs.  How  far  these  are  due  to
heredity,  how  far  to  simple  tradition,  how  far  to  transient  circum-
stances of  time,  and  place,  and  social  opinion,  how  far  to  the  deliberate
and  rational  judgments  of  the  individuals  themselves, —  what  are
their  causes,  and  what  positions  should  be  assigned  to  them  as
regards  development  or  degeneration,  are  inquiries  the  prosecution
of  which  the  committee  trusts  will  lead  to  results  of  the  utmost  im-
portance. Such  results,  however,  must  not  be  looked  for  at  once.
It  is  clear  that,  before  any  reliable  generalizations  can  be  reached,
much  laborious  gathering  of  facts  will  be  needed.

The  method  which  the  committee  wishes  to  adopt  is  to  accumulate
data  from  individuals,  and  by  comparison  of  them  with  one  another
ascertain  the  degree  of  similarity  of  mental  habit  existing  between
the  individuals  concerned.  To  test  the  method,  the  committee  has
selected  two  subjects  intimately  connected  with  other  work  of  the
Society,  namel}',  diagram  drawing  and  the  prevalence  of  superstitions.
As  in  this  part  of  the  researches  of  the  Society  a  very  wide-spread
cooperation  is  absolutely  necessaiy  for  the  achievement  of  results  of
scientific  value,  it  is  hoped  that  the  members  and  associates  will  not
only  universally  respond  themselves,  but  also  induce  large  numbers  of
their  friends  to  respond  to  this  appeal.

You  are  requested:  —

1.  To  draw  ten  figures  on  the  accompanying  postal-card  to  be

returned  to  the  Secretary,  the  drawings  to  be  made  with-
out any  suggestion  received  from  any  other  person.

2.  To  answer   Yes  or  No  to  all  the  questions  on  the  accom-

panying blank  F.

CHARLES  S.  MINOT.

Chairman.

It  is  hoped  eventually  to  found  a  library  for  the  use  of  members  of
the  Society.  Contributions  of  books  on  psychical  subjects  should  be
sent  to  the  Secretary.

It  is  also  hoped  that  voluntary  donations  to  the  Society  will  enable
the  Council  to  issue  a  monthly  journal,  which  shall  be  circulated
gratuitously  among  members  and  associates.  The  object  of  this
journal  will  be  to  give  information  of  the  business  transacted  at  the
meetings  of  the  council,  and  of  the  progress  made  by  the  various
committees,  and  to  furnish  to  our  members  early  records  of  matters
of  interest  which  would  otherwise  be  delayed  till  the  next  publication
of  the  Proceedings.     The  journal,  as  contemplated,  will  be    open    to


2G8  Request  for   Cooperation.

correspondence  and  discussion  by  members  and  associates.  Pecuniary
contributions  towards  the  establishment  of  the  journal  will  be  grate-
fully received.

Any  information  or  suggestions  as  to  the  work  of  the  Society  will  be
gladly  welcomed  by  the  council.

All  communications  or  applications  for  information  should  be  ad-
dressed to  the  Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boylston  Place,  Boston,
Mass.

(Signed  by  the  Executive  Committee  on  behalf  of  the  Council),

H.  P.  BOWDITCH,
E.  G.  GARDINER,
C.  S.  MINOT.

The  Council  specially  requests  prompt  payment  from
any  members  and  associates  who  are  in  arrears  with  their
subscriptions.


Blank  F.


269


Blank  F.

AMERICAN  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.

Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.

You  are  requested  to  fill  up  this  blank  and  send  it  to  the
Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boy  Is  ton  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

All  answers  are  private,  and  will  not  be  shown,  except  to
the  Committee  and  its  clerks.

Name,.


Address,


Occupation,


Age,


Nationality,


Should  you  be  influenced  by  any  feeling  (whether  implying
a  belief  or  not  is  immaterial)  in  regard  to :


1.  Sitting  down  thirteen  at  table?

2.  Beginning  a  voyage  on  Friday?

3.  Seeing  the  new  moon  over  your  left  shoulder?

4.  Choosing,  on  }*our  own  account,  between  two

otherwise   equally    desirable   houses,   one    of
which  was  reputed  to  be  haunted?


ANSWER.
YES  or  NO.


270  Blank   G.


Blank  G-.

AMERICAN  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL   RESEARCH.

Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.
October,  1887.

The  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  is  collecting
accounts  of  cases  where  one  person  has  had  some  remarkable
experience,  such  as  an  exceptionally  vivid  and  disturbing  dream,
or  a  strong  waking  impression  amounting  to  a  distinct  hallucina-
tion, concerning  another  person  at  a  distance,  who  was,  at  the  time,
passing  through  some  crisis,  such  as  death,  or  illness,  or  some
other  calamity.  It  appears  that  coincidences  of  this  sort  have
occurred,  but  it  may  be  alleged  that  they  are  due  to  mere  chance.
For  the  determination  of  this  it  is  desirable  to  ascertain  the  pro-
portion between  (a)  the  number  of -persons  in  the  community  who
have  not  had  any  such  experiences  at  all ;  (b)  the  number  of  per-
sons who  have  had  such  experiences  coinciding  with  real  events  ;
(c)  the  number  of  persons  who  have  had  experiences  which,
though  similar  to  the  foregoing  in  other  respects,  did  not  coincide
with  real  events.

We  therefore  beg  any  reader  of  this  circular  in  the  course  of
the  next  six  months  to  repeat  the  following  questions,  verbatim,  to
as  many  trustworthy  persons  as  possible,  from  whom  he  does  not
know  which  ansiver  to  expect,  and  who  have  not  already  been  interro-
gated by  some  one  else,  and  communicate  the  results.  The  questions
are  so  framed  as  to  require  no  answer  but  yes  or  no,  which  should
be  written  in  one  of  the  blank  squares  below  each  question.  We
draw  special  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  object  of  our  enquiry
would  be  defeated  if  replies  were  received  only  from  persons  who
have  had  remarkable  experiences  of  the  kind  referred  to  (whether


Blank   G.


271


coincident  with  real  events  or  not)  ;  and  there  should  be  no  selec-
tion whatever  of  persons  who  have  had  such  experiences.  In  case
of  negative  answers  only,  it  will  be  sufficient  if  the  collector  will
send  (not  for  publication)  his  own  name  and  address  on  the  cir-
cular with  the  replies  which  he  has  received.

If  there  are  any  affirmative  answers,  we  desire  to  receive  also
(not  for  publication)  the  name  and  address  of  any  person  who
answers  yes.  If  the  experience  has  been  coincident  with  a
real  event,  we  specially  request  the  percipient  to  send  us  an
account  of  it.

All  communications  should  be  sent  to  the  Secretary,  Richard
Hodgson,  5  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  from  whom  additional
copies  of  this  circular  may  be  obtained.  As  soon  as  a  circular  is
filled  it  should  be  returned  to  the  Secretary  ;  circulars  only  partly
filled  will  also  be  gratefully  received.  It  is  of  the  utmost  impor-
tance to  obtain  answers  from  a  very  large  number  of  persons,  and
it  is  hoped  that  many  thousands  of  replies  will  be  received.

I.  Have  you,  ivithin  the  past  year,  when  in  good  health,  had  a
dream  of  the  death  of  some  person  known  to  you  {about  whom
you  were  not  anxious  at  the  time) ,  which  dream  you  marked
as  an  exceptionally  vivid  one,  and  of  which  the  distressing
impression  lasted  for  at  least  as  long  as  an  hour  after  you
rose  in  the  morning  9


II.  Have  you,  within  the  past  three  years  but  not  within  the  past
year,  ivhen  in  good  health,  had  a  dream  of  the  death  of  some
person  known  to  you  {about  whom  you  were  not  anxious  at


272


Blank  6r.


the  time) ,  which  dream  you  marked  as  an  exceptionally  vivid
one,  and  of  which  the  distressing  impression  lasted  for  at
least  as  long  as  an  hour  after  you  rose  in  the  morning  ?

__

III.     Have  you,  within  the  past  twelve  years   but  not  within  the
past  three  years,  when  in  good  health,  had  a  dream  of  the
death  of  some  person  known  to  you  (about  whom  you  were
not  anxious  at  the  time) ,  ivhich  dream  you  marked  as  an  ex-
ceptionally vivid  one,  and  of  ivhich  the  distressing  impression
lasted  for  at  least  as  long  as  an  hour  after  you  rose  in  the
morning  ?

r

i.     Have  you,  at  any  time  during  your  life  but  not  within   tl
past  twelve  years,  when  in  good  health,  had  a  dream  of  tl
death  of  some  person  known  to  you  (about  whom  you  wei
not  anxious  at  the  time),  which  dream  you  marked  as  an  ea
ceptionally  vivid  one,  and  of  which  the  distressing  impressio
lasted  for  at  least  an  hour  after  you  rose  in  the  morning?

,e

,e
-e
j-
n

Blank   Q-.


273


V

Have  you,  within  the  past  year,  ivhen  in  good  health,  and  com-
pletely awake,  had  a  distinct  impression  of  seeing  or  being
touched  by  a  human  being \  or  of  hearing  a  voice  or  sound
which  suggested  a  human  presence',  when  no  one  was  there?


V

I.     Have  you,  within  the  past  three  years  but  not  within  the  pa
year,  when  in  good  health,  and  completely  awake,  had  a  di
tinct  impression  of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  human  beint
or  of  hearing  a  voice  or  sound  which  suggested  a  huma
presence,  when  no  one  was  there?

St

s-

h

n

274


Blank   G-.


VII.  Have  you,  within  the  past  twelve  years  but  not  icithin  the  past
three  years,  when  in  good  health,  and  completely  awake,  had
a  distinct  impression  of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  human
being,   or  of  hearing  a  voice   or  sound  which   suggested  a
human  presence,  ivhen  no  one  was  there?


VIII.  Have  you,  at  any  time  during  your  life  but  not  within  the
past  twelve  years,  when  in  good  health,  and  completely  awake,
had  a  distinct  impression  of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a
human  being,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  or  sound  which  suggested
a  human  presence,  when  no  one  was  there?

$
A

I   ._

rame  of  Collector :
ddress  of  Collector :

•

Vames  and  addresses  of  any  persons  who  reply  in  the  affirmative .

Constitution,  275


CONSTITUTION.


Article  I. — Name  and  Objects.

Section  1.  This  Association  shall  be  called  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Research.

Sect.  2.  The  object  of  the  Society  shall  be  the  systematic  study
of  the  laws  of  mental  action.

Article  II. — Government.

Section  1.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Society  a  Council  shall  be
chosen,  consisting  of  twenty-one  members,  —  seven  to  hold  office  for
one  37ear,  seven  for  two  years,  and  seven  for  three  years  ;  and  there-
after seven  shall  be  chosen  by  the  members  at  each  annual  meeting,
to  serve  for  three  years.

Sect.  2.  The  Council  shall  elect,  each  year,  at  its  first  meeting
after  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Society,  the  following  officers  of
the  Society  :  a  President,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Treasurer,  who  shall
discharge  the  duties  usually  assigned  to  these  respective  officers.
The  Council  shall  elect  as  many  Vice-Presidents  as  shall  be  deemed
advisable.

Sect.  3.  The  Council  shall  exercise  general  supervision  of  the
investigations  of  the  Society,  and  shall  appoint  the  investigating
committees.

Sect.  4.  Vacancies  in  the  Council,  caused  b}"  death  or  resigna-
tion, shall  be  filled  by  the  Council.

Sect.  5.     The  President  shall  be  a  member  of  the  Council.

Article  III.  —  Members  and  Associates.

Section  1.  Any  person  of  respectable  character  and  attainments
is  eligible  to  the  Society  as  an  associate.  Associates  shall  receive
all  the  publications  of  the  Society,  may  participate  in  all  the  meetings,
present  communications,  and  join  in  the  debates.

Sect.  2.  Members,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  num-
ber, may  be  elected  by  the  Council  from  the  body  of  associates.
Members  have  all  the  privileges  of  associates,  are  entitled  to  vote,
and  are  eligible  to  the  Council.

Sect.  3.  Associates  may  be  elected  either  by  the  Council  or  by
the  Executive  Committee  of  any  branch,  after  nomination  in  writing
by  two  members  or  associates.


276  Constitution.

Sect.  4.  Each  member  and  associate  shall  pay  to  the  Treasurer
an  annual  assessment  of  three  dollars.  The  name  of  any  member  or
associate  two  years  in  arrears  for  annual  assessments  shall  be  erased
from  the  list  of  the  Society ;  and  no  such  person  shall  be  restored
until  he  has  paid  his  arrearages  or  has  been  reelected.

Sect.  5.  Any  member  or  associate  may  be  dropped  from  the  rolls
of  the  Society  on  recommendation  of  the  Council  and  a  two-thirds
vote  at  any  meeting  of  the  Society,  notice  of  such  recommendation
having  been  given  at  least  two  weeks  previously.

Article  IV. — Meetings.

Section  1.  The  Annual  Meeting  shall  be  held  the  second  Tuesday
in  January.

Sect.  2.     Other  meetings  may  be  held  at  the  call  of  the  Council.

Article  V.  —  Quorum.

Ten  members  shall  constitute  a  quorum  of  the  Society,  and  five  a
quorum  of  the  Council.

Article  VI. — Accounts.

A  committee  of  two  shall  be  appointed  at  each  annual  meeting  to
audit  the  accounts  of  the  Treasurer  for  the  year  closing  with  that
meeting.

Article  VII.  —  Similar  Societies.

It  shall  be  the  policy  of  this  Society,  by  correspondence  and  other-
wise, to  cooperate  with  societies  of  similar  object  elsewhere.

Article  VIII.  —  Branch  Societies.

Section  1.  A  Branch  of  the  Society  may  be  established  in  any
place  by  the  Council,  on  written  application  from  not  less  than  five
members  resident  in  that  place.

Sect.  2.  The  members  of  the  Society  on  whose  application  a
Branch  is  established  shall  constitute  an  Executive  Committee  to
arrange  the  affairs  of  that  Branch.  The  Executive  Committee  shall
have  power  to  add  to  their  numbers  by  the  election  of  other  members
of  the  Society  belonging  to  that  branch.  They  shall  also  have  power
to  choose  from  their  own  members  officers  of  the  Branch,  to  frame
by-laws  for  its  government,  and  to  elect  persons,  resident  in  their
immediate  vicinity,  as  associates  of  the  Society  and  members  of  the
Branch.


Constitution.  277


Article  IX.  —  By-Laws.

Section  1.  By-Laws  recommended  by  the  Council  may  be  adopted
at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Sect.  2.  By-Laws  may  be  rescinded  or  changed  upon  recommen-
dation of  the  Council  at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Article  X.  —  Amendments.

Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  recommended  by  the  Council,
may  be  adopted  at  any  annual  meeting  by  a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the
members  present.


PROCEEDINGS   OF  THE   ENGLISH   SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL   RESEARCH.

Members  and  associates,  on  payment  of  their  assessments,  may  have  any
Parts  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  English  Society  which  are  issued  during  the  period
of  their  membership.  But  the  Proceedings  will  not  be  sent  except  to  those  who
may  so  request.  They  may  also  purchase  the  back  numbers  of  the  Proceedings.
Parts  I..— VIII.,  40  cents  each;  Part  IX.,  80  cents.  Parts  X.  and  XI.  will  be
sent  on  application  to  members  and  associates  who  have  paid  the  assessment  for
1887.  To  associates  elected  during  1888  they  will  be  sold,  Part  X.,  60  cents;
Part  XI.,  80  cents.  Under  no  circumstances  is  a  member  or  associate  entitled
to  more  than  one  copy  of  each  part.


LIST    OF


Members  and  Associates.


(DECEMBER,  1887.)


Professor  HEM  P.  BOWDITCH,  M.D,      Professor  CHARLES  S.  MINOT,


Harvard  Medical  School.


Professor  GEORGE  S.  EGLLERTON,


University  of  Pennsylvania.


Harvard  Medical  School.


Professor  EDI ARD  C.  PICKERING,

Harvard  College  Observatory.


Dr.  W.   S.   BIGELOW,

Boston.
Prof.  HENRY  P.  BOWDITCH,

Boston.
Mr.  C.   B.  CORY,

Boston.
Prof.  T.  M.  DROWN,

Boston.

Prof.  G.  S.   FULLERTON,

Philadelphia.
Dr.  E.   G.  GARDINER,

Boston.
Mr.  C.  C.  JACKSON,

Boston.
Prof.  WILLIAM  JAMES,

Cambridge.
Dr.  JOSEPH  JASTROW,

Baltimore.
Prof.   S.   P.   LANGLEY,

"Washington.


^DounctL

Prof.   CHARLES  S.  MINOT,


Boston.
Prof.   SIMON  NEWCOMB,

"Washington.
Prof.  E.   C.   PICKERING,

Cambridge.
Mr.  W.  H.  PICKERING,

Cambridge.
Dr.  MORTON  PRINCE,

Boston.
Prof.  JOSIAH  ROYCE,

Cambridge.
Rev.  M.  J-.   SAVAGE,

Boston.
Mr.  S.  H.  SCUDDER,

Cambridge.
Mr.  COLEMAN  SELLERS,

Philadelphia.
Mr.  R.  PEARSALL  SMITH,

Philadelphia.


Prof.  WILLIAM  WATSON,

Boston.


treasurer,

Mr.  C.  C.  JACKSON,       -     -     24  Congress  Street,  Boston.


RICHARD  HODGSON,     -     -       5  Boylston  Place,  Boston.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


279


MEMBERS.


Prof.  Geo.  F.  Barker,  3909  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Pres.  F.  A.  P  Barnard,  Columbia  Coll.,  N.Y.

Dr.  W.  S.  Bigelow,  GO  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  W.  R.  Birdsall,  141  East  74th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Clarence  J.  Blake,  226  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Francis  Blake,  Keewaydin,  "Weston,  Mass.

Prof.  H.  P.  Bowditch,  Harv.  Med.  Sch.,  Bos-
ton.

Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  233  Clarendon  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  W.  N.  Bullard,  89  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Edward  Burgess,  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Lucien  Carr,  344  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Edward  D.  Cope,  2102  Pine  St.,  Phila.

C-  B.  CoRT,  8  Arlington  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  CowlES,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,
Mass.

Chas.  R.  Crane,  297  S.  Ashland  Avenue,
Chicago.

Prof.  W.  O.  Crosby,  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  R.  Cross,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Prof.  John  a.  Curtis,  127  East  33th  St.,  N.Y.

Thomas  Davidson,  Orange,  N.J.

Db-  F.  X.  Dercum,  G33  North  8th  St.,  Phila.

George  Dimmock,  61  Sacramento  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Prof.  T.  M.  Drown,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Prof.  "William  B.  Dwight,  Poughkeepsie,
Vassar  College,  N.Y.

Dr.  Robert  T.  Edes,  1216  Eighteenth  St.,
"Washington,  D.C.

S.  F.  Emmons,  U.S.  Geol.  Survey,  Box  591,
Washington,  D.C.

Prof.  C.  C.  Everett,  53  Garden  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Dr.  W.  Everett,  Adams  Academy,  Quincy,
Mass.

Mrs.  C.  L.  Franklin,  Baltimore,  Md.

Dr.  Persifor  Frazer,  201  South  5th  St.,
Phila.

Prof.  George  S.  Fullerton,  Univ.  of  Penn.,
Phila.

Thomas  Gaffield,  54  Allen  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Edward  G.  Gardiner,  239  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Dr.  F.  H.  Gerrish,  Portland,  Me.

G.  K.  Gilbert,  Washington,  D.C.

Prof.  Asa  Gray,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Albert  Hale,  13  Boylston  Place,  Boston.

George  S.  Hale,  10  Tremont  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  II.  Hall,  5  Avon  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  James  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Judge  Wm.  D.  Harden,  Savannah,  Ga.

William  T.  Harris,  LL.D.,  Concord,  Mass.

John  Heard,  Jr.,  Glenwood,  MaBS.

Angelo  Heilprin,  Acad,  of  Nat.  Sci.,  Phila.


Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  Cambridge,  Mass.

E.  B.  Hill,  53  Wall  St.,  N.Y.

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.,  5  Boylston  Place,
Boston.

Dr.  J.  B.  Holder,  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,
Central  Park,  New  York.

Henry  Holt,  23  W.  23d  St.,  New  York.

Gardiner  G.  Hubbard,  Washington,  D.C.

Prof.  ALPnEUS  Hyatt,  Soc.  of  Nat.  Hist.,
Boston.

C.  C.  Jackson,  181  Commonwealth  Avenue,
Boston.

Prof.  William  Jame3,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  Joseph  Jastrow,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,
Baltimore,  Md.

Prof.  H.  Jayne,  1826  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

J.  II.  Kidder,  Smithsonian  Inst.,  Washington.

Prof.  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Inst.,  Wash-
ington.

Prof.  D.  G.  Lyon,  Cambridge,  Mass.

J.  B.  Marcou,  Cosmos  Club,  Washington.

Prof.  John  P.  Marshall,  College  Hill,  Mass.

W.  J.  McGee,  U.S.  Geol.  Survey,  Washing-
ton.

Josiah  B.  Millet,  150  Charles  St.,  Boston.

C.  K.  Mills,  190J  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  Charles   Sedgwick  Minot,  22  Marl-
borough, St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Simon  Newcomb,  Washington,  D.C.

Dr.  James  R.  Nichols,  Haverhill,  Mass.

Gen.  F.  A.   Osborn,  236    Marlborough    St.,
Boston.

Prof.  A.  S.  Packard,  Providence,  R.I.

Dr.  F.  W.  Page,  Hotel  Cluny,  Boylston  St.,
Boston.

Prof.  G.  H.  Palmer,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Wm.  L.  Parker,  339  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Francis  Parkman,  50  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  B.   O.  Peirce,  P.O.  Box  74,  Waverley,
Mass.

Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  Edward    C.    Pickering,    Cambridge,
Mass.

W.    H.    Pickering,    Harvard    Observatory,
Cambridge.

W.  P.  Preble,  Jr.,  237  Broadway,  N.Y.

Dr.   Morton  Prince,   71  Marlborough  St ,
Boston.

Raphael  Pumpelly,  Newport,  R.I.

Dr.  Charles  P.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  James  J.  Putnam,  106  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Josiah  Quincy,  66  State  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Edward  T.  Reichert,  Univ.  of  Penn.,
Phila.

Prof.  J.  M.  Rice,  U.S.  Nav.  Acad.,  Annap
olis,  Md.


280


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Dr.  W.  L.  Richardson,  225  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  V.  Riley,  1700 13th  St.,  N.W.,  "Wash-
ington, D.C.

John  Ritchie,  Jr.,  Box  2725,  Boston.

John  C.  Ropes,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  Josiah  Royce,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  C.  S.  Sargent,  Brookline,  Mass.

Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  25  Concord  Sq.,  Boston.

G.  C.  Sawyer,  Utica,  N.Y.

Samuel  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  E.  C.  Seguin,  419  Madison  Ave.,  New
York.

Coleman  Sellers,  3301  Baring  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  R.  W.  Shufeldt,  Smithsonian  Inst.,
Washington.

R.  Pearsall  Smith,  1305  Arch  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  H.  R.  Stedman,  Roslindale,  Mass.


Roland  Thaxter,  98  Pinckney  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  W.  Thomson,  1426  Walnut  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  C.  H.  Tot,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Frederick  William  True,  U.  S.  Nat.  Mus.,
Washington.

Edmund  Tweedy,  Newport,  R.I.

Dr.  O.  F.  Wadsworth,  133  Boylston  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  J.  W.  Warren,  119  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Sereno  Watson,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  William  Watson,  107  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Samuel  Wells,  155  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Harold  Whiting,  3  Garden  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

John  G.  Whittier,  Danvers,  Mass.

Rev.  Edward  J.  Young,  Raymond  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.


ASSOCIATE    MEMBERS.


Francis  E.  Abbot,  Larch  St.,  Cambridge,

Mass.
Dr.  S.  L.  Abbot,  90  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.
Brooks  Adams,  23  Court  St.,  Boston.
Geo.  R.  Agassiz,  14  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.
Miss  Mary  Agnew,  Orange  Valley,  N.J.
Joseph  Albree,  20  Market  St.,  Allegheny,

Pa.
Mrs.  T.    B.    Aldrich,   53   Mt.  Vernon  St.,

Boston.
Mrs.  Wm.   Alexander,  42  West  49th   St.,

New  York.
Francis  Almy,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Charles  H.  Ames,  5  Walnut  St.,  Boston.
Miss    Elizabeth   L.  Andrew,  110  Charles

St.,  Boston.
John  F.  Andrew,  cor.  Gloucester  and  Com-
monwealth Ave  ,  Boston.
Mrs.  J.  A.  Andrews,  223  West  Chester  Park,

Boston.
C.  F.  Atkinson,  46  Mason  Building,  Boston.
Prof.  Peter  T.  Austen,  New  Brunswick,

N.J.
George  D.  Ayers,  Maiden,  Mass.
Dr.  Dallas  Bache,  Fort  Adams,  Newport,

R.I.
Mrs.  John   Bancroft,  61  Mt.  Vernon   St.,

Boston.
Robert  H.  Bancroft,  247  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.
Thurlow  Weed  Barnes,  Messrs.  Houghton,

Mifflin,  &  Co.,  4  Park  St.,  Boston.
Clarence  W.  Barron,  121  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.
S.  J.  Barrows,  141  Franklin  St.,  Boston.
Dr.  C.  S.  Bartlett,  176  Commonwealth  Ave.,

Boston.
Dr.  W.   A.   Bartlett,  156   West  53d    St.,
N.Y.


Waldron  Bates,  5  Pemberton  Sq.,  Boston.

F.  S.  Benson,  University  Club,  New  York.

Bernard  Berenson,  Harvard  Coll.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Gorham  Blake,  Londsville,  White  Co.,  Ga.

John  H.  Blake,  53  Devonshire  St.,  Boston.

James  B.  Bond,  Carrollton  notel.  Baltimore,
Md.

C.  P.  Bowditch,  28  State  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  H.  I.  Bowditch,  113  Boylstcn  St.,  Boston.

Richard  Bower,  Halifax  Hotel,  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia.

Clinton  T.  Brainard,  Harvard  College,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Dr.  E.  C.  Briggs,  1  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

Martin  Brimmer,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Frederick  G.  Brombeug,  Mobile,  Ala.

John  F.  Brown,  19  Mechanic  St.,  Fitchburg,
Mass.

Mrs.  John  F.  Brown,  19  Mechanic  St.,  Fitch-
burg, Mass.

Dr.  S.  Brown,  Hotel  Normandie,  Broadway
&33th  St.,  New  York.

G.  H.  Browne,  8  Garden  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Albert  H.  Buck,  13  East  38th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Howard  M.  Buck,  Hotel  Guildford,  New-
bury St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Frank  E.  Bundy,  402  Columbus  Ave.,
Boston.

Col.  John  C.  Bundy,  92  La  Salle  St.,  Chicago.

John  B.  Burnet,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Tucker  Burr,  Nahant,  Mass.

Miss  A.  E.  Bursley,  96  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Edward  T.  Cabot,  Clyde  St.,  Brookline,
Mass.

Miss  A.  J.  Callender,  Mill  St.,  Dorchester,
Mass.

Miss  Helen  Campbell,  Box  22  Orange,  N.J.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


281


Mrs.  Mason  Campbell,  1826  Delancy  Place,
Phila.

Samuel  Cassner,  Jr.,  3729  Chestnut  St.,
Phila.

Capt.  R.  Catlin,  Soldiers'  Home,  Washing-
ton.

Horace  P.  Chandler,  47  Devonshire  St.,
Boston.

G.  P.  Chase,  234  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  E.  D.  Ciieney,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

W.  B.  Clark,  214  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

S.  B.  Clarke,  50  Post-Office  Building,  N.Y.

Charles  A.  Coffin,  178  Devonshire  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Prof.  A.  S.  Cook,  Univ.  of  Cal.,  Berkeley,
Cal.

Dr.  A.  Coolidge,  81  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Isabel  Coolidge,  114  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Robert  Craven,  Ridley  Park,  Penn.

Allen  Curtis,  54  Devonshire  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Greely  S.  Curtis,  28  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  Livingston  Cushing,  "Weston,  Mass.

Arthur  II.  Cutler,  20  West  43d  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  E.  W.  Dale,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston.

Wm.  Franklin  Dana,  311  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  L.  L.  Delafield,  L.  L.  Delafield,  49
Exchange  Place,  New  York.

Miss  Lucy  Derby,  163  Charles  St.,  Boston.

Arthur  Dexter,  Somerset  Club,  Boston.

Mrs.  Albert  Diblee,  86  Buckingham  St.,
Cambridge,  Mass.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Ave.,
Boston.

Miss  A.  A.  Draper,  531  5th  Ave.,  N.Y.

Edward  S.  Drown,  Episcopal  Theological
School,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Theodore  Dunham,  93  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  W.  R.  Dunham,  Keene,  N.H.

Mrs.  John  Elliott,  211  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Samuel  H.  Emery,  Jr.,  Concord,  Mass.

Dr.  H.  C.  Ernst,  Harv.  Med.  Sch.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Edwin  T.  Evans,  189  North  St.,  Buffalo,
N.Y.

Mrs.  Glendower  Evans,  12  Otis  Place,  Bos-
ton.

Dr.  Orpheus  Everts,  Supt.  Cincinnati  Sani-
tarium, College  Hill,  Ohio.

Prof.  J.  H.  Farmer,  Woodstock,  Ontario,
Can.

Thomas  C.  Felton,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mrs.  Barnum  W.  Field,  221  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Andrew  Fiske,  10  Tremont  St.,  Room  65,
Boston.

Mrs.  W.  G.  Fitch,  22  Huntington  Av.,  Boston.

Prof.  George  Forman,  297  South  7th  St.,
Newark,  N.J.

Abbott  Foster,  Utica,  N.Y.

G.  French,  "  Evening  Gazette,"  Worcester,
M  ass.


O.  B.  Frothingham,  US  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Harlow  S.  Gale,  44  S.  Middle,  New  Haven,
Conn.

Miss  Eugenia  Gardiner,  289  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  L.  Gardner,  132  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.

J.  R.  Garfield,  80  Washington  Sq.,  New
York.

Dr.  George  W.  Gay,  589  Tremont  St.,  Boston.

Jos.  M.  Gibbens,  153  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Bent.  I.  Oilman,  Messrs.  Brown,  Shippley,
&  Co.,  London,  England.

Brodley  Gilman,  Concord,  N.H.

Rev.  Percy  S.  Grant,  Brookline,  Mass.

Prof.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

David  S.  Greenough,  91  Franklin  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Miss  Sarah  Louise  Guild,  26  Mt.  Vernon
St.,  Boston.

Prof.  T.  P.  Hall,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.

Oliver  B.  Harden,  907  Walnut  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  Henry  C.  Haven,  200  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Henry  W.  Haynes,  239  Beacon  St.  Boston.

Mrs.  Sidney  M.  Hedges,  76  Highland  St.,
Roxbury,  Mass.

Augustus  Hemenway,  Readville,  Mass.

Rev.  Charles  Higbee,  Pelham,  N.Y.

Rev.  R.  A.  Holland,  St.  George's  Rectory,
2918  Pine  St.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Samuel  V.  V.  Holmes,  Princeton,  N.J.

Miss  E.  R.  nooPER,  111  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

N.  L.  Hooper,  56  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Samuel  A.  Hopkins,  235  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Prof.  E.  J.  Houston,  1521  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Phila.

William  A.  Hovey,  American  Bell  Telephone
Company,  95  Milk  St.,  Boston.

Woodward  Hudson,  Concord,  Mass,

Mrs.  Geo.  C.  Hull,  1012  Francis  St.,  St.  Jos-
eph, Mo.

F.  C.  Hunt,  The  Winfield  Mortgage  &  Trust
Co.,  Winfield,  Kansas.

Rev.  J.  E.  Hurlbut,  Mittineague,  Mass.

Jos.  Hutchinson,  520  Montgomery  St.,  Room
5,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Prof.  E.  J.  James,  201  South  41st  St.,  Phila.

H.  La  Barre  Jayne,  208  South  Fifth  St.,
Phila.

Charles  R.  Johnson,  Worcester,  Mass.,
Box  492.

Miss  Charlotte  H.  Johnson,  123  Marl-
borough St.,  Boston.

Miss  Cornelia  F.  Johnson,  123  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Rev.  Franklin  Johnson,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mrs.  William  B.  Kehew,  317  Beacon  St.,
Boston.

W.  A.  Kelsoe,  City  Editor  "Republican,"
St.  Louis,  Mo.


282


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Prof.  O.  H.  Kendall,  3828  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Mrs.  Caroline  A.  Kennard,  Walnut  St.,
Brookline,  Mass.

Max   Alexander   Kilvert,  11   Stoughton,
Harvard  College,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Benjamin  Kimball,  8  Congress  St.,  Boston.

Miss   Hannah   P.   Kimball,    325-  Common-
wealth Ave.,  Boston.

Graham  Gr.  Lact,  St.  Joseph,  Mo.

Miss  H.  L.  Lane,  41  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

B.  J.  Lang,  Chickering&  Sons,  Boston.

John  Lathrop,  10  Gloucester  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.   Amort   A.    Lawrence,  59  Common-
wealth Ave.,  Boston.

Walter  E.  Lawton,  Box  3429,  New  York.

Joseph  Lee,  131  Devonshire  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Albert  Leffingwell,  Dansville,  N.Y.

Louis  E.  Levy,  646  North  8th  St.,  Phila.

Miss  Anna  II.  Lewis,  Soa  Cottage,  York,  Me.

Frank  S.  Lewis,  337  Arch  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  William  Libbey,  Jr.,  Princeton,  N.J.

Col.  John  S.  Lockwood,  82  Equitable  Build-
ing, Boston.

Mrs.  H.  C.  Lodge,  1227  19th  St.,  Washington,
D.C.

Mrs.  John  E.  Lodge,  31  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

W.  S.  Logan,  54  William  St.,  N.Y.

Geo.    E.    Long,    Jos.    Dixon    Crucible  Co.,
Jersey  City,  N.J.

Augustus  M.   Lord,  12  Lowell   St.,  Cam-
bridge.

Rev.  Howard  MacQueary,  Canton,  O.

Charles  MacVeagh,  45  William  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Arthur  Macy,  17  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Abby  F.  Manning,  129  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  Markoe,  2001  Pine  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  Allan  Marquand,  Princeton,  N.J.

Charles  Marseilles,  Exeter,  N.II.

Henry  Rutgers   Marshall,  74  Wall  St.,
NY.

N.  Matthews,  Jr.,  23  Court  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Nereus  Mendenhall,  Jamestown,  Guil-
ford Co.,  N.C.

Miss  Madeleine  Mixter,  120  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  A.  Morris,  Westchester,  N.Y.

Pres.  P.  V.  N.  Myers,  Belmont  College,  Col-
lege Hill,  O.

John    Hawks     Noble,    312    No.    22d    St.,
Omaha,  Neb.

Prof.  Charles  Eliot  Norton,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Lieut.  Charles  R.    Noyes,    Whipple    Bar.
racks,  Prescott,  Arizona.

Dr.  Richard  J.  Nunn,  119  York  St.,  Savan-
nah, Ga.

Mrs.   Howard    Okie,    192    Dartmouth    St.,
Boston.

Dr.  C.  A.  Oliver,  1507  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Wm.  K.  Otis,  103  West  34th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Horace  Packard,  Concord  and  Wash-
ington Sts.,  Boston.


Capt.  Carl  Palfrey,  Oswego,  N.Y.

Edmund   M.    Parker,  5  Craigie  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Henry  Parkman,  15  Charles  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Mary  R.  Parkman,  31  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Miss  Fanny  Peabody,  247  Berkeley  St.,  Boa-
ton.

John  E.  Peabody,  183  Marlborough  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Dr.  Grace  Peckham,  25  Madison  Ave., N.Y.

Miss  Pendleton,  1522  Locust  St.,  Phila.

Dr.  C.  B.  Penrose,  1331  Spruce  St.,  Phila.

Miss  Nora  Perry,  Ticknor  &  Sons,  Tremont
St.,  Boston.

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps,  Audover,  Mass.

Miss    Katharine    Pierce,    339  Beacon  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  T.  T.  Pitman,  The  Berkshire,  194  Dart-
mouth St.,  Boston.

Mrs.    Maria    S.    Porter,    286    Beacon    St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  William  G.  Preston,  Hotel  Berkeley,
Boston.

Charles  Prince,  44  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

F.  O.  Prince,  311  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Gordon  Prince,  290  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Annie  C.  Putnam,  G3  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

George  Putnam,  24  Quincy  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Rev.  W.  S.   Rainsford,  209  East  16th  St.,
N.Y.

Paul  C.  Ransom,  1298  Main  St.,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Arthur  Reed,  GG  State  St.,  Boston.

Edwin   Reed,    103  Brattle  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

James  W.  Richer,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,
Boston.

Miss  Mary  Rivers,  Milton,  Mass.

Mrs.  Moncure  Robinson,  Jr.,  Airdrie,  Paoli,
Chester  Co.,  Penn.

Dr.  J.  West  Roosevelt,  56  W.   18th   St.,
N.Y.

Arthur  Rotch,  3  Commonwealth  Ave.,  Bos-
ton.

Miss  Joanna  Rotch,  Milton,  Mass.

Samuel  H.  Russell,  13  Doane  St.,  Boston.

Charles  E.  Sampson,  193  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.
'  Mrs.  Turner  Sargent,  59  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.    Winthrop  Sargent,     207     Common-
wealth Ave.,  Boston.

Miss  Vida  D.  Scudder,  250  Newbury  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  Gideon  Scull,  131  Commonwealth  Ave.,
Boston.

Joseph  H.  Sears,  5  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Pres.  Julius  H.  Seelye,  Amherst,  Mass.

Miss  Helen  S.   Shaw,  23  Marlborough  St.,,
Boston.

Thomas  SHKRWiN,95Milk  St.,  Boston.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


283


Mise    Blanche    Shimmin,    229   Beacon    St.,
Boston.

Wm.  Allaire  Shortt,  35  Broadway,  New
York.

Mrs.  Aubrey  H.  Smith,  Phila.

H.  W.  Smith,  4th  and  Walnut  Sts.,  Phila.

Horace  J    Smith,  Coulter  House,  German-
town,  Penn.

L  Logan  Smith,  46  Barclay  St.,  New  York.

Philip  Sherwood  Smith,  261  Georgia  St.,
Buffalo,  NY.

R.  Morris  Smith,  3715  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

Francis  P.  Stearns,  College  Hill,  Mass.

Frank  It.  Stoddard,  Box  5083,  Boston.

Chas.  W.  Stone,  68  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Stanley  Stoner,  3810  Delmar  Ave.,  St.  Louis,
Mo.

Albert  Storer,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Malcolm  Storer,  182  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Tappan,  147  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Frederick  S.  Taylor,  231  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Albert  Thorndike,  22  Garden  St.,  Cam-
bridge.

S.  Lothrop  Thorndike,  Cambridge,  Mass.

JosErn  G.  Thorp,  5  Concord  Ave.,  Cam
bridge.

Miss  Ticknor,  41  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Timmins,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  George  Tyson,  314  Dartmouth  St., Bos-
ton.


Rev.  C.  Van  Norden,  98  Elliot  St.,  Spring-
field, Mass.

Henshaw  Bates  Walley,  40  State  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  C.  Walsh,  121  W.  44th  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  George  Waring,  Newport,  R.I.

Joseph  B.  Warner,  33  Court  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  C.  H.  Washburn,  Columbia  St.,  Dor-
chester, Mass.

Dr.  Wm.  H.  Watson,  Utica,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Webb,  Salem,  Mass.

Dr.  Walter  Wesselhoept,  Cambridge,
Mass .

Rev.  D.  C.  Weston,  2  Rutherford  PI.,  NY.

Miss  Alice  B.  White,  213  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Charles  T.  White,  213  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Miss  Lilian  Whiting,  Hotel  Brunswick,
Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Russell  Whitman,  380  Chicago  Ave.,  Chi-
cago.

Mrs.  E  T.  Wilkes,  Sioux  Falls,  Dakota.

Miss  Frances  E.  Willard.  Evanston,  III.

Rev.  W.  H.  Williams,  Wakefield,  Mass.

Mrs.  Roger  Wolcott,  173  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Miss  Katharine  P.  Wormeley,  Newport,
R.I.

Morrill  Wyman,  Jr.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mrs.  Wynne,  63  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any  change  of  address,
to  the  Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.


PKOCEEDINGS


OF  THE


j  for  Pp


id  ta»l.


Vol.  I.


MARCH,  1889.


No.  4.


MEETINGS    OF   THE   SOCIETY.

Boston,  Nov.  29,  1887.
Eighth  meeting  of  the  Societ\T.

Two  hundred  and  fifty  persons  present.  Professor  C.  S.  Minot  in
the  chair.

Record  of  the  previous  meeting  (May  12,  1887)  read  and  ap-
proved.

List  of  persons  elected  Associates  by  the  Council  since  the  pre-
vious meeting  of  the  Society  was  read.

The  Chairman  drew  attention  to  the  various  circulars  which  had
been  issued  by  the  Society  since  the  previous  meeting,  pointing  out
that  funds  were  urgently  needed  for  the  continuance  of  the  inves-
tigation, and  that  the  active  personal  assistance  of  members  was  re-
quired to  secure  large  returns  to  the  circulars  of  questions  issued.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch  read  the  report  of  the  Committee  on
Thought-Transference.1

Professor  Minot  then  vacated  the  chair  in  favor  of  Professor
Bowditch,  and  read  the  report  of  the  Committee  on  Experimental
Psychology,1  after  the  reading  of  which  he  resumed  the  chair.

Professor  Royce  read  the  report  of  the  Committee  on  Apparitions
and  Haunted  Houses.  *

In  the  absence  of  Mr.  C.  B.  Cory,  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on
Hypnotism,  his  report  on  Hypnotic  Phenomena  J  was  read  by  the
Secretary.

Dr.  W.  N.  Bullard  read  the  report  of  the  Committee  on  Medium-
istic  Phenomena.1

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

RICHARD  HODGSON,  Secretary.


1  See  Proceedings,  No.  3.


286  Remarks  on  Mr,  Peirce's  Rejoinder,

Boston,  Jan.  10,  1888.

Ninth  meeting  (annual)  of  the  Society.

Two  hundred  and  fifty  persons  present.  Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch
in  the  chair.

Record  of  the  previous  meeting  (Nov.  29,  1887)  read  and  ap-
proved.

List  of  persons  elected  Associates  by  the  Council  since  the  pre-
vious meeting  of  the  Society  was  read.

In  the  absence  of  the  Treasurer,  the  Chairman  called  upon  the
Assistant  Treasurer  to  make  an  informal  statement  as  to  the  finan-
cial position  of  the  Societ}T.

Mr.  W.  L.  Parker  and  Dr.  J.  W.  Warren  were  appointed  auditors
of  the  financial  statement  to  be  made  by  the  Treasurer.

The  following  were  elected  to  the  Council,  to  hold  office  till  1891  :  —

Dr.  W.  S.  Bigelow,  Prof.  W.  James,

Mr.  C.  B.  Cory,  Prof.  S.  P.  Langley,

Prof.  G.  S.  Fullerton,  Prof.  E.  C.  Pickering,

Mr.  R.  Pearsall  Smith.

Professor  C.  S.  Mi  not  read  the  report  on  the  diagram  returns  re-
ceived by  the  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology.

Professor  Royce  read  the  report  on  the  narratives  received  by  the
Committee  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

Professor  James  reported  on  some  cases  of  "  Automatic  Writing."

The  meeting  then  adjourned.

RICHARD  HODGSON,  Secretary,


REMARKS  ON  MR.  PEIRCE'S  REJOINDER.

BY  EDMUND  GURNEY.

I  will  endeavor  to  make  the  present  reply  as  short  as  possible,  my
object  being,  not  so  much  to  make  controversial  points,  as  to  ensure,
as  far  as  possible,  that  Mr.  Peirce's  treatment  of  the  evidence  and
argument  for  telepathy  shall  not  prevent  his  readers  from  studying
them  at  length  and  at  first-hand.  Consequently  I  shall  say  little  or
nothing  on  matters  where  I  believe  that  an  impartial  study  of  what
has  been  said  in  "Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  or  in  my  previous  reply,
obviates  the  necessity  of  further  explanation  and  defence,  nor  shall  I
attempt  to  put  what  I  have  to  say  in  connected  literary  form.  It  will
be  enough  to  state  the  points  which  need  stating,  one  after  another,
with  references  to  the  pages  in  Mr.  Peirce's  last  paper.


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  287

Mr.  Peirce's  treatment  of  the  question  of  general  probabilities
(p.  182)  seems  to  me  completely  fallacious.  My  argument  was,  that
a  particular  series  of  events,  of  the  sort  known  as  coincidences,  could
not,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  probabilities,  be  due  to  chance.  My
calculation  made  out  the  degree  of  probability  against  chance,  as  the
cause  of  these  coincidences,  to  be  enormous  ;  and  Mr.  Peirce  objected
to  my  figures,  on  the  ground  that  in  mundane  affairs  probabilities
never  really  ran  so  high.  I  accordingly  gave  a  simple  practical  in-
stance where  they  ran  higher,  —  an  instance  yielding  a  probability  of
almost  incalculable  magnitude  that  a  particular  series  of  events  was
not  due  to  chance.  The  instance  was  that  of  a  pair  of  dice  turning
up  sixes  a  hundred  times  running,  from  which  we  should  unhesitat-
ingly conclude  that  the  dice  were  loaded.  Here  was  a  case  of  an
enormous  (X  posteriori  probability  against  a  chance  Causation,  exactly
parallel  to  my  case  of  the  coincidences.  Mr.  Peirce,  not  being  able
to  directly  deny  the  legitimacy  of  the  illustration,  confuses  the  ques-
tion by  introducing  a  case  of  a  priori  probability,  totally  irrelevant  to
the  matter  in  hand.  He  supposes  the  throw  of  a  siugle  die,  which  we
should  ordinarily  regard  as  certain  to  turn  up  one  or  another  of  its
faces,  but  in  respect  of  which  there  is  an  appreciable  possibilit}'  that  it
"  may  rest  on  its  vertex,  or  fly  up  to  heaven,  or  vanish  altogether,  or
that,  before  it  reaches  the  table,  earth  and  heaven  shall  be  annihi-
lated." It  would  be  easy,  but  it  is  unnecessary,  to  demur  to  this
statement  on  its  own  account.  The  question  is  not  of  the  appreciable
possibility  that  one  new  and  extraordinaiy  event  will  occur  at  all ;  but
of  the  appreciable  possibility  that  a  series  of  events,  similar  in  char-
acter, but  no  one  of  them  new  or  extraordinary,  has  occurred  by
chance.  Mr.  Peirce  may  hold,  if  he  likes,  that  the  probability,  which
plain  men  would  describe  as  certainty,  that  his  die  will  not  ac-
cidentally fly  up  to  heaven,  rests  on  "  assumptions,"  and  "  refers  to
an  imaginary  state  of  things  ;  "  it  is  enough  for  me  that  the  probability
which  plain  men  would  describe  as  certainty,  that  m}^  dice  did  not  ac-
cidentally turn  up  sixes  a  hundred  times  running,  rests  on  no  assump-
tions, and  refers  to  the  actually  existing  state  of  things.  In  what
way,  when  estimating  such  a  probability  numerically  in  the  analogous
case  of  the  coincidences,  I  can  be  held  to  "  admit  that  the  number
has  no  real  significance,"  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive.

As  regards  Mr.  Peirce's  remarks  on  p.  182,  bottom,  and  p.  183,
top,  it  seems  enough  to  refer  to  my  former  reply,  p.  176,  bottom,  and
177.  I  do  not  "suppose  that  hallucinations  are  experiences  particularly
well  remembered"  (p.  183),  in  the  sense  which  Mr.  Peirce  implies.
I  hold  them  to  be  neither  better  nor  worse  remembered  than  other
equally  rare  and  striking  experiences.


288  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

Mr.  Peirce  cannot,  I  think,  have  given  much  time  or  care  to  the
subject  of  hallucinations,  or  he  could  not  have  put  forward  (p.  184),
as  the  one  type  of  "  genuine  hallucination,"  w%  the  product  of  an  over-
wrought brain,  which  is  preceded  by  great  depression,  accompanied  by
faintness,  and  followed  hy  an  access  of  terror."  Such  hallucinations
are  very  rare,  and  are  no  more  "  genuine  "  than  numbers  of  others.
(See  "Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Chap  XI.,  on  "  Transient  Halluci-
nations of  the  Sane.")

So  far  from  there  being  "  no  good  reason  for  limiting  the  census-
question  to  a  period  of  twelve  years"  (p.  184),  there  were  two  very
good  reasons  :  (1)  the  imperfection  of  human  memory,  of  which  Mr.
Peirce  supplies  an  instance,  since  he  describes  a  hallucination  of  his
own,  of  thirty  years  ago,  as  having  all  but  escaped  his  recollection  ;
and  (2)  the  fact  that  most  of  the  best  established  coincidental  cases,
with  which  the  non-coincidental  cases  had  to  be  compared,  fell  within
the  assigned  period.

The  census  inquiry  was  not  limited,  as  Mr.  Peirce  represents,  to
hallucinations  presenting  persons  really  alive,  but  to  hallucinations
presenting  persons  who,  as  in  the  coincidental  <;ases,  were  believed  by
the  percipient  to  be  alive  ;  and  so  far  from  this  involving  a  "  fallacy,"
a  fallacy  would  have  been  involved  in  reasoning  conducted  on  any
other  basis.

The  error  in  Mr.  Peirce's  argument  at  the  top  of  p.  185  may  be
best  shown  by  an  illustration.  Suppose  I  put  an  advertisement  in
the  papers,  asking  persons  who  have  had  small-pox,  though  vacci-
nated in  childhood,  to  communicate  with  me  ;  and  suppose  my  appeal
to  reach  a  circle  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  people,  strangers  to
me,  of  whom  five  take  the  trouble  to  write  and  tell  me  that  they  have  had
the  experience  in  question.  And  suppose  that  I  address  inquiries  on  the
same  subject  to  the  one  thousand  peopJe  most  nearly  connected  with
me  and  with  my  few  intimate  friends,  and  find  that  five  out  of  the  one
thousand  have  been  similarly  Affected.  Mr.  Peirce  would  apparently
conclude  that  the  one  thousand  form  a  class  two  hundred  and  fifty
times  as  "fertile"  in  cases  of  small- pox  as  the  general  population.
Most  other  people,  T  fancy,  would  conclude  that  only  a  very  small
proportion  of  the  newspaper-readers  who  had  had  the  experience  had
answered  my  appeal.  As  regards  my  alleged  petitio  princ'pii  (p.  185) ,
I  can  but  refer  once  more  to  the  sentences  from  the  opening  of  Chap.
XIII.  of  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  quoted  in  my  last  paper,  p.  176.

P.  186.  Mr.  Peirce  says:  "Persons  who,  from  the  percipient's
stand-point,  appear  particularly  likely  to  die,  are,  we  find,  particularly
apt  to  appear  in  hallucinations."  I  suppose  that  this  statement  is
founded  on  those  cases  in  "Phantasms  of  the  Living  " —  an  extremely


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  289

small  proportion  of  the  whole  number  —  where  the  so-called  "  agent  "
was  known  by  the  percipient  to  be  seriously  ill.  But  even  if  such
hallucinations  were  numerous  enough  to  justify  Mr.  Peirce's  assertion,
at  least  two  strong  objections  may  be  urged  to  his  conclusion,  that
they  must  have  been  due  to  the  percipient's  knowledge  of  the  illness.

(1.)  By  what  right  does  he  assume  the  correctness  of  the  evidence
for  the  fact  and  the  circumstances  of  the  hallucination,  in  these  par-
ticular cases,  while  disputing  it  in  the  far  more  numerous  cases  where
the  "  agent  "  was  supposed  by  the  percipient  to  be  in  normal  health?
The  evidence  must  surely  be  judged,  throughout,  on  its  own  account,
and  not  be  picked  to  suit  a  particular  hypothesis.  And  of  two  rival
hypotheses,  that  which  covers  all  the  facts,  as  telepathy  does  here,  is
naturally  to  be  preferred  to  one  which  only  covers  a  small,  arbitrarily-
selected  group  of  the  facts.

(2.)  How  does  he  account  for  the  close  correspondence,  in  time,  of
the  hallucination  with  the  death,  in  the  cases  —  of  which  the  small  class
in  question  chiefly  consist  —  where  the  more  or  less  serious  condition
of  the  "  agent's  "  health  had  been  equally  well  known  to  the  percipi-
ent for  weeks,  and  even  months,  before?

Mr.  Peirce's  next  sentence  (p.  186)  reproduces  his  gratuitous  and
erroneous  view  of  "genuine  hallucinations,"  already  sufficiently
noticed  (p.  288).  The  "  peculiar  terror"  is  an  extremely  rare  con-
comitant.

To  the  two  pages  187-9  ("In  the  discussion  of  each  story"  —
"  destructive  of  sound  judgment")  I  can  give  no  better  reply  than  is
already  given  in  the  "  General  Criticism  of  the  Evidence"  ("  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,"  Vol.  I.,  Chap.  IV.,  pp.  161-72).  I  hope  that  Mr.
Peirce's  readers  will  consult  that  chapter  before  accepting  his  sweep-
ing statement  that  telepathy  is  opposed  to  "  some  of  the  fundamental
elements  of  the  general  conception  of  nature,"  and  to  "  the  main
principles  of  science."  *  Even  less  defensible  is  the  view,  by  which
much  of  the  remainder  of  his  case  is  vitiated,  that  it  is  sufficient  to
suggest  "  an  explanation  for  each  story  more  probable  than  the  tele-
pathic explanation."  This,  of  course,  entirely  ignores  the  quin-
tessential point  of  the  telepathic  argument  —  the  cumulation  of
similar  instances.  A  single  illustration  —  that  of  the  dice  —  will
again  serve.  If  the  dice  turn  up  sixes  once,  by  far  the  most  probable
explanation  is,  that  they  did  so  by  chance,  and  no  sane  person  will
conclude  that  they  are  loaded ;  but  if  they  turn  up  sixes  a  hundred
times  running,  no  sane  person  will  conclude  anything  else.

1  Ab  to  the  alleged  rarity  of  telepathic  effects  "  we  must  not  be  too  positive  that  the  tele-
pathic action  is  confined  to  the  well-marked  or  extensive  instances  on  which  the  proof  of  it  has
to  depend."     (See  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Vol.1.,  p.  97.)


290  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

P.  189.  I  have  never  admitted  that  I  had  "  the  bias  of  an  advo-
cate ;  "  what  I  admitted  was  some  slight  (very  slight)  justification  for
Mr.  Peirce,  if  he  chose  to  regard  me  as  an  advocate.  I  approached
the  subject  quite  as  sceptically  as  he  did  ;  and  to  this  day  I  agree
with  him  in  professing  "a  legitimate  and  well-founded  prejudice
against  the  supernatural."

A  little  lower,  Mr.  Peirce's  bare  assertion  that  one  of  his  old  objec-
tions is  "logically  sound"  is  less  persuasive  than  would  be  some
reply  to  the  passage  (pp.  158-9)  in  which  I  have  proved  it,  as  I
conceive,  to  be  the  reverse.  But,  as  he  withdraws  the  objection,  I
need  say  no  more  about  it.

Mr.  Peirce  has  certainly  not  added  to  the  force  of  his  Uiird  objec-
tion. The  hnlluciuatious  in  the  coincidental  cases  of  the  class  under
debate  were  recognized  as  representing  particular  persons.  It  is  of  hal-
lucinations of  this  class,  and  of  no  other,  that  account  has  to  be  taken
in  estimating  the  comparative  frequency  of  non-coincidental  cases.
Whether  a  recorded  hallucination  was  of  the  "  recognized "  class
was  one  of  the  details  as  to  which  inquiry  was  made  after  the  more
general  census  question  had  been  answered  in  the  affirmative.  (See
"  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Vol.  II.,  p.  7,  note.)  Mr.  Peirce's  argu-
ment here  is  curiously  suicidal ;  for,  even  if  it  were  the  case  that  per-
sons who  have  had  occasional  impressions  of  a  quite  different  kind
were  "  abnormally  subject"  to  this  particular  t}Tpe  of  hallucination,
they  would  be  more,  and  not  less,  likely  than  other  people  to  recall
instances,  which  is  just  what  not  one  of  the  percipients  in  the  cases
to  which  Mr.  Peirce  objects  has  been  able  to  do.

P.  190.  Objection  6.  In  his  first  comment  Mr.  Peirce  seems  to  have
missed  my  point.  Once  more  let  me  repeat,  what  had  to  be  done  was
to  make  a  numerical  comparison  of  certain  coincidental  hallucinations
with  non-coincidental  cases  similar  in  kind.  For  a  non-coincidental
case  to  be  included  in  the  statistics  used  it  would  be  sufficient  that
the  percipient  believed  himself  to  be  awake  at  the  time  of  his  experi-
ence. I  should  not  have  been  justified  in  rejecting  a  case  merely
because  I  had  not  conclusive  proof  that  he  2vas  awake  ;  and  the  co-
incidental cases  had,  of  course,  to  be  treated  on  the  same  principle.  I
may  add  that  the  belief  in  question  is  itself  a  very  strong  proof  of  its
own  truth,  since  it  very  rarely  happens  that  after  waking  from  a  dream
we  continue  to  believe  that  it  was  a  piece  of  real  waking  experience.
To  Mr.  Peirce's  second  comment  I  can  allow  no  weight.  There  is
absolutely  nothing  in  the  fact  of  the  coincidence  to  lead  the  percipient
to  conclude  that  he  had  been  awake  rather  than  asleep  at  the  time  of
his  experience.  Rather  is  the  tendency  of  percipients,  shown  in
several  cases,  to  persuade  themselves,  as  time  goes  on,  that  what  was


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder,  291

clearly  recognized  at  the  moment  as  a  rare  thing,  viz.,  a  waking
hallucination,  had  been  no  more  than  a  common  thing,  viz.,  a  vivid
dream,  likely  to  be  increased  by  the  fact  of  the  coincidence  ;  which  is
clearly  easier  to  explain  by  the  natural  hypothesis  of  accident,  if  the
percipient's  experience  belonged  to  a  common  class,  than  if  it  belonged
to  a  rare  class.

Objection  12.  "  The  percipient  may  have  been  intoxicated,' '  etc.
So  equally  may  the  subjects  of  the  non-coincidental  cases  have  been.
So  equally,  of  course,  were  they  not.

Objection  15.  A.  "  He  may  be  lying."  The  improbability  of  cumu-
lative and  concordant  lying  is  ignored,  like  the  whole  of  the  cumula-
tive argument.  B.  The  hallucinations  have  in  most  cases  been  quite
unlike  "ordinary  indistinct  vision,"  or  "dreams."  They  have  been
clear  and  definite.  C.  The  memory  of  the  hallucination  has  located
it  definitely  in  time  and  space,  which  entirely  differentiates  the  cases
from  the  common  vague  impression  of  having  been  in  the  same  situa-
tion before.  >

Objection  16.  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  the  concluding  sections  of
Chap.  IV.  of  "  Phantasms,"  already  referred  to.  I  will  just  repeat  that
u  it  is  very  important  to  avoid  confounding  the  natural  growths  on  the
margin  (so  to  speak)  of  a  telepathic  record  with  the  vital  point  at  its
centre  ;  or  concluding  that  the  latter  is  as  likely  to  be  unconsciously
invented  as  the  former."

Objection  17.  I  must  maintain  that  the  clearly-stated,  unadorned,
and  corroborated  piece  of  evidence  which  Mr.  Peirce  condemns  as
"  meagre,"  differs  completely  from  the  narratives  which  one  "  may
hear  in  an  endless  flood,"  by  frequenting  the  company  of  marvel-
mongers,  or  even  in  ordinary  society,  where  unscientific  credulity  is
often  the  prevailing  temper.  Whether  or  not  such  apiece  of  evidence
"must"  go  for  nothing,  it  certainly  will  not  go  for  nothing,  in  the
eyes  of  any  impartial  reader,  in  whose  eyes  I  am  not  thoroughly  in-
competent for  my  work.

Case  26.  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  my  remarks  on  pp.  164-5.  I,
of  course,  "  use  the  case  as  a  premise  from  which  to  draw  a  conclu-
sion "  of  the  high  degree  of  probability  which  has  so  offended  Mr.
Peirce,  just  as  I  should  use  each  of  the  hundred  throws  of  sixes  to  sup-
port a  similar  highly  probable  conclusion  that  the  dice  were  loaded.

Case  27.  I  dissent  from  Mr.  Peirce's  remarks,  but  am  quite  con-
tent to  leave  the  question  to  the  reader ;  merely  protesting  against  the
monstrous  assumption  u  that  the  probability  that  this  decedent  would
be  represented  in  any  hallucination  that  the  percipient  might  have  at
this  time  was  four-fifths."  A  little  study  of  the  subject  of  hallucina-
tions would  have  taught  Mr.  Peirce  that  the  hallucination  was  every


292  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

bit  as  likely  to  represent  the  percipient's  wife,  or  a  servant  in  the
house  ;  and  far  more  likely  to  represent  one  or  another  member  of  this
diiily-seen  class.

Case  28.  Again  dissenting  from  Mr.  Peirce's  treatment,  I  am
quite  content  to  let  the  reader  form  his  own  opinion.  It  is  amusing,
by  the  way,  to  find  Mr.  Peirce  driven  by  the  momentum  of  his  argu-
ment into  eulogizing  the  judgment  and  observation  of  one  witness,  of
whom  all  that  appears  is  —  that  he  believed  in  telepathic  communica-
tions on  insufficient  evidence  !  Mr.  Peirce  concludes  his  comment
with  a  similar  monstrous  assumption  to  that  noticed  in  the  last  case.

Case  29.  The  percipient's  testimony  as  to  his  health  is  this  :  "  I
never  felt  better  in  my  life  ;  there  was  nothing  in  the  least  amiss  with
me."  In  the  original  account  he  says  that  while  peering  forward,
for  a  special  purpose,  he  "  slightly  stumbled  on  a  hassock  of  grass,
and  looked  at  my  feet  for  a  moment  only."  On  the  strength  of  this
sentence  Mr.  Peirce  describes  the  man  as  "stumbling  about  the
churchyard,"  —  a  very  characteristic  piece  of  misrepresentation,
small  in  appearance,  but  eminently  calculated  to  prejudice  the  reader.
He  proceeds  to  adduce  as  a  suspicious  circumstance  that,  "  when  the
percipient  got  home,  he  half  thought  what  he  had  seen  must  have  been
his  fancy."  I  go  further,  for  I  have  hardly  a  doubt  that  it  was  "  his
fancy," — in  other  words,  that  what  he  saw  was  a  hallucination.  How
does  that  affect  the  improbability  that  this  fancy,  and  others  of  the
same  sort,  would,  b}'  chance,  closely  coincide  with  the  death  of  the
person  represented  ?  A  little  further  on ,  the  4 '  monstrous  assumption  "
—  as  to  the  probability  that  this/ particular  person  would  be  the  object
of  the  hallucination  —  duly  reappears  ;  partly  based  in  this  instance
on  another — "  as  the  news  of  the  death  reached  the  town  the  next
morning,  it  is  fair  to  assume  that  the  gardener  was  aware  of  the  ill-
ness of  the  decedent."  This  is  a  specimen  of  the  assumptions  which
Mr.  Peirce  regards  as  "  fair."  The  contrary  of  what  he  supposes
seems  sufficiently  implied  in  the  account ;  but  the  evidence  is  certainly
improved  by  the  following  explicit  statement:  fc»  I  had  no  knowl-
edge that  Mrs.  de  F.  was  ill,  and  was  not  even  aware  that  she  was
away  from  Hinxton.     Alfred  Bard."

Mr.  Peirce  says,  "  If  we  had  a  better  acquaintance  with  the  wit-
ness than  is  conveyed  by  the  vicar's  banal  certificate  to  the  man's
character."  The  vicar's  certificate  may  be  "banal,"  but  it  is  at  any
rate  explicit  and  based  on  thorough  knowledge.  But  "we"  have
"  a  better  acquaintance,"  in  so  far  as  first-hand  acquaintance  is  better
than  second-hand  ;  for  Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.  Hodgson1  have  seen  and
carefully  examined  the  witness.

1  Mr.  Bard  was  interviewed,  I  think  in  the  summer  of  1885,  hy  Mr.  Myers  and  myself,  and  we
questioned  him  closely  concerning  his  experience.    R.  II.


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  293

P.  197,  top.  Referring  to  a  remark  of  mine  on  p.  170,  line  8,  I
much  regret  the  misprint,  whereb}*  a  repetition  of  the  last  five  letters
of  the  word  through  has  produced  an  interpolation  of  the  adjective
"  rough"  before  "inadvertence."  When  I  found,  too  late,  that  I
had  overlooked  this  word  in  the  proof,  I  hoped  that  (apart  from  man-
ners) its  fatuity  in  point  of  style  would  suggest  the  nature  of  the
error  ;  but  most  authors  have  had  occasion  to  mourn  the  baselessness
of  such  hopes.1

Case  172.  I  dissent  from  Mr.  Peirce's  objections,  and  I,  on  my
side,  should  be  glad  to  know,  (1)  why  he  calls  an  apparition  seen  with
the  eyes  open,  and  after  the  percipient  had  started  up  in  bed  and
looked  round,  a  dream;  (2)  how  he  would  support  his  assertion  that
it  was  "practically  certain  that  the  dream  would  relate  to  the  dece-
dent," which  implies,  of  course,  that  the  witness  could  not  dream  of
any  human  being  except  this  particular  friend  during  all  the  months
of  the  friend's  illness.

Case  173.  Mr.  Peirce's  "  explanation"  involves,  besides  several
assumptions,  the  conjunction  of  at  least  two  improbabilities,  —  the
production  of  a  vivid  dream  by  the  mention  of  a  name  outside
the  cabin,  and  the  continuance,  in  waking  hours,  of  the  belief  that
the  dream  had  been  a  piece  of  waking  experience.

Case  174.  Beyond  noting  once  more  the  monstrous  assumption  of
"an  antecedent  probability  of  nine-tenths"  that  the  person  who
appeared  would  be  the  object  of  any  hallucination  which  the  per-
cipient might  have  at  the  time,  1  need  only  refer  to  my  former  re-
marks, pp.  160-1,  174-5.

Case  175.  I  willingly  leave  to  the  reader  the  decision  as  to
whether  Mr.  Peirce  is  justified  in  dismissing  as  a  dream  an  ex-
perience of  which  the  percipient  uses  such  expressions  as  these  :  "I
thought  I  saw  him  there  after  dreaming.  I  arose  and  rested  on  my  right
elbow,  looking  at  him  in  the  dusky  light.  I  am  sure  that  as  the  figure
disappeared  I  was  as  wide  awake  as  now."  The  percipient's  former
purely  subjective  dream-experiences,  which  he  expressly  distinguishes
from  the  present  case,  were,  as  I  rightly  say,  "  not  hallucinations  at
all  in  the  sense  in  which  I  throughout  employ  the  word."  Mr.  Peirce's
assertion  that  they  were  "hallucinations,  according  to  the  definition
of  the  census-question,"  is  quite  without  foundation  ;  for  the  census-
question  related  expressly  to  waking  experiences.

Case  182,  with  the  corroboration  of  the  percipient's  cousin,  given
in  my  last  paper,  reduces  Mr.  Peirce  to  rather  desperate  straits ;  and
as    the    "  wonderful   hypnotoid    sensitiveness,"   leading    up,    weeks

1 1  may  note  here  another  misprint,  which  occurs  on  p.  175,  line  27.  The  "  case  which  hap-
pened a  few  months  earlier  "  than  case  199  is  No.  500.


294  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

afterwards,  to  an  accurately-timed  hallucination,  is  in  my  view  as
groundless  an  assumption  as  the  "  important  suppression  or  fal-
sification of  the  testimony,"  I  must  continue  to  think  the  case  a
very  strong  one.  Our  old  friend,  the  "  monstrous  assumption,"  re-
appears, in  a  particularly  monstrous  form,  in  the  supposition  that  the
antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucinations  would  relate  to  the
decedent  was  one-half.

Case  184.  In  saying  that  the  words  "  a  vivid  impression  of  see-
ing a  human  being"  define  what  we  have  to  understand  by  a  hallu-
cination, for  the  purposes  of  the  present  argument,  Mr.  Peirce  has
made  a  serious  error.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  observed  —  what  is
stated  in"  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Vol.  II.,  p.  7 — that  the  details  of
the  hallucinations  mentioned  in  answer  to  the  original  census-question
were  "  a  matter  of  subsequent  inquiry."  One  of  these  details,  as  I
have  said,  was  whether  the  figure  seen  (or  the  voice  heard)  was  rec-
ognized as  that  of  a  person  known  to  the  percipient.  And  I  must,
it  seems,  once  more  point  out  the  obvious  fact  that  the  only  hallu-
cinations which  could  properly  be  included  in  my  estimate  are  those
of  the  same  character  as  the  coincidental  group  which  I  present  as
properly  telepathic,  —  i.e.,  they  must  be  of  the  "  recognized  "  class.
It  is  worth  noting  that  had  I  made  the  mistake  which  Mr.  Peirce,  it
seems,  would  defend,  of  including  unrecognized  non-coincidental  hallu-
cinations in  the  reckoning,  his  own  "monstrous  assumption"  of  an
immensely  high  probability,  sometimes  even  of  certainty,  that  any
hallucination  that  befell  the  percipient  in  the  coincidental  cases  would
represent  the  person  whom  it  did  represent,  would  become  more
monstrous  still,  since  it  is  only  a  minority  of  visual  hallucinations
that  represent  recognized  figures  at  all.

Mr.  Peirce's  proof  that  the  hallucination  was  determined  by  a  state
of  anxiety  on  the  part  of  the  percipient  is  surely  not  one  that  he  can
reflect  on  with  much  satisfaction.  He  says  :  "  The  decedent  was  a  child
of  his  [the  percipient's],  five  years  old,  who  had  been  removed  from
his  parents,  and  from  Paris  to  London,  on  account  of  an  outburst  of
small-pox."  He  omits  to  add  that  the  removal  took  place  in  Decem-
ber, while  the  apparition  did  not  take  place  till  the  24th  of  January,
and  that  in  the  course  of  the  month's  interval  several  letters  had
been  received  giving  an  excellent  account  of  the  little  boy's  health.
More  than  this :  the  hallucination,  which  conveyed  the  impression  of
a  happy  laughing  child,  left  the  percipient  saying  to  himself,  "  Thank
God,  little  Isidore  is  happy  as  always  ;"  and  he  describes  the  ensuing
day  as  one  of  peculiar  brightness  and  cheerfulness.  The  assumption
that  it  was  "  antecedently  practically  certain  that  any  hallucination  at
that  time  would  relate  to  the  decedent  "  is  a  robust  specimen  of  its  class.


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce9  8  Rejoinder.  295

Case  195.  As  to  the  supposed  anxiety,  I  may  simply  refer  to  the
remarks  in  my  former  paper,  on  p.  161.  Mr.  Peirce's  point,  that
the  percipient  "  ought  to  know  her  own  imagination  better  than  Mr.
Gurney  can  do,"  has  no  force  ;  for  she  has  had  no  other  hallucination,
and  therefore  has  no  claim  (such  as  some  abnormally  vivid  visual-
izers  might  have)  to  speak  with  authority  on  the  power  of  her  imagi-
nation to  con j ire  up  fictitious  sensory  experiences.  But  of  course
the  attribution  of  a  sensory  hallucination  to  "  a  strong  imagination  "
would  be  a  very  natural  and  defensible  hypothesis,  even  for  a  co-
incidental case,  if  the  case  stood  alone  ;  it  is  the  accumulation  of
coincidental  cases,  of  which  the  percipients  themselves  knew  noth-
ing, that  justifies  us  in  rejecting  the  hypothesis  of  a  purely  subjective
origin  for  all  of  them.  The  matter  is  one  of  statistics,  where  the
collector  is  an  authority,  and  the  contributor,  as  such,  is  none  at  all.

Case  197.  I  have  here  to  admit  a  piece  of  inadvertence.  When
giving  the  additional  evidence  under  head  16  (pp.  172-3),  I  did  not
recollect  that  it  affected  my  remarks  under  head  8  (p.  165).  The
retention  of  those  remarks  is,  however,  of  no  importance,  for  in  my
summary  (p.  175)  I  say,  "  As  regards  closeness  of  coincidence,  the
recent  information  as  to  case  197,  though  improving  the  quality  of  the
evidence,  removes  it  from  this  particular  death-list."

Mr.  Peirce's  paragraph  (p.  203),  beginning  "Mr.  Gurney  admits
the  coincidence  of  time  is  not  proved  to  be  within  twelve  hours,"  shows
a  curious  misunderstanding  of  my  meaning.  I  never  dreamt  of  taking
advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  twelve  hours'  limit  was  arbitrary,  to  in-
clude in  a  particular  estimate,  based  on  a  twelve  hours'  limit,  cases
where  that  limit  was  known  to  have  been  exceeded,  and  I  should  not
have  thought  that  my  remarks  on  page  165  could  have  been  so  inter-
preted. For  the  purpose  of  the  estimate,  the  inclusion,  with  "  due
warning,"  of  "two  or  three  cases"  where  the  chances  are  about
even  that  the  twelve  hours'  limit  was  or  was  not  slightly  exceeded,
seems  the  more  defensible  in  view  of  the  large  number  of  included
cases  where  the  coincidence  was  much  closer  than  the  said  limit.

Mr.  Peirce  is  so  fond  of  assuming  it  as  a  certainty  that  the  person
actually  represented  would  be  the  object  of  any  hallucination  that
the  percipient  might  have  at  the  time,  that  we  ought  to  be  grateful
for  the  probability  of  nine-tenths  that  he  substitutes  in  this  case,  and
which  is,  perhaps,  not  more  than  fifty  times  too  large.

Lastly,  unless  Mr.  Peirce  could  show  how  the  words,  '•  the  coinci-
dence cannot  have  been  as  close  as  Mrs.  Bishop  imagines,"  implied
that  Mrs.  Bishop  had  imagined  it  to  have  been  exact,  he  should  not
have  labelled  my  perfectly  true  statement  asa"  mistake,"  in  order  to
father  his  own  upon  it.


296  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

Case  199.  I  cannot  conceive  what  Mr.  Peirce  finds  independent  of
the  vision  to  mark  the  day  of  the  week  on  which  the  vision  fell.  The
words  which  he  quotes  relate  to  the  vision,  and  to  nothing  else.

His  remark  about  changing  the  limit  to  thirteen  years,  "  for  the
sake  of  including  a  known  instance,"  is  quite  wide  of  the  mark.  Any
limit  of  years  that  was  selected  would  have  included  a  certain  num-
ber of  ';  known  instances  ;  "  and  what  is  there  "  unwarrantable"  in
my  true  statement,  that,  had  thirteen  years  been  selected  instead  of
twelve,  "  the  numerical  argument  would  not  have  suffered  apprecia-
bly, if  at  all"?

Case  201.  I  willingly  leave  the  case  to  the  reader,  merely  drawing
attention  to  the  misleading  brevity  of  Mr.  Peirce's  assertion  that  the
percipient  "  suspected  she  might  have  been  asleep."  Her  words,
which  he  compels  me  to  re-quote,  are,  "I  tested  myself  as  to
whether  I  had  been  sleeping,  seeing  that  it  was  ten  minutes  since  I
la}T  clown.  I  said  to  myself  what  I  thought  I  had  read,  began  my
chapter  [of  Kingsley's  Miscellanies']  again,  and  in  ten  minutes  I
had  reached  the  same  point."

Mr.  Peirce  says,  "  Mr.  Gurney  gives  up  the  case,  and  I  am  not  in-
clined to  give  it  any  weight."  I  concede  its  omission  from  this  par-
ticular calculation,  owing  to  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  degree  of
closeness  of  the  coincidence,  but  I  continue  to  give  it  great  weight.

On  case  202  I  have  nothing  to  add.

Case  214.  I  do  not  understand  Mr.  Peirce's  probability  of  one  in
one  hundred,  but  suppose  that  he  means  it  as  the  probability  that  the
story  of  the  hallucination  is  untrue.  I  do  not  consider  his  suspicions
well  grounded,  the  account  of  the  shock,  and  its  sequel,  having  every
appearance  of  truth.  If  the  hallucination  took  place,  its  date,  owing
to  the  consequences,  would  be  specially  well  marked,  and  the  odds
against  the  coincidence  would  be  enormous.

My  estimate  of  Case  231  differs  considerably  from  that  of  Mr.
Peirce,  who,  I  think  the  reader  will  agree,  overshoots  his  mark  in
making  it  count  for  less  than  nothing.  But,  owing  to  the  uncertainty
as  to  twelve  hours'  limit,  I  have  conceded  its  omission  from  this  par-
ticular list.

Case  236.  I  have  nothing  to  add  beyond  noting  that  the  assump-
tion of  the  antecedent  probability  that  the  hallucination  would  refer
to  the  decedent  as  nineteen-twentieths  is  perhaps  Mr.  Peirce's  master-
piece in  that  line.  Even  if  we  neglect  the  facts  of  hallucination  in
general  (as,  for  instance,  their  tendency  to  take  the  form  of  "  after
images,"  and  to  represent  objects  which  the  percipient  is  in  the  daily
habit  of  seeing) ,  the  above  exemption  would  at  least  imply  —  what
there  is  not  a  syllable  in  the  account  to  suggest —  an  utterly  abnormal


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.  297

absorption  of  the  percipient's  mind  by  the  thought  of  one  particular
relative.

Case  237.  Mr.  Peirce  thinks  it  "  important"  that  the  mother  of
the  percipient  "  thought  she  might  have  been  dreaming."  The  mother
does  not  say  so  in  her  own  evidence,  and  all  that  her  daughter  says
is,  that  she  "  was  greatly  amused  at  my  scare,  suggesting  I  had  read
too  much  or  been  dreaming."  If  Mr.  Peirce  ever  has  a  waking  hallu-
cination  while  he  is  reading,  and  at  once  mentions  it  to  some  one  in
the  room,  I  would  wager  a  good  deal  that  the  same  comment  will  be
made  ;  and  if  he  is  good  enough  to  send  me  an  account  of  the  occur-
rence, I  engage  not  to  think  the  objection  "  important,"  even  though
the  objector,  like  the  mother  in  the  case  before  us,  should  u  continue
to  disbelieve  in  ghosts."  If  I  were  the  "  advocate"  that  Mr.  Peirce
considers  me,  I  should  certainly  rely  on  his  treatment  of  this  case  to
do  more  for  me  with  the  jury  than  the  best  of  my  arguments.

Case  238.  "  I  assume  it  as  antecedently  certain,"  we  read,  "  that
the  hallucination  would  refer  to  her  husband,  whom  she  seems  to  have
loved.  This  is  the  assumption  the  most  favorable  to  telepathy,
since  he  was  a  well  man."  Mr.  Peirce  omits  to  tell  us  how  he  has
learned  that  she  did  not  love  any  other  "  well  "  man,  woman,  or  child  ;
and  by  what  statistics  he  has  ascertained  that  a  person  must  be  loved,
in  order  to  become  the  object  of  a  hallucination.

Case  240.  The  signification  which  Mr.  Peirce  quite  unwarrantably
squeezes  out  of  a  pluperfect  is  contrary  to  the  fact.  There  had  been
no  "  reconciliation  "  between  the  percipient  and  the  dying  man  ;  nor
was  she  aware,  at  the  time,  of  her  .mother's  visiting  him.  I  must
continue  to  characterize  Mr.  Peirce's  assumption  of  a  practical  cer-
tainty that  the  hallucination  would  relate  to  the  decedent,  as  mon-
strous.

Case  249.  In  connection  with  this  case,  I  would  refer  the  reader
to  the  remarks  on  mistakes  of  identity,  and  their  relation  to  the  cumu-
lative argument  in  "Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Vol.  II.,  pp.  62-63.
The  percipient,  it  will  be  observed,  had  as  little  doubt  as  to  who  the
person  was  whom  he  had  seen  as  if  the  whole  figure  had  been  in  view  ;
in  that  sense  the  recognition  was  perfect,  which  is  all  that  the  argu-
ment requires.  The  "  monstrous  assumption  "  in  this  case  (an  antece-
dent probability  of  one-half  that  the  hallucination  would  represent  the
decedent,  on  the  ground  of  his  being  a  neighbor,  not  known  to  be
seriously  ill)  is  a  veritable  Mammoth.

Case  298.  With  our  knowledge  of  the  witness's  character,  we  find
it  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  news  of  the  man's  illness  and  death
reached  her  in  the  way  described.

Case  300.     As  to  the  case  itself  I  have  nothing  to  add.     I  wholly


298  Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder.

dissent,  however,  from  Mr.  Peirce's  view  that  "  the  reality  of  ghosts
is  put  beyond  doubt  at  once,"  if  sailors'  yarns  are  believed  ;  for
the  ghostly  iucidents  in  such  }Tarns  could  almost  always  be  explained
on  the  hypothesis  of  purely  subjective  hallucination  or  illusion.

Case  350.  I  do  not  think  that  I  endeavored  to  u  make  much  "  of
Mr.  Peirce's  mistakes  in  relation  to  the  facts  of  this  case.  Nor  do  I
even  complain  of  his  hypothesis,  except  so  far  as  the  statement  of
it  implies  the  erroneous  view  that  a  case  has  no  legitimate  place  in  a
cumulative  argument  in  favor  of  one  explanation,  merely  because  an-
other explanation  is  conceivable.  Personally,  I  think  the  hypothesis
that  the  witnesses  had  a  hallucination,  decidedly  more  probable  than
Mr.  Peirce's  suggestion  of  the  pendent  skull ;  and  I  cannot  help
thinking  that  had  there  been  no  coincident  death,  and  no  telepathic
theory  to  confute,  he  would  have  agreed  with  me.  Yet  it  must  be
clear  that,  in  estimating  the  relative  probability  of  the  two  explana-
tions (hallucination  and  skull),  we  have  nothing  whatever  to  do
with  the  coincidence.  We  ought  to  forget  it.  And  even  if  we  re-
member it,  it  will,  of  course,  tell  for,  and  not  against,  the  hypothesis
of  hallucination ;  since  it  brings  in  the  chance  (which  Mr.  Peirce
would  admit  to  exist,  however  infinitesimal  he  would  consider  it)  that
there  was  a  hallucination  of  telepathic  origin,  in  addition  to  the
chance  that  there  was  a  hallucination  of  purely  subjective  origin.

Case  G95.  As  for  the  u  meagreness  "  of  the  story,  a  clear  state-
ment of  all  the  essential  facts,  given  without  a  word  suggestive  of
adornment  or  exaggeration,  is  not  evidence  which  a  disparaging
epithet  will  much  injure.  The  w£>rds  "  told  at  second-hand,"  though
true,  are  misleading.  I  have  explained  ("  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"
Vol.  I.,  pp.  148-9)  that  "  the  evidence  of  a  person  who  has  been  in-
formed of  the  experience  of  the  percipient,  while  thelatterwas  still  un-
aware of  the  corresponding  event,"  is  quite  on  a  par  with  the  percipient's
own  evidence  ;  indeed,  in  some  ways  it  is  even  preferable.  And  it  is,
of  course,  at  its  best  when,  as  in  this  case,  the  information  has  led  the
witness  at  once  to  make  a  written  note  of  the  date,  which  leaves  ab-
solutely no  doubt  as  to  the  coincidence.  Mr.  Peirce's  hypothesis  of
anxiety,  which  Mrs.  Teale  "  concealed  in  order  not  to  alarm  her  hus-
band," is  quite  gratuitous.  Her  husband  says  that  she  was  not
anxious,  and  not  given  to  brooding,  and  the  last  news  of  her  son  had
been  reassuring.  The  "  monstrous  assumption  "  —  of  an  antecedent
certainty  that  the  hallucination  would  relate  to  the  son  —  reappears  in
due  form.

Case  697.  Mr.  Peirce  having  surmised  that  the  percipient  had  heard
of  the  death  during  the  day,  I  stated  that  the  surmise  was  incorrect,  as
most  readers  of  the   account  would  perceive.     He   urbanely  replies


Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce  s  Rejoinder,  299

that  my  testimony  "  goes  for  nothing."  I  will  not,  however,  do  him
the  injustice  of  supposing  that  he  really  doubts  my  statement  to  have
been  made  on  authority,  —  that  of  our  informant,  Mr.  B.

The  assumption  of  a  high  antecedent  probability  (one-fourth)  that
the  hallucination  could  relate  to  the  decedent  —  a  clerk  in  the  office  of
the  percipient's  husband,  whom  she  had  only  occasionally  seen,  and
as  to  whom  even  her  husband  was  "  in  no  anxiety  " —  is  in  this  case
ludicrous  as  well  as  monstrous  ;  for  Mr.  Peirce  bases  it  on  the  fact
that  her  husband,  in  telling  her  of  the  young  man's  death,  used  the
hackneyed  phrase  "  sad  news,"  which,  says  Mr.  Peirce,  "  shows  that
her  pity  had  been  excited  "  !  He  should  really  be  a  little  more  consistent
in  his  view  of  the  emotions  which  beget  hallucinations.  A  little  time
ago  it  was  conjugal  love.  A  woman  loved  her  husband,  and  this
made  it  certain  that  any  hallucination  of  hers  could  represent  no  one
but  him.  But  now  the  degree  of  pity  which  is  implied  in  the  fact
that  somebody  who  tells  one  of  the  death  of  an  acquaintance  calls  the
news  "  sad,"  is  found  to  have  immense  power  in  the  same  direction.
And  hence  a  dilemma :  for  Mr.  Peirce  must  assume  either  that  the
loving  percipient  had  not  this  degree  of  pity  for  any  human  being,  or
that  the  pitying  percipient  did  not  love  her  husband.

Case  702.  "  In  his  original  account  the  percipient  has  the  year
wrong."  This  is  Mr.  Peirce's  version  of  the  fact  that,  writing  in
May,  1886,  without  referring  to  documents,  the  witness  describes  an
event  which  had  really  occurred  three  3"ears  and  eleven  months  before
as  having  occurred  "  some  three  years  since."  I  have  explained  that
the  percipient's  mistake  as  to  the  date  of  the  coincidence  has  no
importance,  since  it  has  no  relation  to  his  evidence  as  to  the  fact  of
the  coincidence.  When  he  handed  me  the  longer  account  (giving  the
date  of  the  death,  which  proved  to  have  coincided  with  his  vision  on
June  15)  he  said  that  he  was  trusting  to  memory  for  the  date,  but  that
he  believed  he  could  hunt  up  the  letter  which  contained  it.  He  did  so
the  same  evening,  with  the  result  which  it  pleases  Mr.  Peirce  to
describe  as  "  cooking"  the  story.  The  date,  June  15,  actually  occurs
in  the  portion  of  the  letter  quoted,  where  it  is  given  as  the  day  of  the
funeral,  the  death  being  simply  stated  to  have  occurred  "  on  St.  Bar-
nabas' day  "  (June  11).  Thus  the  mistake  was  not  only  unimportant,
but  extremely  natural.

As  to  the  case  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  130  [misprinted  230  in  Mr.  Peirce's  re-
joinder], note,  though  precluded  from  giving  it  in  detail,  I  regard  it
as  of  great  value.  The  difference  between  it  and  fully  reported  cases
is  merely  that,  in  respect  of  it,  the  reader  is  more  dependent  on  the
judgment  of  those  who  present  the  evidence.  I  have  said  that  the
narrative  was  of  the  ordinary  type  and  unsensational  in  character ;


300  Postscript  to  Mr.   Grumey's  Reply.

and  that  the  witness  was  not  biassed  by  a  credulous  love  of  marvels
appears  from  her  remark  that,  though  "  confident  of  having  seen  the
vision  [of  an  old  school-friend  who  died  on  that  day  at  a  distance],
her  common-sense  makes  her  "  wish  to  put  it  down  to  imagination."

Mr.  Peirce's  concluding  remarks,  where  he  repeats  his  heroic
hypothesis  as  to  the  ''millions"  whom  our  appeal  for  evidence  has
tapped,  call  for  no  special  reply.  What  I  have  to  say  on  the  important
point  of  the  value  that  may  be  attached  to  "unscientific  observations  "
is  said  at  length  in  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  Vol.  I.,  Chap.  IV.


POSTSCRIPT  TO   MR.    GURNEY'S  REPLY  TO   PROFESSOR

PP2IRCE.

BY   FREDERIC   W.    H.   MYERS.

Mr.  G  urney  did  not  live  to  give  his  final  revision  to  the  above  paper  ;
and  in  the  course  of  correcting  the  proofs  an  inaccuracy  in  his  earlier
"  Remarks  on  Prof.  Peirce's  paper"  has  been  observed  by  us,  which,
so  far  as  it  goes,  tells  in  his  own  favor.  I  shall,  therefore,  correct  it
here,  as  my  only  addendum  to  this  his  latest  word  of  controversy.
I  see,  indeed,  several  arguments  by  which  his  chain  of  reasoning  —
strong  as  that  seems  to  me  already  —  might  be  reinforced.  But  I
cannot  say  with  certainty  how  far  he  would  have  pressed  any  of  these
arguments  himself.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  absolutely  sure
that  he  would  never  knowingly  have  allowed  a  single  sentence  to
stand  which  overstated  his  own  case  in  the  smallest  particular.

In  Proceedings,  p.  161,  first  paragraph,  Mr.  Gurney  states  that,
in  his  census  of  hallucinations,  questions  as  to  the  person's  bodily  or
mental  state  at  the  time  of  the  experience  were  kept  separate  from
the  question  as  to  the  fact  of  the  experience.  This  is  entirely  true
of  the  mental,  but  only  partially  of  the  bodily,  state.  For  the
question  on  the  census-paper  was,  "  Have  you  ever,  when  in  good
health  and  completely  awake,  had  a  vivid  impression  of  seeing,  or
being  touched  by,  a  human  being,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  or  sound  which
suggested  a  human  presence,  when  no  one  was  there?  "  Inquiries  as
to  date,  recognition,  anxiety,  as  well  as  further  inquiries  as  to  health,
were  made  subsequently.  Thus,  Mr.  Gurney  was  the  sole  judge  as
to  what  degree  of  anxiety  should  exclude  a  case  from  the  census  ;  but
the  percipients  themselves  were,  in  the  first  instance,  the  judges  as
to  what  degree  of  ill-health  should  exclude  a  case  from  the  census  ;
and,  consequently,  Professor  Peirce's  objection  to  the  inclusion  in
the  group  of  evidential  cases  of  certain  cases  where  he  thinks  there
was  anxiety  falls  to  the  ground ;    his  objection  to  the  inclusion  of


Postscript  to  Mr.   Gurney' s  Reply.  301

cases  where  there  was  ill-health  has  logical  validity.  For,  so  far  as
the  anxiety  went,  the  same  canon  was  applied  by  Mr.  Gurney  to  both
the  groups  which  were  compared  together,  the  evidential  group  and
the  group  of  miscellaneous  hallucinations  ;  and  the  degree  of  anxiety
which  excluded  a  case  from  the  one  group  excluded  it  also  from  the
other.  But,  so  far  as  the  ill-health  went,  the  respondents  in  the  mis-
cellaneous group  might  conceivably  have  answered  u  No  "  to  the  first
question  in  the  census-paper,  if  they  had  seen  a  hallucination  when
slightly  unwell,  and  might  then  have  judged  themselves  by  a  standard
of  health  stricter  than  that  used  by  Mr.  Gurney  in  testing  cases  to  be
admitted  into  the  evidential  group.  Cases  174  and  702  should,  there-
fore, in  strictness  be  dropped,  —  not,  of  course,  from  the  evidence  in
general,  but  from  this  particular  comparison  between  the  two  groups.
And,  in  fact,  Mr.  Gurney  admits  this  on  pp.  174,  175.  It  is  plain,
therefore,  that  his  erroneous  statement  on  p.  161  was  a  mere  slip  of
expression,  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  fact  that,  in  actual  practice,  the
appraisement  of  ill-health  (as  well  as  of  anxiet}*) ,  in  the  miscellaneous
group,  was  mainly  left  by  the  respondents  to  Mr.  Gurney  himself.
If  the  respondents  had  seen  a  hallucination  at  all  they  usually
answered  "  Yes,"  whether  they  had  been  somewhat  out  of  health  at
the  time  of  seeing  it  or  not.  This  we  know  partly  from  the  testi-
mony of  those  who  collected  the  answers,  and  partly  by  the  evidence
on  the  face  of  the  answers  themselves.  The  error  above  pointed  out,
therefore,  has  probably  had  but  very  slight  effect  on  the  calculation  ;
and,  in  any  case,  it  is  amply  met  by  dropping  cases  174  and  702  from
the  group  used  for  comparison.

I  may  add  that  Mr.  Gurney  by  no  means  considered  that  the  infor-
mation which  he  had  obtained  as  to  hallucinations,  by  his  census  and
other  methods,  was  enough.  He  always  intended  to  take  a  further
census  before  long.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  his  example,  in  thus  sub-
stituting the  laborious  but  fruitful  methods  of  statistics  for  the  vague
generalities  current  on  this  subject  before  him,  may  be  followed  in
England  and  elsewhere  ;  and,  in  any  future  census,  it  would  probably
be  better  to  leave  the  percipient's  state  of  health,  as  well  as  of  anxiety,
for  subsequent  inquiries,  and  to  make  the  question  first  asked  as  short
and  simple  as  possible.


302  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.


SECOND  REPORT   ON   EXPERIMENTAL   PSYCHOLOGY:  —
UPON  THE  DIAGRAM-TESTS.

During  the  past  year  a  large  number  of  postal  cards  were  distrib-
uted, each  bearing  the  printed  request:  "  Please  draw  ten  diagrams
on  this  card ,  without  receiving  any  suggestion  from  any  other  person,
and  add  your  name  and  address."

The  committee  has  received  for  examination  501  postal  cards  with
diagrams  upon  them.  A  few  of  the  cards  had  more  than  10  diagrams
upon  them,  and  of  such  cards  only  the  first  10  diagrams  on  each  were
counted.     A  few  cards  had  less  than  10  diagrams.

The  cards  were  divided  into  3  sets;  1,  men;  2,  women;  3,
without  names.  Each  set  of  cards  was  numbered,  and  the  diagrams
on  each  card  numbered.  The  tabulation  was  then  begun  according  to
this  scheme :  —

Figure  —  Diamonds.


Men.

"Women.

No  name.

Card.        Diagram.

16            3
20             1

27             8
etc.

Card.        Diagram.

6             9

8             3

10             1

etc.

Card.        Diagram.

2             2

6             1

8           10

etc.

Diagrams,  total  no.       28

44

8

The  cards  and  original  tabulations  have  been  preserved,  and  are
in  the  charge  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Society.

The  number  of  cards  were  for  men,  310 ;  for  women,  169  ;  no
name,  22,  total  501.  The  number  of  figures  which  have  been  tabu-
lated is  83.  The  results  are  given  in  the  following  table,  in  which  the
figures  have  been  arranged  according  to  their  relative  frequency.
The  numbers  in  the  first  column  refer  to  the  original  manuscript
tabulations.

Table   I.


7

4

14

25


1  Circles

2  Squares

3  Equilateral  triangles  .

4  Crosses

5  Letters  of  the  alphabet


Women.

Men.

No  name.

60

140

9

61

105

8

58

95

7

53

103

4

52

30

0

Total.

209
174
160
160
82


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.  303

Table   I.  —  Continued.

Total.


9        6  Diamonds

50  7  Oblongs,  horizontal   .

53  8  Inscribed  circles    .

12  9  Stars

1  10  Faces  profile  to  the  left  .

14      11  Houses

52      12  Rhombi

59  13  Scrawls

30  14  Other  animals  and  heads

33  15  Flowers

34  16  Leaves

10  17  Hexagons

13  18  Cubes      ......

5  19  Right-angled  triangles  N^

48  20  Figures  of  men

60  21  Scrolls

80  22  Inscribed  squares  .     .     .

21  23  Hearts

51  24  Oblongs,  vertical  .

49  25  Squares  with  crosses  .     .
16      26  Octagons

3  27  Faces,  not  in  profile  .

6  28  Right-angled  triangles    ^/]

22  29  Moons

31  30  Hour-glasses  ]>£    .     .     .

24      31  Card  spots

44      32  Spirals

76  33  Pentagons

11  34  Flags

62  35  Digits

63  36  Right-angles     ....

32  37  Arrows

36  38  Books

37  39  Ships

39  40  Trees

77  41  Tools

54  42       cf>

57     43  Bottles

41      44  Boots

18      45  Mugs

26  46  Hands

20      47  Hats

23  48  Sun

27  49  Horses

29      50  Cats

40  51  Vases


Women.

Men.

No  name.

28

44

8

27

50

1

22

56

0

28

46

3

21

33

7

19

35

2

15

41

0

14

32

7

12

28

8

28

11

7

20

25

0

13

28

1

17

24

1

9

27

0

6

21

5

16

16

0

14

18

0

9

20

3

15

15

1

16

11

3

13

13

2

12

14

1

5

16

3

8

15

1

11

8

1

6

.   12

1  .

4

12

1

11

5

1

6

8

2

4

12

0

3

11

2

5

9

1

3

12

0

5

9

0

3

10

1

6

8

0

4

8

1

4

9

0

6

6

0

3

6

1

6

4

0

5

4

0

2

5

2

2

7

0

3

4

2

4

5

0

80
78
78
77
61
56
56
53
48
46
45
42
42
36
32
32
32
32
31
30
28
27
24
24
20
19
17
17
16
16
16
15
15
14
14
14
13
13
12
10
10
9
9
9
9
9


304  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology,


Table   I.  —  Concluded.


43
47
56
2
82
83
38
84
17
19
42
61

81
28
64
68
75

70
71
72
79
35
45
65
69
74
46
55
58
'67
73


52  Anchors

53  Apples

54  Eyes

55  Faces,  profile  to  the  right    .

56  Steps

57  Dishes

58  Branches

59  Signs  of  music       .     .     .  * .

60  Pitchers

61  Chairs

62  Keys

63  Skull,  and  skull  and  cross

bones

64  Punctuation  marks

65  Dogs

GQ  Clocks  and  watches    .     .

67  Architectural  plans    .

68  Engines

69  Kites

70  Graves

71  Feathers

72  Spoons

73  Musical  instruments  .

74  Arms

75  Pears

76  Wheels    .     .•

77  Candlesticks

78  Forks

79  Pineapple

80  Ear

81  Corkscrew

82  Bells

83  Knives


Women.

Men.

No  name.

1

8

0

5

3

1

2

6

1

3

5

0

2

4

2

6

2

0

2

5

0

5

2

0

2

4

0

3

3

0

2

4

0

0

6

0

3

3

0

2

2

1

4

1

0

1

3

1

1

4

0

1

3

0

1

3

0

2

2

0

1

3

0

2

2

0

2

1

0

2

1

0

2

1

0

0

2

0

0

2

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

Total.


9
9

9
8

8
8

7
7
6
6
6

6
6
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4


This  table  shows  that  there  is  an  enormous  preponderance  of  a  few
figures,  a  great  preponderance  of  some  others,  and  a  certain  pre-
ponderance of  still  others.  The  very  simplest  geometrical  figures
rank  first,  as  will  be  seen  still  more  strikingly  if  some  of  the  diagrams
which  are  now  classed  separately  are  put  together  into  larger  groups,
but  which,  of  course,  are  natural  ones.  Thus  :  there  are  circles,  both
plain,  209  ;  and  with  inscribed  figures,  78  ;  of  squares  plain,  174  ;  with
cross  lines  inscribed,  30 ;  and  with  other  figures  inscribed,  32.  Of
triangles,    equilateral,  160;    right-angled   turned   to   the   right,  36 ;


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.  805

right-angled  turned  to  the  left,  24.  Other  figures  bounded  by  four
straight  lines  ;  oblongs,  horizontal,  78  ;  vertical,  31  ;  rhombi,  56  ;  dia-
monds, 80.  Geometrical  figures  bounded  by  a  few  straight  lines  ;  hex-
agons, 42  ;  cubes,  42  ;  octagons,  28  ;  hour-glasses,  20 ;  pentagons,  17.
Thus  we  have,

Circles 287

Squares 236

Triangles 220

Four  -sided  figures x 245

Other  straight-sided  figures * 149

making  of  these  very  simple  figures  1,137,  or  over  one-fifth  of  the
total  number.  If  we  add  to  these,  stars  77,  flags  16,  and  arrows  15,
the  total  rises  to  1,245,  or  almost  one-fourth  (1,250)  of  the  whole.

The  following  tables,  II.  and  III.,  bring  out  still  further  the  char-
acter of  the  drawings.

Table   II.

FIGURES    DRAWN   WITH    STRAIGHT   LINES.


Lines.

Men.

Women.

No  Name.

Totals.

1

16

5

0

21

2

78

41

2

121

3

260

138

16

414

4

378

190

28

596

5

110

64

11

185

6

139

93

9

241

7

41

25

6

72

more  than  seven  (7)

415

243

36

694

Table  III.

GEOMETRICAL   FIGURES    DRAWN   WITH   CURVED    LINES.


Lines.

Men.

Women.

No  Name.

Totals.

1

199

83

10

292

2

85

71

9

165

3

38

25

1

64

4

26

35

3

64

5

12

.5

1

18

6

8

2

1

11

7

2

1

1

4

more  than  seven  (7)

26

36

1

63

*  Cf .  Table  II.,  also  Table  HI.


306


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.


Table  II.  shows  that  2,344  diagrams  were  drawn  exclusively  with
straight  lines,  and  1,337  diagrams  with  less  than  six  straight  lines.
Table  III.  shows  that  681  diagrams  were  drawn  exclusively  with
simple  curved  lines,  and  that  603  diagrams  were  drawn  with  less  than
six  such  lines.     To  the  significance  of  these  tables  we  recur  later.

Next  to  the  circles,  squares,  triangles,  and  four-sided  figures,  come
the  faces  ;  profiles  facing  to  the  left,  61 ;  profiles  to  the  right,  8  ;  other
faces  27  ;  or  96  in  all.

Then  follow,

Letters  of  the  alphabet 82

Houses 56

Irregular  scrawls 53

If  we  look  at  Table  L,  we  see  that,  as  there  classified,  there  are  25
diagrams  which  are  found  on  the  cards  30  or  more  times.  These
first  25  diagrams  occur  in  all  1,772  times,  or  on  the  average  70.9
times  each.

Of  the  diagrams  which  are  more  or  less  often  repeated,  an  interest-
ing minority  represent  natural  and  artificial  familiar  objects,  as  can
be  conveniently  seen  by  the  following  :  —

Table   IV.


Animals,

etc.

Plants.

Manufactured  Objects.

Men    .

.     32

Flowers   .

.     46

Houses      ...     56

Hands

.     10

Leaves     .

45

Books  .

.     15

Horses     .

9

Trees .     .     .

,     14

Ships    .

.     14

Cats    .

.     .       9

Apples     .

.       9

Tools    .

.     14

Dogs  .     .     .

5

Branches

7

Bottles

.     13

Ears    .     .     .

1

Pears  .

3

Boots    .

.     12

Arms .     .     ■

1

Pineapples   .

1

Mugs    .     .
Hats

Vases   .     .
Anchors    .
Steps    .     ,
Dishes  .     .
Pitchers     .
Chairs  .

10
.       9
9
9
,       8
8
6
6

etc.

Another  group  of  diagrams  may  be  classed  as  professional  figures,
such  as  surveyors'  instruments,  accurate  pictures  of  engines,  or
parts  thereof  ;  bones,  sections  of  the  spinal  cord ;  musical  instru-
ments, architectural  plans,  and  of  such  many  more.     On  the   501


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.


307


cards  we  find  54  diagrams  which  belong  unquestionably  under  this
head,  but  they  are  from  only  10  cards,  and  those  all  by  men.  On
the  other  hand,  among  the  women's  cards  there  are  4  on  which  the  10
diagrams  make  a  set ;  2  of  these  cards  have  the  first  10  letters  of  the
alphabet ;  the  third  has  10  hearts  arranged  like  the  pips  on  a  playing
card,  but  inside  each  heart  are  4  marks  ;  the  fourth  card  is  a  man
drawn  in  separate  pieces,  —  the  first  piece  is  his  hat,  the  second  his
head,  then  his  neck,  two  arms,  body,  two  legs,  and  two  boots.


Table   V.


RELATIVE  PREPONDERANCE  OP  DIAGRAMS.


"Women.  Men.

Squares 61 — 105

Equilateral  triangles    .  58 —  95

Letters 52—  30

Diamonds      ....  28 —  44

Stars 28—  46

Faces  to  left      .     .     .  21—33

Houses 19 —  35

Flowers 28—  11

Leaves 20 —  25

Cubes 17—24

Scrolls 16—16

Inscribed  squares   .     .  14—  18

Oblongs    .....  15 —  15

Squares  with  crosses   .  16 —  11

Octagons       ....  13—  13
Faces  not  in  profile
Hour-glasses
Pentagons     .     .     .


Flags  .
Tools  .
Boots  .
Hands


12—  14

11—  8

11—  5

6—  8

6—  8

6—  6

6—  4


Circles
Circles  inscr
Rhombi
Scrawls

Men     .
Hearts

A

Spirals
Digits  .
Right  angles
Books
Trees  .


bed


Men.  W'n,

140—60
56—22
41—15
32—14
27—  9
21—  6
20—  9
16—  5
12—  4
12—  4

11-  3

12—  3
10—  3


Further  insight  into  the  peculiarities  of  these  diagrams  is  gained
by  comparing  the  women  and  men.  This  cannot  be  done  as  accu-
rately as  desirable,  because  in  some  of  the  cards  the  names  are  given
with  the  initials  only,  and  when  the  persons  were  not  known  to  the
committee  the  cards  had  to  be  assumed  to  be  from  women  or  men
according  to  the  character  of  the  handwriting.  There  is,  therefore,
a  certain  amount  of  error.     But,  of  course,  this  error  tends  only  to


308


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology,


mask  the  differences  between  men  and  women,  since  some  of  the
women  are  tabulated  with  the  men,  and  vice  versa.  It  will  be  re-
membered that  the  number  of  men,  310,  is  nearly  double  that  of
women,  169  ;  hence  if  the  preponderances  were  perfectly  regular  in
each  sex,  the  men's  cards  ought  to  show  nearly  twice  as  many  of  a
given  diagram  as  the  women's  ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  the  case  ;  on
the  contrary,  as  shown  by  Table  V.,  women's  repetitions  greatly
preponderate  ;  yet  there  are  curious  exceptions,  which  cannot  be  con-
sidered accidental,  —  thus  circles  and  right-angled  triangles,  under
both  the  heads  in  which  they  appear,  are  on  the  men's  side.  On  the
other  hand,  that  gentlemen  preponderate  with  hearts,  and  ladies  with
hands,  perhaps  may  seem  to  many  a  natural  consequence  of  our
social  conditions.  The  general  difference  is,  that  there  is  much  less
variety  among  women  than  among  men.

If  the  cards  are  examined,  the  great  majority  are  found  to  have
ten  different  diagrams  upon  them,  the  respondents  apparently  hav-
ing assumed  that  the  ten  diagrams  ought  to  be  unlike  one  another.
Hence  it  is  evident  that  if  we  wish  to  measure  the  relative  prepon-
derance of  the  diagrams  we  shall  reach  the  most  accurate  results  by
tabulating  the  number  of  cards  on  which  the  various  diagrams
occur,  because  most  persons  have  thought  that  after  they  had  drawn
a  given  figure  on  their  card  they  ought  not  to  draw  it  again,  and
though  it  may  have  recurred  to  their  mind  and  predominated  there,
they  have  not  allowed  —  would  not  allow  —  their  hand  to  put  it  on
the  card.  In  the  following  table  the  diagrams  are  arranged  in
order  according  to  the  number  of  cards  on  which  they  occur.  The
figures  in  the  first  column  refer  to  the  original  manuscript  tabula-
tions of  the  committee.


Table  VI.


No.


7

4
15

9
50
14
53
14
52

1


Diagram.


Circles

Squares

Equilateral  triangles  .

Crosses

Diamonds

Oblongs,  horizontal   .     .     .

Stars

Circles  with  inscribed  figures

Houses

Rhombus

Profiles  to  left       ....


Men.

Women.

135

60

100

60

92

54

80

40

44

27

50

27

43

19

47

17

33

19

36

15

28

16

No  Name.


Total.


202
168

153
124

79
78
65
64
54
51
47


Second  Report  oh  Experimental  Psychology.


309


Table  VI.  —  Continued.


No.

10
13
25
30
34

5
51
33
49
60
16
80
21

6
59
22
48
31

3

76
44
24
11
63
36
32
62
54
62
39
37
41
18
26
40
20
23
27
29
43
47
56
77

2
83


Diagram.


Hexagons

Cubes

Letters  of  alphabet     ....
Other  animals  and  heads

Leaves

Right-angled  triangle     j\^  .     .

Oblongs,  vertical

Flowers

Squares  with  crosses  ....

Scrolls

Octagons

Squares  with   inscribed  figures

Hearts

Right-angled  triangles  /\

Scrawls

Moons

Figures  of  men      ...

Hour-glasses  ^

Faces  not  in  profile    ....

Pentagons

Spirals

Card  spots

Flags

Right  angles

Books

Arrows

o

Bottles

Digits

Trees

Ships

Boots

Mugs

Hands

Vases

Hats

Sun

Horses  and  horses'  heads     .     .
Cats  and  cats'  heads  ....

Anchors

Apples

Eyes

Tools

Profiles  to  right

Dishes


Men.

Women.

28

12

23

17

20

20

22

12

21

16

25

9

15

15

10

17

11

15

16

13

13

13

15

11

11

9

15

5

16

4

13

7

15

4

8

11

10

7

5

11

12

4

12

4

8

6

11

3

12

3

9

5

8

4

8

4

8

4

9

3

8

3

6

5

7

2

4

6

6

4

4

5

5

2

7

2

4

3

8

1

3

5

6

2

5

4

5

3

2

6

No  name.


Total.


1
1

0
5
0
0

1

3
3
0
2
0
3
3
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0

1

0
0
0
2
0
2
0
1
1
0
0
0


41
41

40

39

37

34

31

30

29

29

28

26

23

23

22

21

21

20

18

17

17

17

16

16

15

15

13

12

12

12

11

11

10

10

10

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

8

8


310  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.


Table  VI.  —  Concluded.


No.

Diagram.

Men.

Women.

No  name.

Total.

38

1

5

2

0

7

82

4

2

1

7

17

4

2

0

6

42

4

2

0

6

61

Skulls,  or  skull  and  cross  bones

6

0

0

6

84

2

4

0

6

81

Punctuation  marks     ....

3

2

0

5

75

4

1

0

5

71

3

2

0

5

68

Architectural  plans    ....

3

1

1

5

64

Watches  and  clocks        .     .     .

4

1

0

5

28

Dogs  and  dogs'  heads     .     .

2

2

1

5

19

2

3

0

5

66

3

1

0

4

70

3

1

0

4

72

3

1

0

4

79

Musical  instruments  ....

2

2

0

4

65

Wheels

1

2

0

3

45

1

2

0

3

74

2

0

0

2

69

2

0

0

2

35

1

1

0

2

73

1

0

0

67

Bells

0

1

0

58

1

0

0

55

1

0

0

46

1

0

0

There  is  one  other  manner  in  which  we  have  sought  to  ascertain
the  order  of  precedence  of  the  diagrams.  The  diagrams  on  each
card  have  been  numbered,  beginning  at  the  upper  left  hand  cor-
ner, then  across  the  card,  then  down  and  across  again  from  left  to
right,  following  the  succession  natural  in  writing.  The  numbering,
therefore,  presumably  corresponds  approximately  to  the  actual  order
in  which  the  diagrams  were  drawn.  The  average  of  all  these  is,  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  plain  circles  3.9,  which  is  therefore  the  average
place  of  a  plain  circle,  when  it  is  drawn  as  one  of  the  ten  diagrams.
The  average  places  of  diagrams  1-59,  inclusive  of  Table  I.,  are
given  in  the  following  table.  The  figures  in  the  first  column  refer  to
the  original  manuscript  tabulations.


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.


311


Table  VII.


4

7

6

8

5

3

2

9

50

1

34

12

52

10

83

15

84

77

20

76

53

82

13

23

11

49

21

16

31

56


Figure.


Equilateral  triangles
Squares    ....
Right-angled  triangles  /\

Circles

Right-angled  triangles|\
Faces  not  in  profile  .
Faces,  profile  to  right
Diamonds  ....
Oblongs,  horizontal  .
Faces,  profile  to  left    .

Leaves

Stars

Rhombi

Hexagons     ....

Dishes

Crosses

Signs  of  music  .

Tools

Hats

Pentagons     ....
Inscribed  circles     .

Steps

Cubes

Suns

Flags

Squares  with  crosses  .

Hearts

Octagons       ....
Hour-glasses  ^     .
Eyes


Place


2.6
3.2
3.8
3.9
4.1
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.6
4.7
5.0
0
0
0

1

2
3
3
4

5
5
5
G
6
6


5.6
5.7
5.7
5.7

5.7


25
37
33
27

48
51
62
38
47
40
30
36
24
14
43
80
59
54
39
18
26
60
57
22
41
44
32
63
29


Figure.


Letters  of  alphabet

Ships

Flowers

Horses

Figures  of  men  .     .
Oblongs,  vertical   .     .

Digits

Branches       ....

Apples

Vases

Other  animals  and  heads

Books

Card  spots    ....

Houses

Anchors

Inscribed  squares  .     .
Scrawls

o

Trees

Mugs

Hands

Scrolls

Bottles

Moons

Boots

Spirals

Arrows

Right  angles      .     .     .
Cats


Place.


5.7

5.7

5.8

5.8

5.8

5.9

6.

6.

6.3

6.3

6.4

6.4

6.4

6.5

6.6

6.6

6.6

6.7

6.8

6.8

6.8

6.9

6.9

7.

7.

7.1

7.1

7.6

7.8


I  have  now  presented  the  data,  which  have  been  derived  from
the  diagrams.  I  have  next  to  lay  before  you  the  psychological
deductions  which  appear  to  me  warranted  by  those  data,  and  finally  to
point  out  the  bearing  of  those  deductions  on  certain  psychical  ex-
periments.

It  is  evident  that  the  essential  question  is,  what  are  the  factors
which  lead  to  certain  figures  or  classes  of  figures  appearing  so  often,
and  the  factors  which  produce  the  variety  of  figures  which  occur
onty  a  few  times  or  once.  We  have  a  problem  of  visualization,  —  the
mind  is  called  upon  to  supply  an  optical  image,  and  naturally  offers


312  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology,

first  that  which  is  most  accessible ;  sometimes  that  which  is   first
offered  is  accepted  at  once,  or  again  the   decision  hesitates,  several
images  are  offered,  then  a  choice  is  made  and  one  selected.     There
are  two  causes  which  undoubtedly  lead  a  minority  of  persons  to  have
special  visual  images  stand  prominently  first,  —  to  press  to  the  fore
on  every  occasion.     The  first  cause  alluded  to  is  a  mental  trick, — the
habitual  occupation  with  some  special  figure,  which  accidentally  and
unconsciously  is  adopted   by  the  mind.      Such  personal  diagrams
belong  to  certain  individuals,  —  one  might  almost  say  the  individual
belongs  to  the  diagram,  so  domineering  is  it  in  its  incessant  recur-
rence.     A  perfect  example  of  this  is  afforded  by  on^  of  our  corre-
spondents.    Miss  N.  writes,  "  she  has  observed  for  years  that  the  first
form  (^Z))  curiously  possesses  her,  without  her  having  the  slightest
explanation  of  the  cause.     Her  papers  are  covered  with  it.     The  way
she  makes  it  is  not  as  she  writes  3).     Then  the  circular  stroke  is  always
up ;  in  the  former  case  it  is  always  down,  and  the  interior  straight
line  is  always  added  after  the  curve."     Later  she  adds,  "  My  nephew
has  a  special  feeling  about  the  letter  D.     My  nephew  attributes  his
(and  my)  feeling  to  the  fact  that  ^  is  the  only  letter  whose  curve  in
writing  is  made  upwards  and,  so  to  speak,  backwards,  which  gave  him
a  great  deal  of  trouble  as  a  child,  and  he  thinks  it  probably  did  me  / "
And  again  she  adds,  "  I  found  yesterday  that  another  nephew  of
mine  has  always  been  in  the  habit  of  making  JP's  uniformly  with  the
double  stroke.     He  adds,  as  I  feel,  '  It  looks  so  much  better.'     But  it
is  sad  to  see  the  curve  shrinking  with  the  descending  generations."
Such  tricks  are  very  likely  to  be  acquired,  as  we  so  often  remark  in
the  conversation  of  others,  if  not  of  ourselves,  —  the  "  Well's"  and
"  Ah's,"  U  Don't  you  know's,"  and  other  stop-gap  interjections.     So,
too,  it  is  probable  that  the  diagram-trick  is  much  more  common  than
we  are  aware  of,  and  that  it  accounts  for  a  minority  of  the  first  figures
drawn  on  the  cards.

The  second  cause  above  alluded  to  is  the  sustained  attention  of  the
mind  to  certain  objects  constantly  encountered  in  a  person's  regular
daily  occupation.  A  painter  recalls  his  palette ;  a  naturalist  his
butterfly ;  a  physician  his  skull  ;  a  college  student  his  bicycle ;  a
member  of  this  society  his  book  ;  and  so  on,  seriously  and  indefinitely.
When  the  profession  involves  incessant  consideration  of  special  forms,
then  the  images  may  always  be  lurking  in  the  mind,  on  the  watch,  as
it  were,  to  come  forward,  and  if  there  is  the  least  demand  for  a
visual  image  they  press  into  notice.  Pre-occupation  so -intense  is
rare ;  but  among  the  five  hundred  cards,  there  are  three  on  which
every  diagram  indicates  extreme  and  persistent  attention  to  profes-
sional images.


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.  313

A  considerable  number  of  the  diagrams  were,  we  may  safely
assume,  suggested  by  the  objects  around  the  persons  when  they
were  making  the  diagrams,  or  some  association  of  ideas,  or  by  the
recollection  of  objects  or  figures  with  which  they  had  been  specially
or  even  only  casually  occupied  shortly  before.  Data  bearing  on
this  point  are  given  in  Table  IV.  The  image  in  these  cases  came
to  the  mind  from  the  outside ;  but  the  great  majority  of  the
diagrams  are  of  such  a  character  that  we  need  not  hesitate  to
designate  them  as  thrown  out  from  the  mind,  or  as  ejective.  The
ejective  class  of  images  claims  our  special  attention.

The  large  majority  of  the  cards  exhibit  very  little  or  no  real
individuality.  They  are,  of  course,  every  one  different  from  every
other  ;  but  there  is  general  uniformity,  which  is  brought  out  with  start-
ling emphasis  by  Table  VI.  There  we  learn  that  40%  of  the  per-
sons have  drawn  circles  ;  34%  squares;  31%  equilateral  triangles  ;
25%  crosses;  16%  diamonds;  etc.  In  fact,  there  are  scarcely  any
cards  with  figures  contained  on  no  other  card ;  by  far  the  majority
of  the  cards  have  several  figures  which  are  found  more  or  less
frequently  on  other  cards.

With  the  exception  of  a  very  few,  the  diagrams  are  all  simple  in
character.  A  glance  at  Table  I.  suffices  to  show  that  this  is  the
case,  and  it  is  still  more  forcibly  demonstrated  by  Tables  II.  and  III.
The  persons  drawing  have  evidently  drawn  as  a  rule  what  was
easiest.  In  this  manner  we  must  account  for  the  prevalence  of  faces
seen  in  profile  to  the  left,  of  left-handed  spirals,  of  cubes  and  houses
with  the  perspective  lines  running  to  the  right.  If  any  one  will  try
making  the  diagrams  just  mentioned,  he  will,  at  least  if  right-handed,
find  it  easier  to  make  them  as  described  than  in  the  reverse  positions.

We  are  all  trained  in  the  faith  in  individualism,  and  we  are  induced
in  numerous  ways  and  almost  incessantly  to  assign  the  highest  value
to  the  individual,  and  to  the  cultivation  of  individually  distinctive
qualities.  We  are  also  far  more  adept  in  perceiving  differences
than  in  recognizing  resemblances ;  indeed,  it  is  well  known  that
ability  to  recognize  resemblance,  when  it  is  masked,  is  one  of  the
most  distinctive  traits  of  mental  superiority  and  of  genius  itself.  Two
potent  influences  are  confluent  to  make  us  exaggerate  the  differences
between  man  and  man,  and  they  are  abetted  by  each  person's  feel-
ing that  he  is  different  from  his  neighbors.  The  consequence  is  that
we  too  often  and  too  easily  forget  our  similarity,  and  forget  that
it  stretches  over  trifling  habits  as  well  as  over  the  great  and  little
modes  of  thought.  We  feel,  and  for  the  most  part  willingly  ac-
knowledge, the  likeness  of  our  natures,  but  our  sentiments  and  ideas
we  are  over-inclined  to  consider  original.     Such  tests  as  the  drawing


314  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.

of  the  diagrams  thrust  home  the  conviction  that  even  in  trifles  we
differ  but  little.  The  images  and  notions  which  pass  across  the  con-
sciousness of  each  individual  are  almost  all  common  property ;  they
are  comparable  to  coins,  —  every  one  is  a  separate  entity,  but  yet  the
stamp  is  the  same.  Our  thoughts  are  in  large  measure  owned  by  the
community ;  we  are  in  mental  matters  all  pure  communists.

Such  tests  as  the  diagrams,  on  which  this  report  is  based,  demon-
strate the  slightness  of  our  real  individual  distinction  and  separa-
tion. The  similarity  is  so  great  that  the  same  visual  images  arise  in
many  of  us  with  approximately  the  same  readiness.

We  come  here  to  a  domain  of  psychology  which  has  been  but  little
and  inadequately  studied,  namely,  the  frequency  and  readiness  with
which  ideas  recur.  In  a  previous  report  in  the  Proceedings  (ante,
pp.  86)  I  have  shown  that  even  in  so  indifferent  a  matter  as
t'ae  ten  digits,  there  are  unconscious  preferences  of  the  mind,  or,  in
other  words,  that  the  notions  or  images  of  certain  digits  come  forward
oftener  and  more  readily  than  of  others  ;  and  I  have  also  shown,  ante,
pp.  90-91,  that  the  order  of  relative  frequency  is  similar  for  different
persons.  It  is  probable  that  all  ideas  possess  each  its  special  degree
of  readiness  of  appearing  in  consciousness,  and  that  the  degree  of
readiness  is  approximately  the  same  for  a  great  many  persons.  This
similarity  probably  also  prevails  in  regard  to  the  majority  of  ideas.

This  aspect  of  our  mental  processes  puts  the  problem  of  thought-
transference  in  a  somewhat  different  light  from  that  in  which  we
have  been  asked  to  view  it.  It  is  evident  that  if  two  persons  are
requested  to  think  of  some  one  thing  of  a  class,  such  as  a  letter  of
the  alphabet,  a  playing-card,  a  baptismal  name,  there  is  by  no
means  an  equal  chance  of  their  selecting  any  one  ;  on  the  contrary,
there  is  not  only  the  probability  that  they  will  think  of  a  special  one
first,  but  there  is  a  chance  of  their  both  thinking  of  the  same  one,
for  the  relative  frequency  or  preponderance  of  one  idea  or  image
out  of  a  set  has  been  shown  to  be  similar  for  a  number  of  people.
In  order  to  prove  the  reality  of  thought-transference,  it  must  be
demonstrated  that  the  observed  coincidence  of  thoughts  can  not  be
explained  by  the  law  of  relative  frequency.

Let  us  suppose  by  way  of  illustration  that  two  persons  make
an  experiment  in  thought-transference  with  diagrams.  The  agent
draws  a  circle  ;  now,  four  persons  out  of  ten  are  likely  to  draw  a
circle  (see  Table  VI.),  and  to  draw  it  near  the  beginning  of  a  series  of
diagrams  ;  instead,  therefore,  of  the  chances  of  the  percipient's  draw-
ing a  circle  being  almost  infinitely  small,  they  are  very  great.  The
trial  is  proceeded  with ;  the  circle  having  been  drawn,  it  is  probable
that  the  next  figure  will  be  different,  as  our  cards  show ;  the  agent


Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.  315

draws  a  square  ;  again  the  percipient's  unconscious  chances  are  very
great.  And  so  on  with  a  considerable  series  of  diagrams.  In  this
manner  thought-transference  might  be  simulated,  and  a  proof  of  its
reality  obtained,  which  would  seem  overwhelming  so  long  as  the  law
of  relative  frequency  is  disregarded  as  an  explanation.

In  the  first  report  of  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research
(Vol.  1,  Part  I.)  there  occur  several  expressions  which  show  that  the
existence  of  the  law  of  relative  frequency  of  ideas  was  not  known
to  the  committee  reporting.  For  example,  p.  23,  they  say,  "The
chances  against  success  in  the  case  of  any  one  card  are,  of  course,
51  to  1,"  —  the  Italics  are  ours.  On  the  contrary,  the  chances  vary
according  to  the  card  ;  and  if  the  card  is  not  drawn  at  random  from  a
full  pack,  but  selected  by  some  person  thinking  of  it,  the  chances  in
favor  of  success  are  very  much  greater  than  1  to  51.  A  similar
criticism  is  applicable  to  the  remark  on  p.  26, 1,  c. :  "  In  the  case  of
letters  of  the  alphabet,  of  cards,  and  of  numbers  of  two  figures,  the
chances  against  success  on  a  first  trial  would  naturally  be  25  to  1,
51  to  1,  and  89  to  1,  respectively."  In  the  third  report  on  thought-
transference,  I.  c.,Part  III.,  especially  p.  173,  similar  statements  are
repeated,  and  it  is  added  concerning  the  reproduction  of  drawings  by
Mr.  Smith,  when  Mr.  Blackburn  acted  as  agent,  "  Here  obviously
an  incalculable  number  of  trials  might  be  made,  at  any  rate  in  the
case  of  the  more  random  and  eccentric  figures,  before  pure  guess-
work would  hit  upon  a  resemblance  as  near  as  that  obtained  in  almost
every  case  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith."  We  have  to  remember  that  "p?/re
guess-work "  is  precisely  what  we  are  not  dealing  with.  In  Mr.
Schmoll's  article  in  the  same  Proceedings,  Part  XI.,  on  the  repro-
duction of  diagrams  by  thought-transference,  occurs  the  following
sentence,  p.  336  :  "  We  have,  therefore,  been  able  to  convince  "our-
selves that  the  agents,  concentrating  their  looks  on  the  given  object,
projected  on  the  mental  eye  of  the  percipient  a  picture  more  or  less
resembling  it,  and  we  take  it  as  incontrovertible  that  the  above  results
could  not  have  been  achieved  by  conscious  or  unconscious  guessing."

If  we  examine  the  drawings  given  in  the  various  articles  above
referred  to,  we  notice  at  once  that  with  the  exception  of  a  single
series,  those  with  Mr.  Gr.  A.  Smith  as  percipient,  the  figures  drawn  by
both  the  agents  and  percipients  are  in  greater  part  just  such  as  our
diagram  tests  have  shown  to  be  the  ones  likely  to  be  drawn.  The
authors  of  the  articles  in  question  having  fundamentally  miscon-
ceived the  nature  of  the  chances,  of  course  fail  to  offer  the  necessary
proof  that  the  proportion  of  coincidences  was  greater  than  chance
would  account  for.  Until  this  is  done  it  appears  premature  to  accept
these  experiments  as  valid  proofs  of  thought-transference.


316  Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology.

There  still  are  left  the  experiments  with  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  Black-
burn. If  we  examine  the  diagrams  reproduced  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  English  Society,  Part  II.,  pp.  83-97,  and  Part  III.,  pp.  175-215,
we  observe  among  them  also  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  figures
which  are  most  likely  to  be  drawn,  so  that,  even  under  the  assump-
tion that  everything  was  perfectly  fair,  the  evidence  is  much  less
strong  than  the  English  committee  have  represented  it.  There  re-
mains to  be  considered  the  possibility  of  a  code  arranged  between
Mr.  Blackburn  and  Mr.  Smith.  The  English  committee  in  their  third
report  express  themselves  (Proceedings  S.  P.  P.,  Part  III.,  pp.  164,
165)  very  decidedly  in  regard  to  the  possibility  of  a  code.  They  have
written  :  4 '  Let  our  readers  who  may  be  familiar  with  the  Morse  or
any  other  code  of  signals  try  in  some  such  way  to  convey  a  descrip-
tion of  some  of  our  drawings  to  a  friend  who  is  blind-folded  and  has
not  seen  the  original ;  we  venture  to  assert  that,  even  if  audible  signs
were  allowed,  several  minutes  at  least  would  be  required  to  convey
the  notion  of  the  figures  correctly.  It  is  probably  no  exaggeration  to
say  that  several  scores,  if  not  hundreds,  of  precise  signs  would  be  re-
quired to  convey  an  idea  as  exact  as  that  implied  in  many  of  Mr.
Smith's  representations."  In  the  light  of  our  present  information
this  opinion  must  be  renounced,  and  we  must  say  instead  that  two  or
three  signs,  which  might  be  variously  combined,  as  in  the  Morse  alpha-
bet, would  suffice  to  convey  in  a  short  time  the  precise  ideas  required  ;
and  it  must  be  added  that  very  ample  opportunity  for  such  signalling
was  afforded  in  nearly  all  the  Smith-Blackburn  experiments.  If  the
conditions  as  described  in  the  third  report  of  the  English  Society  are
considered,  it  will  be  evident  at  once  that  in  at  least  a  portion  of  the
experiments  sensory  impressions  could  have  been  received  by  Mr.
Smith  from  Mr.  Blackburn,  and  of  course  any  sort  of  impression
could  be  utilized  in  a  signalling  code.  If  Messrs.  Blackburn  and
Smith  had  observed  that  there  are,  say  fifty  diagrams  which  people
are  likely  to  draw,  a  code  could  have  been  easily  arranged  for  the
former  to  signal  to  the  latter  which  one  or  two  of  the  diagrams  had
been  drawn.  If,  further,  the  code  include  signals  for  straight  lines,
for  semicircular  curves,  for  right,  left,  up  and  down,  or  below  and
above,  it  would  not  be  very  difficult  nor  require  long  for  a  couple  of
expert  collusionists  to  accomplish  the  thought-transference  of  almost
any  of  the  diagrams  in  the  series  given  in  the  pages  cited.  1  do  not
bring  any  accusation  against  the  two  gentlemen  who  achieved  the
remarkable  successes  reported  by  the  English  committee  ;  I  merely
point  out  that  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  still  remains  tenable,  and  that
unless  it  is  met  adequately,  persons  of  cautious  judgment  must
consider    that  the   explanation  of  the  success   of  Mr.  Smith  in  the


>0  J0H0Y8  1     J//r^rPTMTHC4tTXff


&


/


>


<,


I


J


y


-^S'


y


~r^


<s>


Q


c


SECOND    REPORT    ON    EXPERIMENTAL    PSYCHOLOGY.


Heliotypi  Panting  Co,  Boston.


Note  to  the  Foregoing  Report.  317

reproduction  of  drawings  is  more  probably  fraud  than  supersensuous
thought- transf  ere  nee .

If  this  view  is  adopted,  the  general  conclusion  is  unavoidable  that
none  of  the  experiments  heretofore  published  afford  conclusive  evi-
dence of  thought-transference.

The  accompanying  plate  gives  reproductions  of  the  principal  types
of  diagrams.     The  figures  are  all  fac-similes  of  actual  drawings  on

tllP  Pirds

CHARLES    SEDGWICK   MINOT.


NOTE   TO   THE   FOREGOING   REPORT.

As  one  of  the  members  of  the  "Committee  on  Experimental  Psy-
cholog}'  "  I  feel  that  I  ought  to  disclaim  agreement  with  the  full  breadth
of  Dr.  Minot's  conclusions.  His  painstaking  study  of  the  diagrams
sent  in  by  our  associates  has  given  a  more  definite  numerical  form  to
the  alread}x  well-known  fact  that  simple  geometrical  figures,  letters,
faces,  houses,  and  scrawls  "are  the  most  likely  things  both  to  be
drawn  and  guessed  in  thought-transference  experiments  where  im-
provised drawings  are  used.  But  he  seems  to  me  greatly  to  exagger-
ate the  importance  of  this  diagram-habit  when  he  considers  that  the
absence  of  special  provisions  against  it  in  the  English  Society's  ex-
periments constitutes  a  very  formidable  objection  to  their  value  as
proofs  of  thought-transference.

Our  readers  will  not  have  forgotten  that  only  a  small  number  of  the
experiments  recorded  in  the  English  Society's  Proceedings  were  made
with  diagrams  at  all.  Where  diagrams  were  used,  it  is  true  that  their
elements  were  almost  always  the  familiar  ones  above  mentioned.  With
so  few  elements  a  code  of  signals  is  much  less  difficult  than  with
more  ;  and  Dr.  Minot  consequently  infers  that  where  whole  series
of  diagrams  were  rightly  guessed,  this  may  well  have  been  because  the
agent  secretly  conveyed  information  to  the  percipient  by  such  a  code.

This  wholesale  right  guessing  of  diagrams  seemed  to  have  oc-
curred in  at  least  five  series  of  experiments.  (I  omit  the  two  series
contributed  by  Herren  Dessoir  and  Schmoll,  as  the  success  in  them
was  inferior  to  that  in  the  other  series.)  Three  of  these  series  are
not  mentioned  by  Dr.  Minot  at  all.  In  the  series  with  Miss  E.  and
Miss  R.,  reported  by  Mr.  Guthrie  (pp.  31  ff.  of  Vol.  II.  of  the  Lon-
don Society's  Proceedings),  the  successful  agents  were  investigators
of  honorable  repute  who  were  singly  in  the  room  with  the  percipient
when  the  guessing  was  done,  so  that  if  there  were  cheating  it  could
perfectly  well  have  gone  on  without  a  "  code."     In  the   experiments


318  Note  to  the  Foregoing  Report.

with  Miss  R.,  as  recorded  by  Prof.  Lodge  (ibid.  p.  194),  the  specta-
tors and  agents  seem  also  to  have  been  gentlemen  themselves  bent
on  research.  In  those  reported  by  Mr.  J.  W.  Smith  (ibid.  p.  207),
with  his  sister,  the  same  seems  to  have  been  the  case.

But  in  these  three  series  the  success  was  less  continuous  and  strik-
ing than  in  the  two  series  which  Dr.  Minot  alone  mentions,  namely,
those  in  which  Mr.  Blackburn  was  assent  and  Mr.  G-.  A.  Smith
percipient.  In  the  first  of  these  series  (Vol.  I.,  p.  78),  contact  was
allowed,  so  that  it  is  admitted  in  the  report  that  tactile  signals
might  conceivably  have  been  made.  In  almost  all  the  drawings
of  the  second  series  (Vol.  I.,  p.  1G1),  however,  of  which  the  suc-
cess was,  if  anything,  even  more  remarkable,  there  was  no  contact
between  agent  and  percipient ;  and  although  the  committee  ad-
mit that  the  possibility  of  audible  signals  was  not  absolutely
excluded,  yet  the}T  seem  to  have  been  keenly  alert  to  detect  them.
u  The  material  for  possible  signs,"  they  say,  "  appears  to  be  reduced
to  shuffling  on  the  carpet,  coughing,  and  modes  of  breathing.  Any-
thing distinctly  unusual  in  aiw  of  these  directions  must  have  been
inevitably  noticed  ;  and  since  our  attention  during  this  part  of  the
experiment  was  of  course  concentrated  on  the  relation  between  Mr.
B.  and  Mr.  S.,  we  are  at  a  loss  to  conceive  how  any  signalling,  suf-
ficient in  amount  to  convey  the  required  ideas,  could  have  passed
undetected.  Furthermore,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  reproductions
were  not  made  in  a  tentative,  hesitant  manner,  as  if  waiting  for  sig-
nals, but  deliberately  and  continuous!}?,  as  if  copying  a  drawing  that
is  seen.  Moreover,  in  almost  every  instance  the  irroportions  of  the
different  parts  of  the  original  figure  were  reproduced  more  accurately
than  were  its  more  easily  describable  details.  However,  with  the
view  of  removing  all  doubts,  ...  we  on  one  occasion  stopped  Mr.
Smith's  ears  with  putty,  then  tied  a  bandage  round  his  eyes  and  ears,
then  fastened  a  bolster-case  over  the  head,  and  over  all  threw  a
blanket  over  his  entire  head  and  trunk.  Fig.  22  was  now  drawn  by
one  of  us  and  shown  outside  the  room  to  Mr.  Blackburn,  who,  on  his
return,  sat  behind  Mr.  Smith,  and  in  no  contact  with  him  whatever,
and  as  perfectly  still  as  it  is  possible  for  a  human  being  to  sit  who  is
not  concentrating  his  attention  on  keeping  motionless  to  the  exclu-
sion of  every  other  object.  In  a  few  minutes  Mr.  Smith  took  up  the
pencil  and  gave  the  successive  reproductions  shown,"  which  are  most
striking  copies  of  the  original  complicated  "  scrawl."
,-  Dr.  Minot  says  of  this  series  of  experiments  that  in  it  "  ample  op-
portunity for  signalling  was  afforded,"  and  that  "  persons  of  cautious
judgment  must  consider  that  the  explanation  of  the  success  of  Mr.
Smith  is  more  probably  fraud  than  supersensuous  thought-transfer-


Note  to  the  Foregoing  Report.  319

ence."  It  seems  to  me  here  that  Dr.  Minot  must  have  been  less
studious  of  the  details  of  the  English  reports  than  of  his  own  postal
cards  with  their  diagrams,  and  that  he  cannot  have  sufficiently  dis-
criminated betweeu  the  possibility  in  abstracto  of  framing  a  code  of
signals  for  such  drawings  and  the  ease  in  concrete  of  using  such  a
code.  The  ease  in  this  instance  can  hardly  have  been  great.  I  can-
not agree,  therefore,  that  the  revelation  of  the  diagram-habit  has
appreciably  weakened  the  evidence  for  thought-transference  actually
to  be  found  in  the  English  Society's  reports.  To  most  of  that  evi-
dence the  existence  of  such  a  habit  is  wholly  irrelevant ;  and  where  it
is  pertinent,  fraud  based  on  its  use  seems  so  unlikely,  if  the  reports
are  faithful,  that  vague  suspicions  of  unfaithful  reporting  and  bad
observation  seem  to  me  carry  more  real  sceptical  weight  with  them
than  Dr.  Minot's  more  definitely  formulated  charge.

The  experiments  of  the  English  Society,  like  all  possible  experiments
of  the  sort,  are  exposed  to  many  vague  suspicions.  The  true
warrant  for  their  credibility  is  less  to  be  found  in  the  increasingly
minute  description  of  precautions  in  the  reports  (which  would  only
make  the  reading  of  the  latter  more  tiresome),  than  in  the  reader's
preconceptions  as  to  the  likelihood  of  the  phenomena  and  the  com-
petence of  the  observers.  Where  the  phenomena  are  usual,  any
observer  will  pass  for  competent ;  but  his  competency  will  be
suspected  just  in  proportion  as  what  he  tells  of  grows  more  strange.
The  great  weakness  of  the  case  for  thought-transference  is  that  the
accounts  of  it  are  so  rare.  Why  don't  the  apparent  cases  come  in
faster,  now  that  so  many  of  as  are  on  the  watch?  It  is  true  that  in
strict  logic  those  who  believe  in  thought-transference  ought  to  be  no
more  puzzled  by  this  lack  of  new  cases  than  those  who  believe  in
fraud.  Fraud  we  know  to  be  a  vera  causa,  which,  like  all  such,
should  recur  with  a  certain  statistical  regularity.  If  as  real  a  thing
as  fraud  can  thus  remit  for  a  time  its  effects,  so  may  a  more  doubtful
thing  like  thought-transference,  if  it  really  exist,  do  the  same.  But
whilst  no  coercive  conclusion  can  yet  be  drawn,  it  seems  to  me  that
the  exceedingly  strong  presumption  in  favor  of  thought-transference
which  the  English  reports  establish  —  I  understand  that  the  word
"  thought-transference"  implies  no  positive  theory  whatever  as  to  how
the  knowledge  is  conveyed  from  the  agent's  to  the  percipient's  mind
—  is  not  appreciably  shaken  by  Dr.  Minot's  critical  remarks.  This
I  feel  in  duty  bound  to  say ;  for  whilst  additional  proofs  are  waited
for,  questions  get  prematurely  closed  and  forgotten  ;  and  in  this  case
that  seems  to  me  a  consummation  which  one  ought  to  try  as  long  as
possible  to  postpone.

WILLIAM   JAMES.


320  Heport  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.


REPORT     OF    THE     COMMITTEE     ON    MEDIUMISTIC

PHENOMENA.

•
Your  committee  desires  to  report  a  moderate  progress  in  the
investigations  pertaining  to  its  work.  During  the  year  the  commit-
tee, as  such,  has  undertaken  the  careful  examination  of  the  results
obtained  by  one  well-known  trance  medium  who  is  reported  to  have
given  to  many  prudent  sitters  names  and  communications  of  such
accuracy  and  fulness  that  it  is  supposed  that  such  results  could  only
be  reached  by  some  occult  agency,  or  by  some  mental  process  which
is  not  exactly  recognized  as  yet.  The  committee  was  of  the  opinion
that  the  reality  of  such  phenomena  could  probably  be  satisfactorily
determined  by  a  series  of  sittings  held  with  suitable  sitters  under  the
personal  supervision  of  a  member  of  the  committee,  and  stenograph-
ically  reported.  In  this  plan  we  were  aided  ven*  materially  by  the
generous  cooperation  of  the  medium,  who  expressed  herself  ready
and  willing  to  act  with  us  in  our  work.  Thus  far  we  have  been  able
to  have  only  eight  or  ten  sittings  in  which  the  desired  conditions
were  reasonably  fulfilled.  The  results  thus  obtained  are  not  of  such
a  character  as  to  warrant  any  very  decided  judgment  as  to  the  nature
of  the  phenomena  under  examination,  but  they  throw  some  light  on
the  questions  involved.  We  are  of  the  opinion  that  an  extension  of
the  investigation  would  be  very  desirable,  provided  such  amounts  of
money  could  be  placed  at  our  disposal  as  would  enable  us  to  obtain
the  full  reports  of  a  large  number  of  sittings  with  this  medium  and
•perhaps  with  others  as  well.

The  method  we  have  employed,  which  seemed  to  us  at  the  time  the
only  one  of  any  promise,  has  some  difficulties,  not  all  of  which  could
be  readily  foreseen.

In  the  first  place,  the  method  is  necessarily  expensive,  both  in  time
and  in  money.  The  members  of  the  committee  are  mostly  busy  men,
but  they  have  been  generous  in  giving  their  own  time  to  the  necessary
superintendence  of  sittings,  and  to  the  no  less  necessary  revision  of
the  reports  ;  we  have  not,  however,  had  the  money  which  such  an  in-
vestigation requires.  Before  the  work  was  entered  upon,  various
persons  expressed  great  personal  interest  in  having  just  such  an  in-
vestigation made  ;  but  when,  relying  upon  this  deep  interest,  we
really  undertook  the  task,  we  saw  only  a  very  limited  materialization
of  such  an  interest  in  the  form  of  cash.     One  of  these  persons  was  a


Report  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena.  321

bright  exception,  and  has  aided  the  committee  by  a  liberal  gift  of
money,  and  in  other  ways.  We  have  also  had  a  moderate  amount  of
money  from  the  Council  of  the  Society,  and  a  smaller  contribution
from  another  member,  and  some  vague  promises  from  others  who
became  interested  in  the  question  at  a  later  time.  Good  steno-
graphic reports  are  expensive  ;  poor  ones  are  worse  than  useless.

Then,  too,  the  phenomena  with  which  we  are  concerned  appear  to
be  of  a  very  delicate  nature.  It  would  seem  that  not  merely  the
physical  condition  of  the  medium  is  of  importance,  but  that  the  per-
sonality, or  frame  of  mind  of  the  persons  present  (sitter  or  commit-
tee member),  has  a  marked  effect  on  the  sitting  or  on  the  trance
conditions.  On  this  account  several  sitters  were  altogether  unsuc-
cessful and  some  four  or  five  sittings  had  to  be  abandoned.  Two
members  of  the  committee  also  proved  to  be  a  hindrance  to  the
manifestations  (weakening  the  power  of  the  medium,  it  was  said,  and
making  her  tired),  and  their  services  had  to  be  dispensed  with.
These  difficulties  are  mentioned  merely  in  explanation  and  not  in  a
complaining  or  captious  spirit.  In  any  scientific  experiment  there
are  certain  conditions  which  must  be  fulfilled  ;  these  will  necessarily
vary  with  the  character  of  the  investigation,  and  the  successful
investigator  is  the  one  who  recognizes  the  legitimate  conditions  and
varies  them  to  obtain  his  result.  That  the  character  of  the  surround-
ings, the  temperament,  disposition,  and  frame  of  mind  of  the  persons
present  may  not  be  important  elements  in  every  trance  or  similar
manifestation,  your  committee  is  not  at  present  prepared  to  say.  It
may  also  be  that  the  very  desire  to  investigate,  with  its  inevitable
suspension  of  judgment  or  active  doubt,  is  of  itself  a  hindrance  to
success  in  obtaining  good  results  in  this  field,  just  as  the  chairman  of
the  Committee  on  Thought-transference  has  suggested  concerning  the
special  work  of  that  committee.  In  spite  of  such  difficulties  we  are
of  the  opinion  that  an  investigation  such  as  we  have  begun  is  of  real
value,  and  recommend  that  it  be  continued.

Individual  members  of  the  committee  have  also  visited  other
mediums  of  varied  powers  and  have  witnessed  occult  manifestations
with  a  view  to  determining  the  desirability  of  bringing  them  to  the
attention  of  the  committee.  No  less  than  five  such  persons  of  con-
siderable reputation  have  recently  been  publicly  exposed  or  are
"  under  a  cloud."  So  that  at  least  seven  materializing  or  etherealiz-
ing  mediums  (nearly  every  one  of  which  had  been  highly  recom-
mended to  our  special  attention)  have  come  to  grief  here  in  Boston
during  the  past  two  or  three  years.  Such  a  state  of  things  hardly
tends  to  encourage  your  committee  in  the  active  pursuit  of  this  class
of  phenomena ;  but  we  are  still  ready  to  examine  even  these  phe-


322  Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.

nomena  on  the  receipt  of  tangible  experiences  on  the  part  of  trust-
worthy persons,  provided  we  ^re  permitted  to  impose  such  conditions
as  seem  to  us  reasonable  and  necessary.

There  are  also  ways  in  which  the  members  of  the  society  can  aid
the  committee,  besides  giving  us  liberal  contributions  of  money.  We
are  in  possession  of  a  large  number  of  names  of  persons  whose  rare
gifts  are  dignified  by  various  long  or  mysterious  names,  and  have
been  commended  to  our  examination  by  those  who  have  seen  them
displayed.  As  yet,  we  have  not  found  ourselves  able  to  test  the
reality  of  these  psychometric,  clairvoyant,  and  similar  powers.  We
shall  be  glad  to  have  any  competent  members  of  the  society  assist  us
in  forming  an  estimate  of  such  cases,  with  a  view  to  giving  them,
ultimately,  a  more  detailed,  and  perhaps  a  more  guarded,  examination
should  they  prove  worthy  of  serious  attention.  The  expense  of  such
work  need  not  be  great,  nor  would  any  considerable  expenditure  of
time  be  required.  We  should,  however,  wish  to  have  it  clone  under
our  general  supervision,  and  with  due  regard  to  certain  precautions
and  rules  which  we  should  be  glad  to  communicate'  to  any  intending
investigator.

JOSEPH   W.   WARREN,

Chairman.


SOME   EXPERIMENTS   IN   THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

This  account  is  not  presented  either  as  evidence  for  or  as  evidence
against  the  theory  of  telepathy,  nor  indeed  of  any  theory.  Certain
results  having;  been  obtained  which  could  not  be  accounted  for  on
the  hypothesis  of  pure  chance,  we  have  applied  whatever  tests  have
occurred  to  us,  and  the  whole  is  offered  merely  as  so  much  evidence
bearing  on  the  subject.

The  experiments  were  performed  in  Nov.,  1886.  Throughout,  the
same  two  persons  acted  as  agent  and  percipient,  — Mrs.  J.  F.  Brown
and  Nellie  Gallagher,  a  domestic  lately  come  from  the  count}'  of
Northumberland  in  New  Brunswick.

Exclusive  of  some  miscellaneous  sets,  which  will  be  referred  to
later,  the  experiments  consist  of  3,000  guesses  of  the  numbers  from
0  to  9  or  from  1  to  10,  the  normal  probability  of  each  separate  guess
being  right  being  one  in  ten.  They  are  arranged  in  sets  of  100
guesses  each,  and  the  sets  numbered  from  1  to  30.  The  first  20  sets
are  made  up  as  follows  :  The  column  at  the  left,  in  heavy  tjTpe  (see
pp.  330-4) ,  represents  the  numbers  thought  of  by  the  agent,  and  the


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  323

horizontal  row,  opposite  each  of  these  numbers,  the  ten  guesses  of
that  number  by  the  percipient.  The  left-hand  column  in  each  set
was  made  up,  before  the  guessing  on  that  set  commenced,  by  shuf-
fling and  drawing  off,  one  after  another,  ten  playing-cards  running
from  ace  to  ten,  the  ten  standing  for  zero.  This  was  done  out  of
sight  of  the  agent,  and  usually,  if  not  always,  in  her  absence.

The  agent  fixes  her  mind  on  the  digit  at  the  head  of  the  column,
the  percipient  guesses  which  one  it  is,  and  the  agent  records  the
guess  in  the  upper  space  in  the  next  column  ;  the  next  number  is
thought  of  and  the  guess  recorded  in  the  next  space  of  the  second
column,  and  so  on  clown  the  line.  Now,  the  agent  reverses.  The
number  at  the  foot  of  the  column  is  guessed  again,  then  the  one  next
above,  and  so  on  to  the  top.  To  get  the  order  of  the  percipient's
guesses,  therefore,  we  run  down  the  first  column,  up  the  second,
down  the  third,  up  the  fourth,  and  so  on.  This  method  of  procedure
has  been  explained  to  the  percipient  beforehand,  and  if  she  keeps
count  she  will  know  when  the  agent  repeats  the  number  at  the  foot
or  head  of  the  column.

The  agent  sits  at  one  side  of  a  table  and  the  percipient  at  the  op-
posite side  facing  her.  The  paper  containing  the  guessing  order,
which  the  percipient  has  never  seen,  is  in  the  agent's  lap,  out  of  sight
from  the  opposite  side  of  the  table,  and  there  is  no  mirror  in  the  room
to  cause  a  reflection.  A  strip  of  paper  with  an  opening  large  enough
for  one  number  to  appear  is  placed  over  the  agent's  column,  and  this
strip  is  moved  down  or  up  as  the  case  may  be,  so  that  at  any  par-
ticular time  only  the  number  then  thought  of  is  in  sight.  For  the
first  two  or  three  sets  some  comments  were  made  by  the  agent  while
the  guessing  was  in  progress,  and  several  times  the  percipient  was
told  when  the  guess  was  right.  But  this  was  soon  discontinued  —
the  agent  being  cautioned  against  it  —  and  was  not  done  at  all  after
the  first  two  or  three  sets.  It  apparently  made  no  difference  in  the
result.  After  some  ten  sets  were  guessed,  the  precise  time  not  hav-
ing been  recorded,  the  percipient's  back  was  turned  so  that  she  could
not  see  the  agent,  and  for  a  few  sets,  somewhere  in  the  second  ten,
the  percipient  was  blindfolded.  This  she  did  not  like,  and  it  was  not
done  any  more.

For  the  third  1,000  guesses,  40  playing-cards  were  taken,  ace  to  ten
in  each  of  the  four  suits.  These  were  well  shuffled  by  the  agent  and
a  card  drawn.  The  percipient,  whose  back  was  turned,  then  guessed
the  number  of  pips  on  the  card.  The  number  guessed  was  recorded
by  the  agent  in  the  first  column,  and  then  the  right  number  in  the
second  column  opposite.  For  the  first  set  of  100  guesses  in  this
group  the  cards  were  shuffled  after  every  guess.     And  for  this  set  the


C">


24  Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


percipient  was  told  to  name  the  suit  if  she  felt  any  impression  in  that
direction,  and  when  she  did  so  it  was  recorded,  the  real  suit  of  the
card  held  being  noted  each  time.  Afterwards  all  idea  of  the  suit
was  dropped,  as  it  was  thought  it  might  lead  to  confusion.  In  this
set  the  percipient  named  the  suit  27  times,  11  times  being  right ;  and
it  is  a  noticeable  fact  that  in  each  of  these  27  cases,  where  the  suit
was  named,  the  value  of  the  card  was  given  correctly.  For  the  next
set  the  card  at  the  top  of  the  pack  was  turned  and  guessed,  then
placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  pack,  the  next  one  turned,  and  so  on  till
the  100  guesses  had  been  made.

The  remaining  eight  sets  were  done  in  the  way  last  described,
except  that  the  cards  were  re-shuffled  after  each  column  of  25  guesses
had  been  recorded.

The  method  of  procedure  being  explained,  it  remains  to  examine
the  results  obtained.

Tables  which  follow  show  the  number  of  times  each  digit  was
called  by  the  percipient  in  each  set,  and  the  number  of  correct
guesses,  also  the  totals  for  each  separate  set,  and  for  each  1 ,000
guesses.  Thus,  in  the  first  set  1  was  guessed  14  times,  2  of  these
guesses  being  right;  2  was  guessed  12  times,  4  being  right.  In  the
first  set  of  100  guesses,  20  were  right;  in  the  second  set,  13.  Out
of  the  first  1,000  guesses,  the  percipient  said  1,  107  times,  18  of  these
107  guesses  being  right ;  2,  82  times,  7  being  right.  The  number  of
correct  guesses  to  the  100  varies  from  10  in  the  8th,  to  28  in  the  19th,
21st,  and  28th  sets.  Thus  the  proportion  never  falls  below  what
chance  calls  for,  but  rises  to  nearly  three  times  that  figure.  In  the
first  1,000  there  are  175  right  instead  of  100,  in  the  second  190,  and  in
the  third  219,  making  a  total  of  584  right  out  of  3,000.  This  steady
preponderance  of  right  guesses  is  proof  positive  of  some  influence  or
influences  other  than  chance.  /

Number  habits  are  found  to  some  extent.  Thus  in  each  1,000
guesses,  0  or  10  is  below  the  average  in  frequency,  while  1  is  above.
In  the  whole  series  8's  predominate.  There  are  387-S's  and  but  223-
10's  or  O's.  Yet  here  the  proportion  of  right  guesses  is  pretty  con-
stant. 584  out  of  3,000  is  a  percentage  of  19.46.  The  percentage  of
Ts  is  19.43,  of  O's  and  Ws  it  is  19.72,  and  of  8's  17.31.

As  we  find  number  habits,  so  also  there  are  temporary  tendencies,
changing  from  time  to  time.  Thus  in  the  first  10  sets  fours  and  fives
are  guessed  oftener  than  any  other  numbers,  fives  slightly  predomi-
nating;  in  the  second  10,  fours  and  fives  are  about  10  per  cent,
below  the  average  in  frequency  ;  and  in  the  third  10,  they  are  still  less
frequent.     These  shifting  tendencies  serve  to  balance  each  other,  so


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  325

that  in  the  entire  series  we  find  297  fours,  three  less  than  one-tenth  of
3,000,  and  302  fives.  We  have  seen  that  there  are  more  correct  guesses
in  the  second  1,000  than  in  the  first,  more  in  the  third  than  in  the
second  ;  and  among  the  fours  and  fives  the  proportion  increases  also.
In  the  first  1,000  guesses,  four  and  five  are  guessed  in  succession  59
times  ;  in  the  second  1,000,  17  times ;  and  in  the  third  1,000,  only  8
times.


1st
right.

2d
right.

Both
right.

Both
wrong.

1st  1,000    ....

59

4

10

7

38

2d  1,000     ....

17

4

2

0

11

3d  1,000     ....

8

5

1

0

2

3,000    ....

84

13

13

7

51

These  number  habits  and  shifting  inclinations,  so  far  as  observed,  do
not  seem  to  have  had  any  especial  influence  upon  the  general  results.

It  was  found  that  in  a  good  many  cases  the  percipient  was  not
satisfied  with  the  guess  first  given,  and  chauged  it  to  something  else.
Now,  on  the  theory  of  thought-transference,  if  a  wrong  guess  was
given  and  then  an  impression  came  a  little  late,  there  would  be  the  ten-
dency to  change  the  guess  from  wrong  to  right.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
if  a  right  guess  was  made,  the  tendency  would  be  not  to  change  it,  but
to  leave  it  as  it  was  ;  and  this  is  just  what  took  place.

In  the  first  ten  sets  there  are  10  cases  where  the  percipient  guessed
wrong  and  then  changed,  making  it  wrong  again ;  16  cases  where  the
change  was  from  wrong  to  right,  and  only  1  from  right  to  wrong ;  in
the  next  ten  sets  there  are  26  from  wrong  to  wrong,  16  from  wrong
to  right,  and  2  from  right  to  wrong.  In  the  last  ten,  20  from  wrong
to  wrong,  25  from  wrong  to  right,  and  none  from  right  to  wrong ;
making  a  total  of  56  wrong  to  wrong,  57  wrong  to  right,  and  3  right
to  wrong.  But  this  is  not  all.  There  are  some  cases  where  the  per-
cipient changed  more  than  once ;  for  instance,  where  she  first  said  3,
changed  to  8,  and  again  to  7.  There  are  14  of  these  cases,  in  11  of
which  the  number  finally  settled  on  was  right.     Adding  these  to  the


326  Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.

single  changes,  we  have  a  total  of  130,  68  of  which  ended  right.  It
is  easy  enough  to  understand  how,  when  the  percipient  was  facing  the
agent,  the  expression  of  the  latter's  countenance  might  have  conveyed
the  idea  that  the  guess  was  right  or  wrong,  or  that  a  movement  of  the
lips,  in  mentally  repeating  over  the  number  thought  of  to  keep  it
strongly  in  mind,  might  consciously  or  unconsciously  have  been
observed.  But  it  should  be  noticed  that  it  is  where  the  percipient's
back  was  turned  that  these  changes  were  the  most  numerous,  and
where  the  proportion  of  changes  from  wrong  to  right,  and  also  the
proportion  of  correct  guesses  to  the  whole  number  guessed,  is  the
greatest.

Another  noticeable  fact  about  these  changes  is  the  prominent  part
phired  by  the  4's  and  the  5's,  and  the  frequency  with  which  these
digits  are  associated.  This  appears  in  a  marked  degree  in  the  mis-
cellaneous column.  Also  of  the  116  single  changes,  17  cases  are  of
changes  from  5  to  4  or  4  to  5.  In  10  of  these  17  cases  the  digit  last
given  was  correct,  but  in  no  instance  throughout  the  series  was  a  4
or  a  5  given  correctly  and  then  changed  to  something  else.  Turning  to
the  tables  which  give  the  general  totals,  we  find  that  4's  and  5's  are
guessed  right  much  oftener  than  any  other  digits.  While  the  per-
centage of  correct  guesses  to  the  whole  number  guessed  is  19.46,  the
percentage  of  5's  is  24,  and  of  4's,  35.  And  this  increased  percentage,
especially  in  the  case  of  the  4's,  extends  pretty  generally  throughout
the  sets.  In  25  sets  out  of  the  30,  the  percentage  of  correct  4's  is
above  the  general  average.

Subtracting  from  297  (the  number  of  times  the  percipient  says
4)  106  (the  number  of  times  4  is  guessed  correctly)  leaves  191,
which  is  the  number  of  times  4  is  guessed  when  some  other  number  is
right.  One-ninth  of  191,  say  21,  is  the  number  of  times  the  right
number  should  be  5  according  to  chance.  Five  is  really  the  number
thought  of  35  times.  Similarly  4  should  be  the  number  thought  of,
where  5  is  guessed,  in  25  cases.     It  is  so  in  42  cases.

Now,  the  thought  naturally  occurs,  if,  as  has  been  shown  to  be  the
case,  for  some  reason  41  and  5  are  more  readily  guessed  than  the  other
digits,  4  apt  to  be  guessed  for  5  and  5  for  4,  what  would  be  the  result
if  in  some  of  the  first  20  sets,  4  and  5  should  come  next  to  each  other  in
the  agent's  column  ?  This  is  found  to  be  the  case  in  two  sets,  the  5th
and  10th.  In  the  5th  set,  in  the  horizontal  line  opposite  5,  there  are
two  5's  and  two  4's  ;  opposite  the  4,  one  4  and  four  5's.  Thus  three
times  out  of  20,  4  or  5  is  guessed  right,  and  six  times  more  the  digit
most  readily  associated  with  it  is  given.    But  the  10th  set  is  far  more

1  It  may  be  worth  while  to  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fact  that  the  numbers  four
and  Jive  (and  only  these)  begin,  when  spoken,  with  the  same  sound,  — /.


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  327

remarkable.  Here  5  is  guessed  right  seven  times  out  of  10,  and  4
nine  times  ;  once  4  is  given  for  5,  twice  4  is  called  and  changed  to  5,
twice  5  is  changed  to  4,  once  4  to  5  and  back  again  to  4,  once  5  to
4,  back  to  5,  then  to  4  again.  In  the  set  just  before  the  9th,  5  is  the
seventh  digit  in  the  agent's  column  and  4  the  ninth,  they  being  separated
b}7  a  9.  In  this  set  5  is  guessed  right  six  times,  and  4  six  times.  In
the  19th  set,  in  the  horizontal  line  opposite  4,  we  find  6-9-1,  and
then  seven  4's  in  succession,  the  line  just  above  and  just  below  con-
taining neither  a  4  nor  a  5  ;  and  there  are  only  three  other  4's  in  the
set,  of  which  two  are  in  the  5  line,  making  but  ten  4's  in  all.  In
this  same  set  there  are  five  cases  of  changes,  in  every  one  of  which,
the  number  last  given  is  correct.  In  only  one  of  the  five  cases,  how-
ever, are  4  and  5  the  digits  concerned.

In  each  of  the  first  20  sets  the  agent  repeats  the  digit  at  the  foot
of  the  column  five  times,  and  the  one  at  the  head  four  times,  making
nine  times  in  all  for  each  set,  and  180  times  for  the  twenty  sets.

At  the  points  above  noted  the  percipient  in  her  guesses  repeats  but
seven  times,  and  in  but  two  out  of  the  seven  is  the  digit  repeated
the  same  as  that  repeated  by  the  agent.  This  shows  conclusively  that
what  little  idea  the  percipient  may  have  had,  consciously  or  uncon-
sciously, as  to  when  the  foot  or  top  of  the  column  was  reached,  did
not  have  any  appreciable  effect  upon  the  general  results.  Now,  take  a
case  like  that  in  the  19th  set,  where  in  the  horizontal  line  opposite  4
in  the  agent's  column  there  are  seven  4's,  representing  seven  guesses
of  that  digit  by  the  percipient.  Did  the  percipient  after  making  the
first  correct  guess  get  an  inkling  that  4  was  right,  and  then  repeat
the  guess  at  intervals  of  ten  guesses  thereafter,  in  consequence  of
this  intimation,  and  perhaps  of  others  like  it?  The  last  computation
has  an  important  bearing  on  this  matter,  and  it  may  be  tested  in
another  way.  We  will  ascertain  the  number  of  cases  in  the  first  20
sets  in  which  the  same  digit  is  found  three  or  more  times  among  the
percipient's  guesses  in  the  same  horizontal  line,  and  the  number  of
these  cases  in  which  the  guesses  were  right.


4         U  44

5  "         "

6  "         "

7         44  (4

9     "         "

Thus  there  are  8  cases  where  the  same  digit  is  found  6  or  more
times,  and  in  each  of  these  cases  the  digit  is  the  same  as  that  in  the
agent's   column  opposite.      It  is  a  significant  fact  that  in   7  cases


e  line,  107

cases

.

.

21,  or  19.6

per  cent.

right.

"            35

44

.

.

14,  or  40

44

44

44              5

(4

.

•

3,  or  60

44

44

44              5

44

•

.

all

44

44              2

(4

•

•

all

44

44              1

(4

9

t

all

44

328  Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.

out  of  the  8  the  digit  was  either  a  4  or  a  5,  and  it  should  also  be
noticed  that,  in  the  third  group  of  sets,  —  21st  to  30th,  —  where  no
such  opportunity  occurred,  the  proportion  of  correct  guesses  is  greater
than  in  the  first  group  or  the  second,  and  that  if  we  leave  out  all  4's
and  5's,  there  remain  2,401  guesses,  of  which  404  are  right,  instead  of
240,  as  chance  calls  for.

As  might  be  expected,  there  are  cases  where  the  percipient  repeats
when  the  agent  does  not.  Now,  on  the  theory  of  thought-trans-
ference, if  a  right  guess  is  given,  and  the  agent  does  not  repeat,  the
percipient  should  not ;  but  if  the  percipient  happens  to  call  the  number
that  the  agent  is  to  think  of  next,  the  tendency  should  be  for  the  per-
cipient to  call  the  same  number  again.  So  in  these  cases  of  repetition
by  the  percipient,  on  the  theory  of  thought-transference,  the  second
guess  should  be  right  much  oftener  than  the  first.  And  this  is  just  what
happens.  In  the  first  10  sets  there  are  10  such  cases  :  right  the  first
time,  0 ;  right  the  second  time,  6.  In  the  second  10  sets  there  are
12  cases  :  right  the  first  time,  2  ;  right  the  second  time,  3.  In  the
third  10  there  are  60  cases :  right  the  first  time,  1  ;  right  the  second
time,  16.

Suppose  the  percipient  happens  to  call  the  number  that  is  to  be
thought  of,  not  the  next  time,  but  the  second  time  following,  and  then
happens  to  repeat  the  call.  Now,  the  agent  thinks  of  this  same
number,  and  if  a  telepathic  message  is  now  conveyed  the  percipient
should  repeat  again.  So,  where  the  same  number  is  called  three
times  in  succession,  the  guess  should  be  right  the  third  time  rather
than  the  second  or  the  first.  In  the  last  10  sets  there  are  seven  such
cases  :  right  the  first  time,  0  ;  right  the  second  time,  1  ;  right  the
third  time,  3.

In  each  of  the  first  two  groups  of  10  sets  the  agent  repeats  90
times.  In  the  first  group  the  percipient  guesses  right  the  first
time  in  14  of  these  cases,  and  the  second  time  in  20  ;  in  the  second
group  it  is  14  and  14.  In  the  third  group  of  10  sets  the  agent  re-
peats 71  times;  the  percipient  is  right  the  first  time,  12;  right  the
second  time,  5.  Total  for  the  30  sets  :  right  the  first  time,  40  ;  right
the  second  time,  39.  So  the  dwelling  on  any  particular  number  by
the  agent  does  not  seem  to  have  any  effect  on  the  percipient's
guessing.  To  test  this  further,  3  extra  sets  of  100  guesses  were
tried,  the  percipient  not  having  any  intimation  that  there  was  any-
thing unusual  about  them.  In  the  first  set  the  agent  thought  of  4
all  the  time,  in  the  second,  of  8,  and  in  the  third,  of  2.  The  number
of  correct  guesses  was  14,  16,  and  23,  respectively.  In  the  last  of
these,  after  10  guesses  had  been  made,  and  no  comments  whatever
by   the   agent,   the   percipient   said,    "  You   haven't   got   any   high


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  329

numbers  in  this  square."  The  reply  was,  "  Go  on."  With  the  ex-
ception of  two  8's,  there  was  no  guess  higher  than  5  in  the  whole  set.
This  concludes  the  analysis,  but  there  is  one  thing  more  that  may,
perhaps,  have  a  bearing.  The  guesses  were  recorded  by  the  agent,
and  it  has  since  been  found  that  she  has  the  tendency  to  misplace
numbers  that  come  near  each  other.  For  instance,  in  reading  a  col-
umn of  figures,  if  there  is  a  5  and  then  an  8,  she  is  apt  to  get  the  8
first.  Suppose  now  that  one  of  the  last  ten  sets  is  being  guessed.
The  agent  turns  an  eight  and  the  percipient  says  5.  Now,  the  agent
should  record  the  guess,  5,  and  then  the  right  number,  8  ;  but  in  con-
aequence  of  the  tendency  above  noted  she  may  write  8  first,  then  look
at  the  card  in  her  hand  and  put  down  8  again,  thus  making  an  agree-
ment where  none  in  reality  exists.  If  it  is  one  of  the  first  20  sets,
the  agent  looks  at  a  digit  in  the  left-hand  column,  which  we  will  say
is  8  ;  the  percipient  guesses  5,  but  the  agent,  who  has  concentrated
her  attention  on  8,  writes  8  instead  of  5.  The  agent  states  that  she
found  herself  doing  this  but  a  very  few  times,  that  she  was  extremely
careful,  and  does  not  think  that  mistakes  enough  of  this  kind  could
have  been  made  to  materially  affect  the  result.

As  was  stated  at  the  outset,  this  account  is  not  presented  as  an
argument  for  telepathy.  We  have  never  been  convinced  that  one
mind  can  influence  another  in  this  way,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have
considered  the  evidence  in  its  favor  to  be  far  from  strong.  We  have
accordingly  tried  hard  to  find  some  other  explanation  of  the  results
here  presented,  but  have  not  as  yet  succeeded  except  as  already
noted.

JOHN  F.  BROWN,
MRS.  JOHN  F.  BROWN.


330


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


1st  Set.


2d  Set.


2

2

£

5

2

1

2

1

6

2

5

8

2

9

5

5

3

4

G

2

6

4

9

5

7

1

6

8

9

5

9

8

6

0

9

3

1

6

8

5

3

4

8

3

0

0

4

8

5

7

9

9

1

9

0

2

5

2

4

4

9

9

8

9

3

7

3

9

5

6

8

5

8

3

2

3

1

7

7

8

9

1

4

0

0

7

9

9

7

5

1

9

1

7

0

7

9

5

4

4

0

5

6

2

2

3

5

4

0

0

5

3

2

1

2

1

1

3

7

4

5

3

3

0

8

0

1

5

9

2

5

1

1

2

3

0

4

0

4

1

1

2

9

1

1

1

0

3

0

6

3

3

4

6

6

9

0

5

0

6

5

0

1

3

3

6

4

6

1

7

5

8

4

6

6

8

4

1

6

4

9

9

2

4

5

7

2

9

2

4

3

8

8

1

6

8

2

3

8

5

7

3

7

8

3

2

6

6

8

5

8

9

4

6

9

4

5

1

5

5

3d  Set.


4th  Set.


0

2

i

4

5

1

5

9

S

5

2

3

5

4

2

2

1

5

1

4

3

9

1

6

2

9

1

8

4

7

2

4

4

7

1

1

5

7

8

4

3

5

1

3

8

5

9

8

9

6

6

2

0

8

9

0

6

0

0

0

4

(9

0

tf

6

1

5

5

7

5

5

4

8

0

4

2

3

8

9

8

8

9

5

5

9,8

2

9

0

3

0

2

3

8

9

1

8

8

1

5

2

0

7

7

5

0

3

4

6

5

4

9

9

8

6

2

1

0

4

5

9

6

6

2

3

0

3

7

9

6

7

0

2

6

2

1

7

6

8

3

7

6

4

8

9

5

9

6

0

6

4

9

8

9

3

4

6

0

0

4

3

5

2

6

o
O

2

5

9

2

1

1

9

7

5

5

8

8

2

3

9

4

2

9

7

5

0

5

3

1

9

6

8

6

3

8

2

3

2

9

7

2

5

2

7,4

4

6

9

1

9

8

4

8

4

5

4

4

1

6

4

1

6

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


331


5th  Set,


6th  Set.


6

6

i

8

2

8

8

8

1

6

4

6

2

5

0

6

5

S

6

6

7

5

1

1

2

1

4

6,1

1

6

4

2

6

2

6

6

1

1

3

5

4

3

9

7

3

4

9

4

8

3

3

1

5

0

8

1

4

1

5

2

9

2

5

1

3

2

5

8

5

3

1

5

4

9

8

9

4

9

1

2

4

9

2

7

0

5

5

5

4

9

4

9

2

0

5

5

1

5

5

4:

0

3

9

4

0

6

9

0

4

4

9

0

3

4

6

2

9

3

7

3

3

7

3

6

6,7

2

1

8

2

9

1

6'

8

5

6

1

4

9

8

4

9

2

9

3

5

9

8

5

5

3

7

3

0

5

2

4

1

6

3

1

0

7

5

1

1

5

8

5

5

8

8

0

1

4

6

0

7

6

9

9

1

3

1

1

3

6

7

0

9

4

4

3

2

1

0

6

2

3

0

8

0

7

0

5

6

0

6

5

2

8

4

2

1

0

7

4

8

8

4

0

7th  Set.


8th  Set.


9

3

6

9

7

9

1

9

5

2

5

4

2

5

7

5

4

5

4

5

4

0

5

6

4

0

2

5

2

5

5

7

9

1

6

9

6

5

8

6

2

0

1

2

0

2

1

7

5

4

7

3

9

1

0

0

5

5

2

1

1

0

1

1

6

5

2

0

3

5

6

8

3

6

1

2

1

8

4

4

8

2

7

1

0

5

7

3

8

4

8

3

7

9

4

8

6

3

5

5

8

0

4

6

4

4

9

4

6

2

3

9

5

9

0

7

1

2

3

5

6

2

3

1

6

7

9

5

4

9

3

7

4

8

4

5

9

5

0

3

4

4

8

9

0

2

0

0

0

6

5

8

8

6

1

7

6

2

6

1

5

4

5

6

3

7

8

6

5

5

6

7

7

2

9

5

7

9

1

0

4

0

6

7

9

8

0

3

1

5

9

3

3

9

6

4

0

4

6

5

3

8

1

3

4

5

2

7

9

6

9

4

8

1

2

8

1

5

1

2

*

*

*

*  Note  sequences.     See  also  sets  9  and  16.


332


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


9th  Set.


10th  Set.


1

3

2

6

2

7

2

8

4

3

0

2

3

0

0

0

8

8

6

8

6

8

6

4

8

4

0

5

2

5

6

5

5

9

1

6

4

1

7

7

3

0

2

6

0

6

3

3

4

6

3

9

0

4

4

5

0,5

5

5

7,6

4

5

4,5

1

4,5

5

3

8

4

2

3

8

7

8

1

5

3

4

6

4

4

4,5
4

5,4

5,4

5,4

4

4

4

5,4

8

0

5

5

6

4

0

6

8

6

3,6

7

4,5

7

1

6

8

1

3

6

5

6

1

2

1

6

8

1

5

4

1

4

9

4

0

5

6,3

7

6

0

5

8

3

8,5

3

5

5

7

7

9,5

1

3

4,5

5

0,5

4,5

3

1

6,4

8

4

3

8

9

7

6

4

9

3

0

5

6,8

3

7,6

5,9

6

0

3

1

0

5

5,4

5

4

5

0

4,9

3,1

5

4

7

0

4

4

4

4

4

3

4

9

6

3

8

8

1

5

4,6

3

6

0

7

7

4

9

3

0

6

0

5,6

7

5

8

8

4

6

3

2

3

6

7

8

8

2

11th  Set.


12  th  Set.


0

3

9

2

9

3

6,8

1

3

1

0

7

3

9

7

0

7

8

3

4

8

1

3

8

0

7

1,4

5

2

3

4

9

6,5

4:

4

3

3

4

5

5

4

2

3,6

9

8

1

3

6

7

9,8

9

4

0

8

4

1

0

1

1

6

3

2

4

3

5

8

1

7

8

3

5

9,5

3

0

6

4

1

6

6

7

8

5

8

6

8

8

9

7

6

8

5

5

8

8

8

1

7

5

3

0

5

8

0

6

6

7

3

7

0

6

7

0

1

6

6

3

6

8

9

3

6

5

1

4,6

5,3
5

2

I

5

1

8

2

8

4

2

4

2,4

4

4

4

4

2

8

8

3

2

6

2

1

0

0

7

6

1

2

9

9

5

6

8

0

3

6

8

6,0

9

8

9

0

8

8

7

5,4

0,8

0

8

rr

4

5

6

7

8

2

5

0

4

2

1

1

9

8

1

4

3

6

8

9

5,4

7

4

2

5

8

3

0

8

1

9

3

8,6

2

2

7

2

9

7

2

4

1,4

6

3

6

Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  333


13th  Set.


14th  Set.


3

8

6

9

8

1

7

3

0

3

5

9

8

S

9

2

3

6

5

8

7

5

0

6

0

3

8

0

8

2

6

8

0

4

3

1

3

7

1

1

4

4

1

6

8

5

1

2

6

7

6

1

5

6

9

0

7

6

0

9

0

2

7

2

3

8

9

4

8

7

5

6

2

0

6

3

8

7

6

5

1

6

8

0

3

6

0

1

4

4

2

5

2

4

1

7,6

9,8

7

3

8

5

8

6

8

6

9

1

0

5

0

2

5

9

1,2

9

7

5

4

0

4

1

1

1

1

2

1

2

8

0

1

4

3

1

1

5

0

8

3

2

2

7

8

2

3

0

7

9

3

5

5

9

9

9

4

5

6

4

3

2

1

8

3

2

3

3

6

8

3

5

8

8

3

8

5

6

8

6

0

3

8

6

8

6

9

6

8

0

5

8,6

0

3

7

9

4

5

3

3

5

7

8

2

9

7

9

5

5

8

7

5

2

9

1

4

6

1

7

1

7

2

7

15th  Set.


16th  Set.


1

3

2

0

8

9

3

0

1

0

2

2

7

1

4

7

5

2

1

2

9

1

5

0

8

0

4

0

5

9

5

4

2

7

8

7

8

5

9

0

8,7

2

6

2

3

8

1

6

6,6

7

9

1

8

5

6

1

6

3

7

7

6

5

6

5

7

3

2

7

5

7

1

5

4

7

2

8

5

4

4,  5
4

1

5

4

4*

3

8

4

8

5

7

9

3

8

2

3

7

8

e

7

3

9

1

8

3

£

3

8

9

7

9

4

8

1

6

5

7

1

8

9

5

6

7

3

0

0

2

0

9*

*t

0

8

3

6

6

3

7

9

8

9

3

1

3

2

9

6

9

6

0

8

6

5

5

6

4

7

0

8

9

4

5

0

0

8

8,1

7

8

0

5

3

1

4,7

3

8

4

7

5

9

4

6

0

1

1

4

1

4

0

4

4

5

2

4

5

3

5*

5,7

3

0

2

4

9

2

5

2

6

6

5

6

8

5

3

8

1

7

8

6

1

S

2

1

1,0

8

*  Called  right.


t  Called  wrong.


334  Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


1  7th  Set.


18th  Set.


7

1

1

6,7

9

6

0

8

8

9

1

4

3

2

9

4

8

2

8

i

5

2

1

7

3

8

8

2

1

7

1

6

0

0

8

0

7,8
6,0

7,0

7

5

7

1,0

9

0

4

4

8

5,4

7

7,1

3

5,9

4

4

2

5

1

4

9,8
7

5

4

1

3

9

7

5

0

3

9

9,6

3

0

8

1

2

0

3

9

7

3

8

2

9,8

9

0

0

2

8,1

8

8

7

8

4

3

9

0

9

5

9,5

3

3

7

9,3

0

3

4

1

3

3

1

5

7

5

1

5

2

5

5

5

9

5

7

1

9

1

4

2

0

4

7

0

6

9

1

6

0

8

0

7

9

9

2

8

8

2

8

9,2

2

7

3

7,8

8

1

8

3

9

4

7

2

6

8

3

7

9,0

2

6

0

2

8

3

9

6

G

5

8

7

6

3

0

1-5

9

7

4

4

8

4

6,7

1

8

9

9

4

1

8

9,8
2

9

9

3

2

2

1

4

7

4

2

7

4

3

9

2

3

6

7

8

2

1

1

0

5

1

*Both  called  wrong,
t  Said  to  be  right.


19th  Set.


20th  Set.


2

1

0

8

3

1

2

3

2

1

2

9

1

8

8

1

5

9

1

3

8

8

6

8

3

4

7

2

7

5

9

9,8
6

8

4

5

4

4

4

3

2

8

0

4

1

8

3

1

8

9

0

9

0

7,8

5

3

7

3

9

3

8

4

9

7

2

3

2

3

1

0

5

8

8

8

1,3

1

9

6

8

8

3

0

3

8

0

8

9

8

3

7

0

7

3

3

3

3

1

3

8

8

2

9

0

1

7

9

4

0

5

0

7

4

6

9

1

4

4

4

4

4

\

4

1

1

1

5

0

6,2
1

3

3

1

9

8

0

3

8

0

8,7
0

0

0

8

8

6

0

3

0

8

9

5

0

8

2

4

5

9

1

7

1

2

9

8

8

9

8

7

1

5

8

5

4

3

9

7

1

3

8

5

5

9

4

5

3

9

4

5

0

5

5

6

7

1

0

1

7

0

8

1

0

5

9

8

8

7

9

*7

3

6

2

9

0

0

6

2

3,9

7

8

8

7

9,0

3

2

*  Called  wrong.


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  335


21st  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

6

Is

3

8h

8

3h

5h

5h

8

9h

5h

5h

8

7c

8

9h

4s

4c

8

6s

9

6c

3

6d

8

5h

3,8,7c

7c

1

2s

1

10c

8

7c

9

8d

3h

3s

7

2h

5

4c

6

9d

6

8d

3

5s

6

10

6h

6d

9

7d

6

Is

8c

8d

7

8h

9

7s

3

lh

9

7s

5

4s

8

3c

3

7c

8

3d

9

7d

5

2c

Is

Is

4

4s

6

9h

5h

5h

7

2d

3

5d

3

4s

4

2c

3

9c

8

9s

8s

8c

7h

7c

3h

3c

2

3h

4h

4h

9

6h

7d

7d

9

7s

5

3c

8,3,9

6d

lh

lh

8c

8d

7

5s

2

7c

2c

2s

5s

5c

8

lc

8

3h

1

7c

8

6c

9

lOd

3

7d

9

7s

9

6s

3

4s

5, 4-h,  s

4s

5  c*

5c

8

9d

1

3h

2

5h

6

7c

8

9c

5

2h

3

6s

4h

4h

8

7d

5c

5d

7

3

7

9c

6h

6c

8

Is

6

Is

7h

7s

4c

4s

5c

5h

5

9c

9

5h

lh

Is

9

3s

1

6d

3

5h

*"Not  hearts."


336


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


22d  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

1

3

3

8

7

8

2

6

9

8

6

10

9

9

8

9

5

1

1

4

1

1

1,7

7

9

7

3

10

7

10

5

5

4

4

7

I

7

2

3

3

1

3

2

8

3

9

2

8

6

2

2

6

8

6

9

1

5

5

8

3

2

6

7

7

1

5

9

9

4

5

4

4

7

3

6

7

3

10

3

3

8

8

3

4

3,4

4

5

2

7

9

2

6

1

2

5

5

3

1

1

9

1

1

6

5

6

10

8

7

3

7

8

3

5

2

4

5

1

2

8

8

6

9

9

3

8

8

2

9

10

6

2

8

3

10

3

1

4

6

3

1

5

4

9

10

8

5

2

7

9

10

1

2

8

10

4,5,  4

4

8

8

7

9

1

4

5

3

1

6

3

6

7,8

2

2

2

3

3

2

6

3

1

7

5

1

9

5

5

9

7

6

5

10

7

3

10

6

2

2

3

5

4

7

4

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


337


23d  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

1

2

4

3

1

3

8

9

4

5

1

1

5

4

2

4

7

10

5

10

8

5

7

8

6

3

7

10

7

8

9

5

4

2

2

6

1

1

7

1

4

4

9

7

3

10

8

8

7

1

5

4

5

2

9

9

8

6

2

7

8

9

7

6

8

1

4

2

4

4

4

2

5

5

8

8

2

2

5

5

9

7

10

5

8

5

8

8

8

10

3

5

3

6

2

2

1

5

4

2

8

8

1

6

3

7

6

9

10

9

8

6

'  8

9

2

8

4

4

10

1

8

1

4

5

3

8

8

1

2

2

6

6

4

2

9,7

7

5

4

1

4

7

7

8

3

6

8

8

2

5

4

5

5

7

3

7

4

10

2

9

9

1

8

1

5

8

4

8

3

9

8

2,  3

6

8

1

1

8

5

4

2

8

2

9

8

10

10

6

3

9

6

9

1

1

1

10

7

3

3

8

9

7

338


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


24th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

9

8

9

10

5

4

9

8

10

6

8

5

1

1

8

5

10

7

v   4

1

8

5

3

6

3

8

9

7

9

9

I

1

9

7

4

4

1

1

4

4

8

4

1

1

6

10

9,  3

3

1

10

3

5

1

2

2

6

2

10

6

9

6

1

8,  7  or  9

7

1

2

8

9

1

9

8

9

1

1

4

5

7

9

1

2

1

6

8

10

2

6

9

9

8

9

6

6

3

7

7

7

4

4

8

6

4

4

8

8

7

1

9

8

1

2

9

4

8

7

6

3

3

3

8

5

9

4

9

5

8

3

3

5

8

3

8

8

8

8

9

7

1

2

3

6

9

6

8.  3

3

1

5

1

1

9

10

2

10

4

8

4

4

7

10

8

6

9

2

1

7

8

4

4

5

8

9

8

5

6

7

9

6

10

3

3

8

8

5

10

1

1

3

9

2

9

10

1

4

2

8

9

6

8

7

6

3

Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


339


25th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

8

6

5

6

7

7

9

8

5

4

6

8

5

4

3

7

3

9

10,9

9

10

8

4

5

10

10

2

9

2

2

6

3

6

9

4

1

1

3

3

4

7

5

2

4

1

1

1

6

8

7

9

3

4

4

9

6

9

1

5

1

9

8

7

7

9

7

8

3

7,6

5

6

4

1

6

10

7

5

5

1

9

3

10

9

2

3

4

8

1

1

3

1

3

1

9

9

7

2

2

7

5

9

1

3

3

1

5

5

2

5,4

7

9

3

7

7

7

7

1

4

10

10

4

2

8

4

4

5

2

8

3

9

4

4

1

10

8

7

6

8

9

8

3

1

5,4

4

3

10

9

9

9

9

3

4

4

4

10

9

5

9   '

6

9

9

3

1

1

5

2

8,  9

9

6

3

5

4

1

8

3

5

2

1

8

5

9

8

1

1

8,  5

1

2

4

4

3

2

2

1

5

8

1

7

2

9

10

340


Some  JExperiments  in  Thought- Transference.


26th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

7

5

1

2

1

7

9

6

1

3

3

8

2

5

6

4

4

4

9

7

3

10

9

7

9

10

10

9

1

6

3

1

2

2

3

4

7

9

4

6

7

1

5

10

4

4

4

1

1

6

4,8

6

2

5

8

8

2

6

9

10

1

9

9

9

1

7

3

7

7

3

6

1

3

1

8

8

1

5

10

9

2

2

1

9

1

2

7

10

1

1

10

6

7

2

9

7

2

2

8

6

9

8

2

1

5

4

8

9

5

8

5

7

7

9

7

4

9

9

4

9

3

1

1

7

10

1

2

8

2

7

5

5

4

9

9

3

9

3

1

3

7

4

4

4

3

5

9

3

1

6

5

2

7

10

2

5

1

6

8

2

8

3

7

10

2

3

7

3

7

5

4

1

7

1

8

4

1

9

5

2

3

10

5

8

10

9

3

4

8

5

5

6

2

5

7

5

1,9

2

10

6

Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


341


27th  Set,


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

7

3

7

6

6

5

7

5

2

2

4

2

9

3

1

10

6

4

8

10

10

7

7

6

9

3

9

7

8

3

10

3

8

7

7

10

1

7

8

5

6

1

8

7

9

6

8

8

8

8

3

1

8

8

6,7

1

9

9

4

4

3

10

4

2

7

9

6

8

7

3

3

9

8

8

9

5

1

9

9,7

10

1

3

2

5

2

2

8

5

9

4

9,7

7

3

10

1

8

5

4

1

1

1

9

9

3

9

5

2

6

4

4

7

9

2

10

9

2

1

8

8

10

6

5

3

6

1

9

4

2

9

3

9

1

10

1

3

10

1

8

3

9

6

7

5

4

6

6

2,  5

5

9

10

i

5

4

9

9

2

7

3

8

9

7

2

10

8

7

1

.  6

3

3

1

6

1

1

9

8

5

2

3

1

3

2

7

4

6

5

1

9

7

2

8

4

1

1

3

2

5

4

9

9

8

5

342


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


28th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

1

10

2

3

3

9

8

8

4

4

4

4

8

6

7

2

3

3

5

3

8

9

3

1

1

2

2

5

8

10

4

4

1

5

1

8

7

8

3

10

1

1

7

7

1,3

5

7,6

6

7

5

6

9

4

1

7

7

1

4

8

7

8

10

8,  3

3

3

6

10

10

9

8

2

6

9

5

4

2

8

6

8

7

1

6

3

8

8

3

5

5

2

2

1

9

1

10

1

2

9

10

1

8

2

2

3

1

7

7

1

1

8

10

7

7

8

8

4

2

8

6

9

3

9

9

7

3

1

4

1,2

2

9

10

1

10

5

3

9

3

8

6

9

9

1

1

7

8

8

1

8

1

8

8

1

7

2

3

3

4

7

7

1

1

3

6

10

8

6

6

3,  5

10

7

4

7

7

1

5

9

6

5

9

8

1

1

5

1

5

8

7

2

3

4

2

4

8

1

1

4

2

6

5

7

2

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  343


29th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

7

10

6

8

3

4

9

2

8

9

7

10

1

5

3

1

1

2

3

2

5

5

2

8

3,4

8

7

6

7

4

3

10

7

4

5

4

1,7

7

3

8

3

3

5

2

3

4

3

8

2

10

7

6

9

9

7

7

1

5

7

2

1

9

10

6

5,4

3

It  7

7

2

4

4

4

8

10

2

6

6

6

1

8

7

7

3

5

3,  2

2

7

9

8

8

6

9

4

1

1

2

1

9

2

6

2

1

3

3

4

4

1,8

5

3

9

7

7

7

3

4

4

7

3

9

1

8

1

7

10

9

3

4

4

3

9

7

1

2

6

8

9

2

8

2

1

2

7

8

6

5

1

rr

8

3

2

7

2

2

1

2

6

3

3

9

1

7

7

1

10

7

1

1

8

3

3

5

5

2

5

5

2

6

1

2

10

7

7

3

5

2

5

7

9

10

10

1

9

4

4

8

8

9

2

6

5

344


Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


30th  Set.


p

A

P

A

P

A

P

A

10

4

7

2

8

2

9

10

1

10

9

3

7

3

6

7

1

2

7

7

5

1

5

4

4

8

5,4

7

2

2

3

6

4

5

1

1

1,7

5

10

9

8

6

2

4

7,3

9

8

4

4

2

3

9

7

8

5

2

9

5

8

10

8,1

1

8

10

7

6

7

10

7

5

6

1

9

6

10

9

6

1

2

6

1

5

8

3

2

6

7

9

1

8

8,1

1

7

7

6

9

5

4

9

7

9

9

8,7

7

3

9

4

3

9,  8

6

10

2

3

5

10

5

5

5

1

1

9

6

4

4

8

3

10

10

1

1

10

9

1,2

2

9

3

2

7

7

4

4,3

7

8

5

6

10

7

10

9

8

7

5

4,5

8

4

2

1,8

8

4

8

3

4

7

9

7

1

9,1

1

8

8

7

4

9

10

2,  3

3

9,7,3

3

3

3

9

3

7

7

1

1

1

7

1

8

6

4

2

9

1

10

1

6

6

7

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  345


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

1st  Set.

14 2

12  4

92

72

13  *

91

82

82

12  2

82

100  »

2d     "  .

92

81

12  *

13  1

123

ll3

42

11°

11°

9°

100  13

3d     "  .

81

14  ]

81

12  J

12  3

10  2

5°

ll2

132

7°

100 13

4th    "  .

10°

9°

91

11 4

12  2

101

61

103

12  3

11 6

100 21

5th    "  .

18  4

6°

10 2

12  l

11 2

ll2

41

10  *

11  *

73

100  17

6th    "  .

ll3

10°

10 2

12  3

13  2

11 4

61

82

81

ll1

100 19

7th    "  .

91

81

12  *

10  3

14  3

10°

91

82

123

81

100  ]6

8th    "  .

ll1

10°

62

133

15°

12°

72

81

8°

10 l

100  10

9th    "  .

83

2°

132

18  6

16  6

13  J

61

91

51

10  *

100  22

10th  "  .

91

3°

11 l

179

16  7

15 2

71

12  2

2°

81

100 24

1st  1000

10718

82  7

10015

12533

13429

11216

6212

9518

9413

8916

1000175

1

2

71

3

13  J

4

12  6

5

101

6

10°

7
5°

8
172

9

82

0

91

11th  Set

91

100  15

12th"  .

92

92

9°

ll3

83

122

122

164

61

82

100  21

13th'4   .

71

121

12  3

62

10°

133

82

16°

8°

83

100  15

14th"  .

14  4

61

12  l

62

ll2

ll1

9°

132

91

92

100 16

15th  "  .

12 1

71

9°

84

13  2

9°

102

13  x

9°

102

100  M

16th  "  .

9°

82

ll1

10 4

10 2

103

132

123

93

8°

100  »

17th"  .

102

92

91

124

96

5°

13 1

12  2

122

92

100  M

18th  "   .

121

12  ]

126

71

52

42

ll1

154

10  J

125

100  a

19th"  .

10  -

63

U1

107

74

51

71

182

11 2

125

100  «

20th"  .

13  4

10518

6°
8214

13°

11413

84
9037

92

9224

1°
8012

81
9612

184
15024

11  J

9313

131

9823

100  17

2d  1000

1000190

346


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


1

2

41
12  J

93
5°
83

12  3
72
83

16  x
72

8819

3

14  2

163
8°
103
ll1
10°
12  *
ll2
17*
103
11919

4

76
7*

ll3
95

10*
83
52
93
85
81

82M

5

13  7
10*

10  *
1°

10  J
91
61
51
62
61

7621

6

102

8°
51
71
8°
2°
81
42
51
7°
64  «

7

10*

ll2

122
52
7*
15°
13  x
13  6
23  7

18*

12732

8

20"
12*
21*
22  3

8°

92
14*
18  3

72
11 2

14227

9

14°
92
7  2
192
18 4
13  2
I73

92

61

ll1

12319

0

0°
2°
5°
4°
52
6'
3°
21
21
71
36  6

21st  Set
22d    "  .
23d    "  .
24th  "  .
25th  fc«   .
26th  "   .
27th  "  .
28th  "  .
29th  "   .
30th  "  .

83
132
123
18  6
153
16  *
153
21s
10°
157

100  28
100  22

100  21
100  2s
100  a
100  M
100  18
100  2s
100 24

100  22

3d  1000

14333

1000219

3000


355s9


252*°


33347


106  Q A Q74


297  m  302


25636


28S56


38767310*5


223**


300068*


Changes.


W.  to  W.

W.  to  R.

R.  to  W.

Miscellaneous.

Total.

1st  Set  .

0

0

0

0

2d     "    .

0

0

0

0

3d     4<    .

0

0

1

1

4th    "    .

0

1

0

1

5th    "    .

0

1

0

1

6th    "    .

0

1

0

1

7th    4t    .

0

0

0

0

8th    "    .

0

0

0

0

9th    "    .

4

5

0

9

10th    u    .

6

8

0

Oneca8e4,5,4.4j4be;nKright

16

10  Sets    .

10

16

1

29

Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,
Changes.


347


Changes.


W.  to  W.

W.  to  R.

R.  to  W.

Miscellaneous.

Total.

11th  Set  .

6

2

0

8

12th  "    .

4

2

0

5,  3,5,-  5  being  right.

7

13th  "    .

2

1

0

3

14th  "    .

1

0

0

1

15th  "    .

2

0

0

2

16th  "    .

3

1

0

4, 5,  4,  —  4  being  right

5

17th  "    .

5

2

1

8

18th  "    .

2

4

1

7,  8,  6,  0,-0 being  right

9,  8,  7,  —5

9,  8,  2,  —1             "

10

19th  "    .

0

3

0

8,  7,  0,  —  0  being  right

9,  8,  6,  -  6

5

20th  "    .

1

1

0

6,  2,  1,-1  being  right

3

10  Sets    .

26

16

2

32

W.  to  W.

W.  to  R.

R.  to  W.

Miscellaneous.

Total.

21st  Set.

0

1

0

3,  8,  7,—  7  being  right.
8,3,9,-6

3

22d    "    .

1

2

0

4, 5,  4,  —  4  being  right.

4

23d    "    .

1

1

0

2

24th  "    .

0

3*

0

*  In  one  of  the  3  eases.

8,  7  or  9,  —  7  being  right.

3

25th  "    .

3

3

0

6

26th  "    .

2

0

0

2

27th  "    .

2

2

0

4

28th  "    .

2

3

0

5

29th  "    .

3

3

0

6

30th  "    .

6

7

0

9, 7, 3,  —  3  being  right

14

10  Sets    .

20

25

0

49

30  Sets   .


56


57


14,—  11  of  which  ended  right.


130  t


f  Of  which  68  ended  right,  62  wrong.


348


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


Repetitions  in  Horizontal  Lines.


3  times

4  times

5  times

6  times

7  times

8  times

9  times

1st  Set     .     .

3°

I1

0

0

0

0

0

2d      "      .     .

71

0

0

0

0

0

0

3d      "      .     .

41

0

0

0

0

0

0

4th     "      .     .'

42

l1

0

l1

0

0

0

5th     "      .     .

41

51

0

0

0

0

0

6th     "      .     .

62

21

0

0

0

0

0

7th     "      .     .

53

0

0

0

0

0

0

8th     "      .     .

61

3°

0

0

0

0

0

9th     "      .     .

61

2°

0

22

0

0

0

10th  "      .     .

5°

2°  *

0

0

l1

0

l1

llth  "      .     .

2°

2°

0

l1

0

0

0

12th  "      .     .

62

21

0

0

0

0

0

13th  "      .     .

83

1°

0

0

0

0

0

14th  "      .     .

5°

31

1°

0

0

0

0

15th  "      .     .

11°

l1

0

0

0

0

0

16th  "      .     .

63

21

0

0

0

0

0

17th  »      .     .

4°

l1

0

l1

0

0

0

18th  "      .     .

3°

21

22

0

0

0

0

19th  "      .     .

61

l1

21

0

l1

0

0

20th   "      .     .

6°

43

0

0

0

0

0

20  Sets      .     .

107a216

35cUd

5.8

5/

2/

0

n1

a,  10  cases  where  the  digit  is  either  4  or  5.

ft,  6       "  "  "

c,  12       "  "  "

d,  6       "  "  "


e,  0  cases  where  the  digit  is  either  4  or  5.
/,  4       "  "  "  [2  4's:2  5'0

0,2       •'  "  "  £14;i5.]

A,  1       "  "  '■


[14;
C4-]


Some  Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.


349


Extra  Sets.


1— l

►—I

H*

CO

tO

t— '

CO

£

rt*

I—'

O*

t^

at

CO

<i

oa

00

I—*
CO

CP

00

©

o

o

tf*

^

H*>

rf*

*»>

**

►f*

►K

tf*

H^

Cn

o

to

►f*

co

00

CD

<i

i— »

to

*0

Cs

Ki

Ol

SO

hk

V|

0i

0o

Ki

CO

to

00

CD

»-i

Cn

tf*.

to

O

OS

0«

Oo

tit,

Qo

Ol

SO

Ka

SO

bo

CO

to

rf*

as

00

CO

Cn

^1

4^

Cn

bo

k4

Cft

N

SO

SO

Oo

bo

K«i

**

to

to

CO

*»

Cn

CD

~

Oo

~

o
*.

^

bo

Ki

Cj>

00

so

V|

o

M^

bo

to

o

CD

CO

*-

^J

oo

Cn

CO

^—

K4

so

SO

Oi

fe>

bo

VI

SO

Oi

00

=  1

h-i

1— I    1

o  1

10

51

CO

«l

rf*

«l

©1

^

c3i

«

V!

OS

00

to

o

CO

o

o   I
O    I


00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

Cn

co

o

OS

^

CD

o

to

oo

CO

Qo

V|

so

bo

Oo

Kl

so

O*

Qo

so

rfs-

h-»

00

to

o

Oi

oo

i— i

o

to

Oo

OS

Qo

Oi

bo

ka

so

so

V|

Oi

-

'00

^i

oo

o

CD

t— I

00

to

CO

so

as

Qo

bo

°*

oo

Oi

so

V|

Qo

Cn

to

CO

CD

00

1— »

*.

Cn

as

o

V|

OS

Oo

Qo

Oi

©

Kl

V|

Oi

Qo

to

as

CD

00

^

Or

as

1— I

CD

CO

Qo

SO

k4

so

oi

Oo

K^

bo

k4

V|

Sol

M

8  i   n>

Sol    00

to

4*

S  1  <*

©  1    O

ol   <«

to  1   QO

©'

SO

SI   ©

100

1

1

lO

to

tO

to

10

to

to

to

to

to

i—i

to

rf^

Oi

CO

o

h- '

Cn

to

Ki

Oo

hk

bo

.   Ki

so

Oi

Oo

Ki

hk

Cn

ba-
in

O

©
to

i—i

Or

CO

JO

oo

M^

to

►k

Or

Oo

I'M

so

ho

H^

Oo

bo

Qo

to

t— *

CO

Cn

to

*«■

to

o

h- »

Cn

"to

"o,

Oo

k4

so

Oo

Oi

hk

bo

Oo

I— »

O

►— i

CO

(O

to

CO

**

o

>-L

bo

K4

Oi

H^

SO

Oo

bo

Oi

K4

Oo

CO

to

o

H*

to

CO

-

o

^

to

H^

Oi

bo

Ki

so

Oo

bo

Oi

bo

Oo

350  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.


REPORT   OF   THE   COMMITTEE   ON   PHANTASMS    AND

PRESENTIMENTS.

We  who  collect  narratives  from  many  sources  are  usually  supposed
to  be  very  much  at  the  mercy  of  our  informants.  We  shall  reach,
most  people  say,  either  no  results  at  all,  or  only  such  results  as  popu-
lar prejudices  and  superstitions  already  support  in  advance.  When
the  English  society  first  asked  for  stories  of  the  sort  that  this  com-
mittee is  now  studying,  critics  declared  that  such  a  call  for  ghosts,
dreams,  and  vain  imaginations  took  down  every  barrier  which  science
usually  puts  between  itself  and  pure  superstition.  To  ask  every  man
to  tell  what  was  in  his  head  about  his  presentiments,  and  his  other
wild  fancies,  was  at  best,  even  if,  per  impossibile,  such  fancies  had
any  basis,  very  like  asking  mankind  at  large  to  write  down  their
views  on  electricity  or  on  medicine.  If  there  was  any  scientific  ex-
planation for  all  these  visions,  surely  this  could  not  be  the  way  to  get
at  the  truth  of  the  matter.

In  beginning  a  report  to  the  society  on  the  present  occasion,  I  am
glad  to  be  able  to  declare  that  a  study  of  a  good  man}'  stories,  such
as  have  come  to  hand  in  the  work  of  your  committee,  convinces  me
that  this  method  of  work  does  not  leave  us  at  the  mercy  of  our  cor-
respondents,   and   is   neither  essentially   unscientific    nor  necessarily
unfruitful.     The  principal  positive  generalization  that  I  shall  offer  in
this  paper  is,  namely,  one  which  not  a  single  one  of  our  correspond-
ents has  had  in  mind,  although  many  of  them  will  be  found  to  bear
unconscious  witness  to  its  truth.     And  this  generalization,  such  as  it
is,  has  no  standing  as  a  popular  superstition  ;  and,  as  a  psychological
doctrine,  has  some  genuine  novelty.     From  this  point  of  view  I  re-
gard our  method  of    research    as  in  this  case  well  justified  by  the
event,  and    I    am    hereby   well    encouraged   to    continue    the    work.
Moreover,  whilst  a  large  number  of  our  cases  are  not  as  yet  certainly
capable  of  being  brought  under  any  established  laws,  new  or  old,
still,  even  these   cases  are  not  generally  what  the  objectors  to  the
methods  of  the  English  society  expected  to  find  as  the  results  of  a
request   for  stories  about  apparitions  and  presentiments.     That  is,
our  stories  bear  in  general  the  marks  of  being  not  mere  products  of
folk-lore,  or  of   systematic  superstition,  but   rather  expressions    of
genuine    experience,  —  of   experience  which  our  correspondents  do
indeed  often  misinterpret,  but  which  is,  in  most  cases,  the  fresh,  live
product  of  real  mental  processes,  and  not  the  manufactured  tale  of
popular  legend.     Superstitious  creations  are,  indeed,  found  amongst


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  351

our  narratives  ;  fanciful  and  credulous  people,  influenced  by  system-
atic and  unenlightened  conceptions,  derived  from  some  lower  form  of
popular  faith,  occasionally  do  give  us  their  confidences  ;  but  even
such  people  are,  as  I  find  to  my  delight,  very  commonly  people  whose
interpretation  of  their  experience  is  not  nearly  so  prominent  in  their
stories  as  is  their  real  inner  experience  itself,  in  all  its  freshness,  its
abnormity,  and  its  consequent  instructiveness.  For  abnormal  expe-
riences also,  the  products  of  over-excitement  and  of  mental  disease,
ma}7  be,  when  studied  by  the  comparative  method,  even  more  instruc-
tive to  the  student  of  psychology  than  are  tjie  reports  of  perfectly
commonplace  folk.  And  in  our  comparative  study  we  have  been
also  aided  by  large  numbers  of  people  who  are  neither  commonplace
nor  superstitious.

The  comparative  method,  —  that,  as  I  need  hardly  say  to  intelligent
students  of  facts  of  this  kind,  is  the  key  to  all  useful  examination
of  such  narratives.  Your  correspondents  ma}7  tell  you  what  they
will  themselves ;  they  cannot  know  or  predict  what  shall  appear
when  many  stories,  from  independent  sources,  are  put  together.
What  mere  folk-lore  consciously  or  unconsciously  creates,  and  what
genuine  inner  experience  actually  supplies,  come  to  be  thus  quite
easily  distinguishable  when  you  look  at  narratives  of  the  same  group
in  large  collections.  Where  your  classification  does  not  depend  on
the  intentions  of  any  of  your  individual  correspondents,  but  on  char-
acteristics tint  are  common  to  many  of  their  separate  stories,  you
can  get  by  your  analysis  the  unconscious  testimony,  so  to  speak,  of
all  the  man}7  persons.  And  this  unconscious  testimony  is,  in  large
part,  what  we  shall  have  to  depend  upon  for  results  in  this  class  of
evidence.  Hence  the  justification  of  our  methods,  of  our  public
requests  for  stories,  and  of  our  whole  undertaking.

Yet  in  this  report  I  want  to  give  much  more  than  the  still  very
incomplete  scientific  results  of  the  inquiry  as  thus  far  prosecuted.
Even  at  the  risk  of  seeming  to  heap  up  mere  anecdotes,  I  want  to
give  some  notion  of  the  variety  of  our  material.  Where  no  results
are  apparent,  where  the  tales  cited  either  illustrate  well-known
classes  of  psychological  facts,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  stand  alone  as
inexplicable  curiosities  of  mental  life,  I  hope  that  the  society  will
understand  why  I  repeat  them  here.  Old  classes  of  facts,  such,  for
instance,  as  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  are,  nevertheless,  to-day
in  much  need  of  fresh  examination  and  illustration.  I  want  to  show
that  by  our  method  we  can  hope  ere  long  to  furnish  further  mate-
rial for  the  comparative  scientific  study  of  such  known  classes  of
facts.  Novel  facts,  even  if  our  scrutiny  of  them  is  still  very  incom-
plete, ought  to  be  mentioned,  so  as  to  give  members  of  the  society


352  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

an  idea  of  what  novelties  are  reaching  us.  In  short,  I  think  it  due
to  the  society  to  make  this  paper  not  only  a  statement  of  one  or  two
probable  general  results  that  I  think  we  have  reached,  but  also,  to  a
certain  extent,  a  collection  of  specimens  of  our  material, —  a  little
cabinet  of  curiosities,  if  you  will,  not  meant  solely  to  mark  definite
additions  to  general  knowledge,  but  in  part  intended  to  illustrate
the  variety  of  our  sources,  and  the  fresh  interest  of  our  letters.  I  pro-
pose to  show,  at  all  events,  that  if  this  research  is  soon  to  cease,  it
should  not  do  so  because  of  the  lack  of  promising  material ;  and
that,  if  the  members  of  the  society  want  the  research  to  continue,
they  can  easily  find,  in  the  wealth  of  the  ripened  harvest,  a  reason
for  sending  out  further  laborers  into  the  standing  corn.

My  illustrative  facts  will  differ  much  both  in  intrinsic  value  and
in  interest  for  the  curious.  I  shall  begin  with  the  less  interesting
types  of  cases,  and  shall  gradually  come  to  those  which  may  be
supposed  to  throw  some  possible  light  on  the  reality  of  telepathy.
First  of  all  I  shall  speak  of  the  cases  that  possess  only  a  subjective
interest,  as  illustrating  curious  events  of  the  inner  life  of  some  peo-
ple. I  refer,  of  course,  to  subjective  hallucinations,  such  as  lack
discoverable  objective  reference.  Secondly,  I  shall  describe  a  few
experiences  that  are  probably  to  be  explained  as  instances  of  what
is  generally  called  "  unconscious  cerebration."  Thirdly,  I  shall  give
a  part  of  the  evidence  for  what  I  have  called  the  principal  result  of  this
paper,  viz.,  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  not  generally  recog-
nized species  of  mental  experience,  —  a  species  which  simulates  pre-
sentiment, but  which  is  not  presentiment.  I  mentioned  in  an  earlier
informal  report  to  this  society,  not  published  in  the  Proceedings,
the  possible  existence  of  this  species  of  unreal  presentiments  ;  but
only  now  have  I  evidence  well  in  hand.  Having  disposed  of  all
these  classes  of  cases,  I  shall  come  at  last  to  the  seemingly  tele-
pathic coincidences  now  in  our  hands,  and  shall  give,  as  fairly  as-
possible,  the  exact  evidence  that  we  have  for  these  coincidences,  and
an  estimate  of  their  value.  The  way  may  seem  long,  and  only  the
possible  amusement  that  some  may  find  in  the  occasionally  rather
surprising  originality  of  statement  in  the  stories  can  beguile  its  clul-
ness.  But  in  any  case  these  stories  may  serve,  for  better  or  for
worse,  as  documents  illustrating  the  psychology  of  the  American
people.

I.  —  Subjective  Hallucinations  of  Familiar  Type.

Not  a  few  of  our  correspondents  tell  us  of  hallucinations,  and  of
remarkable  dream  impressions,  which  indeed  lack  any  possible  verifi-
cation, and  suggest  no  objective  test,  but  which  are  in  themselves


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  353

good  examples  of  what  may  occur  to  perfectly  sane  and  reasonable
people.  Few  persons  who  do  not  inquire  into  the  matter  know  what
remarkable  hallucinations  of  the  sane  are  on  record,  and  how  plastic
and  vivid  some  of  these  purely  subjective  experiences  are.  Unre-
flective  people,  in  fact,  do  not  observe  the  obvious  truth  that  a  thing
is  not  real  merely  because  it  is  vividly  present  to  my  senses  when  I
am  quite  awake  and  apparently  quite  well.  Only  that  is  objective
whose  existence  can  be  tested  from  without,  either  by  the  fact  that
other  people  see  it,  or  by  the  fact  that  it  gives  some  otherwise  exter-
nally verifiable  sign  of  its  reality.  Yet  some  of  our  correspondents,
in  telling  us  about  vivid  hallucinations,  add  that  the  hallucination
must  have  been  somehow  a  real  thing,  because,  says  one,  "  I  was  not
in  the  least  expecting  it,"  or  because,  as  another  remarks,  "  It  lasted
some  time  ;  "  or  because,  as  is  very  commonly  stated,  "  I  was  quite
awake  at  the  time,"  or  "  quite  well."  Now,  all  these  tests  are,  of
course,  meaningless  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  such  hallucinations,
leaving  no  trace  of  their  reality  on  earth,  and  vanishing  into  the  dream-
land whence  they  came,  are  known  to  occur,  not,  to  be  sure,  frequently,
but  sporadically,  in  the  lives  of  tolerably  sound  and  wide-awake  people.
Of  course  one  cannot  question  that  such  appearances  are,  in  proper
connections,  important  pathological  symptoms,  but  they  surely  do
sometimes  come  to  persons  who,  at  the  time,  seem  to  themselves  to  be
fairly  or  quite  well.  In  fact,  as  is  well  known,  one  of  our  society's
blanks  asks  particularly  for  reports  of  experiences  of  this  sort.  I  will
here  give  one  or  two  of  the  communications  illustrating  these  subjec-
tive hallucinations,  merely  adding  that  I  feel  convinced,  in  respect  of
all  the  cases  reported  in  this  paper,  that  they  are  reported  by  sincere
people.  The  conviction  is  based  either  upon  our  official  knowledge  of
the  people,  or  upon  a  proper  examination  of  second-hand  evidence  as
to  their  character.  In  the  later  classes  of  cases  discussed  herein,  my
conviction  needs,  of  course,  to  be  founded  on  a  closer  scrutiny  than
it  is  necessary  to  give  to  the  evidence  for  these  earlier  subjective
cases,  whose  type  is  well  known,  and  whose  value  is  mainly  illus-
trative.

[1]  {From  C.  II  W.)

Baltimore,  Dec.  18,  1887.
To  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  :  —

In  answer  to  question  VIII.,  let  me  say  that  I  had  a  very  remarkable
experience.

In  the  year  of  1872  or  '73  I  was  listening  to  a  lecture  on  geology,  in
the  Boston  Natural  History  Hall.  Suddenly  a  human  face  appeared
before  me  of  a  young  lady  who  had  died  three  or  four  years  before.  She
lived  in  Newton,  and  was  only  known  to  me  by  having  seen  her  occasion-
ally on  the  street  in  Newton.     I  had  never  been  introduced  to  her,  and


354  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

had  probably  heard  of  her  death  and  never  thought  of  her  again  until  her
face  appeared  about  six  feet  in  front  of  me  at  a  lecture  in  which  I  was
much  interested,  and  which  could  not  have  lifted  my  mind  to  thoughts
spiritual,  as  they  were  way  down  in  the  tertiary  period.  It  affected  me  so
deeply  that  I  kept  it  to  myself  for  about  three  years.  I  then  happened
to  make  a  wedding-call  on  a  young  lady  who  lived  next  door  to  the  one  of
my  dream.  I  related  it  to  her.  In  a  few  weeks  she  died,  and  I  was  one
of  her  pall-bearers.  A  celebrated  bank  president,  who  now  resides  in
Canada,  officiated  also  in  the  same  capacity,  and  I  believe  he  carried  several
thousand  dollars  of  the  officiating  clergyman  with  him  to  that  haven.

Very  truly  yours,  etc.

The  hallucination  and  the  narrative  are  a  trifle  droll,  and  no  one
will  lay  any  stress  on  the  coincidences,  which  amuse  the  author  as
much  as  they  do  ourselves.  The  misfortune  with  the  case  is  the
lapse  of  time  since  the  event.  To  test  the  accuracy  of  our  inform-
ant's memory,  we  sent  him  a  question  blank,  to  which  we  received
the  following  replies  :  —

Baltimore,  Dec.  27,  1887.
Dear  Sir,  —  Your  letter,  with  circular  G,  at  hand.     In  answer  to  ques-
tions :  —

1.  Q.    Is  the  experience  which  you  narrate  the  only  one  of  the  kind
which  you  have  had  in  your  life?

A.    Yes,  it  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind.

2.  Q.    Did  you  see  the  face  alone?

A.    To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I  saw  the  whole  head.

3.  Q.    Did  you  recognize  the  face  clearly  at  the  time  ?
A.   Yes.

4.  Q.    Was  there  anything  peculiar  about  the  appearance  ?
A.    No ;  she  looke  1  natural.

5.  Q.    Did  the  face  shut  out  your  sight  of  other  objects  behind  it  ?
A.    Of  course.

6.  Q.    What  position  did  the  face  occupy  in  space,  high  or  low,  etc.  ?
A.    High.     I  first  saw  her',  I  think,  while  looking  at  the  clock.

7.  Q.    Was  the  face  seen  by  any  other  person  than  yourself  ?

A.  I  think  not.  I  was  sitting  in  one  of  the  back  seats  in  the  lec-
ture-room, and  I  don't  think  any  one  else  was  sitting  at  an  angle  at  which
she  could  be  seen.

The  same  informant  has  had  one  comparatively  insignificant  dream
experience,  which  he  narrates  to  us;  but  he  seems  to  have  been
otherwise  quite  free  from  such  visitations,  an  instance  of  a  quasi-
presentiment,  which  he  sends  us,  having  no  importance.  He  declares
himself  to  be  of  a  phlegmatic  temperament,  free  from  superstition,
and  adds  that  he  has  never  been  mesmerized,  although  he  has  sub-
mitted to  experiments  for  that  purpose.

Our  next  case  is  from  a  Southern  lady,  —  C.  B.     Here  are  two


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  355

hallucinations,  one  of  the  well-known  type  of  hallucinations  on  the
borderland  of  sleep,  the  other  a  day-illusion,  generated  as  a  sort  of
reflex  by  an  appropriate  sense-impression  under  peculiar  circum-
stances. About  the  writer's  intelligence  and  temperament  I  have
none  but  internal  evidence,  but  that  is  favorable.

[2]  April  8,  1888.

Richard  Hodgson,  Secretary  Society  for  Psychical  Research:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  have  become  very  much  interested  in  the  work  of
your  society,  and  would  like  to  submit  some  strange  personal  experi-
ences ;  only  requesting  that,  if  you  see  fit  to  publish  the  f ollowing,  my
name  and  residence  be  withheld.

A  few  years  ago  I  was  'visiting  a  friend  living  in  the  country,  thirty
miles  from  the  nearest  town.  The  family  Avas  small, —  only  the  doctor,  his
wife,  my  friend,  and  myself.  One  night  S.  and  I  had  gone  to  our  room
about  eleven  o'clock,  and  after  retiring  had  talked  quite  a  while,  till  S.
said  she  was  going  to  sleep,  and,  turning  over,  was  soon  in  dreamland.
The  room  was  large,  and  lighted  by  four  windows,  through  which  the
moonlight  poured  in  brightly.  The  door  was  closed,  but  not  fastened,
and  was  almost  opposite  the  bed.  For  nearly  an  hour  I  lay  looking  out
over  the  orchard  and  garden,  when  suddenly  I  became  conscious  of  a
presence  in  the  room,  and,  turning,  saw  the  door  was  open,  and  standing
in  the  middle  of  the  room  was  a  figure  clothed  in  black,  with  a  heavy  veil
concealing  the  face  and  figure.  It  advanced  slowly  to  the  foot  of  the
bed,  which  so  terrified  me  that  I  hastily  drew  the  sheet  over  my  face,
and  began  to  shake  S.,  and  whisper  to  her  that  there  was  somebody  in  the
room.  It  was  fully  ten  minutes  before  she  wakened  to  understand,  and
then  our  strange  visitor  had  gone.  Of  course  she  said  I  was  dreaming;
but  the  open  door  was  unaccountable,  and  I  had  not  even  closed  my  eyes,
and  the  moonlight  was  too  bright  for  me  to  have  mistaken  any  object  for
something  supernatural.

The  following  winter  I  was  in  New  Orleans,  and  went  one  Sunday  with
my  sister  to  Trinity  Church  to  hear  Dr.  (now  Bishop)  Hugh  Miller
Thompson.  The  church  being  crowded,  a  single  row  of  seats  had  been
placed  in  the  aisle  next  the  windows.  My  sister  took  a  chair  just  behind
mine,  the  one  in  front  of  me  being  vacant.  During  the  Litany,  at  the
clause,  "  from  sudden  death,"  a  hand  was  laid  on  my  prayer-book.  It
was  a  large,  well-shaped,  white  hand,  evidently  a  man's,  with  nails  well-
cared  for.  This  I  took  in  at  a  glance,  and  before  I  had  time  to  speculate
on  the  subject  it  was  gone.  I  questioned  my  sister,  but  she  had  seen
nothing.  The  aisle  was  too  broad  for  any  one  to  reach  across,  and  no
one  had  passed  down  the  aisle  after  service  had  begun ;  so  it  could  not
have  been  human.

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  this  correspondent  tells  us  that  the
hand  in  question  was  not  a  hand  that  she  could  recognize  as  belong-
ing to  any  known  person,  and  adds  that  she  knows  of  no  connection
between  this  experience  and  any  previous  or  subsequent  events.
Her  sister,  who  was  with  her  in  church,  confirms  her  view  that  the


£56  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

apparition   in    question  could   not  have  been  the  band  of  any  real
person.

I  bave  numerous  otber  sporadic  hallucinations  that  have  been
reported,  and  in  the  supplement  to  this  report  will  be  found  further
material.  I  cite  these  cases  here  mainly  for  a  reason  previously
suggested,  viz.,  although  tbe  existence  of  hallucinations  in  health
and  in  disease  is  well  recognized,  still  the  comparative  study  of  their
forms  and  conditions  is  yet  in  its  infancy.  Some  recent  writers,
such  as  Kandinsky,  of  St.  Petersburg,  have  lately  been  defining
afresh  and  prosecuting  such  a  stud}',  and  it  is  much  to  be  desired  as
a  contribution  to  psychology.  Now,  surely  a  committee  like  our
own  might  hope,  in  time,  to  add  valuable  material  to  the  mass.  Of
course  I  have  no  illusions  about  the  small  scientific  value  of  any
such  limited  collection  of  reported  hallucinations  as  we  now  have.
What  I  suggest  is,  however,  that  we  may  yet,  if  we  continue,  have  a
large  and  important  collection  of  these  interesting  phenomena.  The
effort  is  worth  making.

II.  — Instances    of   Recognized    Sorts   op  Unconscious

Cerebration.

Text-books  of  mental  science  have  for  many  years  contained  men-
tion of  the  interesting  cases  where  people  by  the  aid  of  dreams
have  recalled  forgotten  facts,  have  found  lost  articles,  or  have
solved  problems  that  they  had  vainly  attempted  in  their  waking  life.
It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  we  should  receive  a  good  many
fresh  instances  of  this  sort.  Their  type  is  not  new,  and  their  gen-
eral explanation  is  sufficiently  well  known,  although  that  general
explanation  is  not  yet  very  satisfactory  to  such  minds  as  want  to
understand  the  specific  laws  of  mental  life.  In  general,  then,  it  is
known  that  much  of  our  mental  life  is  not  in  our  own  personal  con-
sciousness from  minute  to  minute,  and  may  never  get  into  our  clear
consciousness  at  all.  How  this  unconscious  mental  life  is  related  to
our  consciousness  we  do  not  very  well  know.  We  only  know  the
relation  is  genuine,  close,  and  constant,  affecting  our  whole  conscious
life.  Now,  in  certain  cases,  what  one  can  no  longer  consciously
make  out  to  himself  03*  any  effort  is  still  somehow  clear  to  what  we
may  call  his  unconscious  self,  and  the  curious  conditions  of  dream-life
may  therefore  suddenly  supply,  as  a  free  gift  to  the  conscious  per-
son, results  that  no  amount  of  conscious  toil  can  give  him,  but  that
this  unconscious  self  has  elaborated.  This  is  still  the  best  account,
very  vague  indeed  though  it  be,  of  the  mental  processes  that  are
illustrated  by  the  following  among  our  cases.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  357

The  first  case,  or  rather  set  of  cases,  which  I  quote  under  this  head
will  be  seen  to  have  a  somewhat  puzzling  character,  and  probably  not
all  the  instances  in  question  belong  to  this  particular  type  ;  yet  I  cite
them  all  here,  first,  because  the  source  from  which  they  come  makes
them  especially  noteworthy,  and,  secondly,  because  the  instances  that
suggest  any  other  explanation  than  pure  coincidence  may  be  cases  of
our  unconscious  cerebration  type.  In  quoting  I  give  the  letters  of
our  well-known  correspondent  almost  in  full,  omitting  only  a  few  sen-
tences of  no  importance  here  :  —

[3]  {From  Prof.   Coleman  Sellers.)

3301  Baring  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Feb.  10,  1888.

.  .  .  About  Mr.  Wilson1 1  will  tell  you  a  curious  circumstance.  Some
years  ago,  before  I  bad  met  bim,  I  was  one  evening  on  my  way  to  a  meeting
of  the  Photographic  Society.  I  stood  at  a  corner  waiting  for  a  car ;  I  saw
a  dark-haired  man  waiting  also.  We  got  in  the  first  car,  and  sitting  on
opposite  sides  of  the  car  we  looked  at  each  other.  I,  impressed  with  a
•desire  to  speak,  crossed  to  him  and  said,  "Is  your  name  Wilson?"
"Yes,"  he  replied.  "Is  your  name  Sellers?"  I  then  said,  "But  I
thought  you  had  light  hair,"  and  he  said,  "  I  thought  you  had  dark  hair."

That  was  the  beginning  of  a  long  friendship,  now  nearly  twenty-five
years'  standing.     .     .     .

Wilson  and  I  may  have  seen  pictures  of  each  other,  but  neither  could
remember  having  done  so.  I  have  no  doubt,  however,  but  that  was  the
way  we  came  to  know  each  other.

Another  letter,  dated  Philadelphia,  Feb.  14,  1888,  continues,  in
answer  to  questions,  thus  :  —

In  regard  to  the  meeting  with  him  (Mr.  Wilson)  it  was  as  I  stated,  with
the  exception  that  I  had  been  informed  that  he  was  coming  to  the  city,
and  yet  I  did  not  know  that  he  had  come.  I  admit  nothing  out  of  the
common  in  the  event.  I  can  explain  it  in  many  ways.  There  may  have
been  a  family  likeness,  and  I  knew  his  father.  All  admissions  being
made,  the  coincidence  was  a  good  one,  as  it  influenced  two  persons.

Now  let  me  tell  you  another  case.  Business  called  me  to  Altoona,  Pa.
I  was  to  go  up  at  night.  I  noticed  a  very  good-looking  man  walking  in
the  station,  waiting  for  the  gate  to  open.  We  entered  the  same  sleeping-
car.  Our  berths  were  near  to  each  other.  It  was  bright  moonlight,  and
as  we  passed  the  park  he  asked  me  some  questions  about  West  Philadel-
phia, and  finding  that  I  resided  there  he  questioned  me  about  the  religious
denominations  there.  I  could  give  him  little  information,  but  I  mentioned
having  heard  a  great  Unitarian  preacher  speak  in  Chicago.  He  then  told
me  many  anecdotes  about  this  man,  who  had  been,  if  I  mistake  not,  a
blacksmith  at  one  time.  We  went  to  bed,  and  in  the  morning  we  were
both  up  before  my  reaching  Altoona.     We  chatted,  and  during  the  talk  he


1  The  President  of  the  Franklin  Institute.    [Note  by  J.  R.]


358  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

said,  "  I  was  at  the  seaside  once,  and  met  a  very  bright  German  who  was
there  with  his  microscope  —  "  —  "Yes,  I  know,"  said  I,  "it  was  Carl
Meinerth,  of  Newburyport,  Mass."  He  looked  at  me  with  wonder,  and
admitted  that  I  was  right,  and  asked  me  why  I  had  named  him-  I  could
give  no  reason,  for  I  know  many  bright  Germans  who  are  microscopists.
He  was  so  astonished  that  he  could  not  speak,  and  at  that  moment  we
reached  Altoona.  I  said  good-by  and  we  parted,  neither  knowing  the
other.

While  at  the  hotel  in  Altoona  I  wrote  to  Meinerth,  and  told  him  the
story,  and,  describing  the  man,  asked  if  he  could  tell  me  his  name.  When
I  reached  home  I  found  a  letter  from  Meinerth  enclosing  the  picture  of
the  man,  and  saying  that  he  had  written  to  ask  who  I  was,  and  our  letters
crossed.  That  is,  Meinerth  wrote  to  me  before  receiving  my  letter  to  him.
The  man  was  an  Episcopal  divine,  living  in  the  West,  who  had  come  to
Philadelphia  to  look  at  the  church  that  had  given  him  a  call.  This  led  to
a  long  correspondence,  that  was  continued  for  some  years,  but  now  I  can-
not recall  his  name.  I  cannot  consider  this  in  any  other  light  than  pure
chance.  During  the  war  of  the  Revolution  my  grandfather  was  called
home  from  his  place  in  the  army  to  make  paper  moulds  that  were  needed,
he  being  the  only  one  in  America  who  could  make  them.  It  was  an  act
of  Congress  that  recalled  him,  and  after  that  the  government  had  him  em-
ploy ed  in  many  ways  besides  fighting.  He  continued  to  make  paper  moulds
and  other  work  of  that  kind,  under  the  firm  name  of  Nathan  and  David
Sellers,  later  Sellers  &  Pennock.  My  father  invented  a  machine  to
lay  paper  moulds,  and  was  working  at  it  in  the  city  after  his  father  had
retired  from  business  to  his  country-place  in  Delaware  county.  The
machine  did  not  work  well,  and  both  of  them  were  bothered  over  the  fail-
ure. One  night  my  father  dreamed  that  an  old  man  came  to  see  him  and
said,  "  If  you  want  that  machine  to  work  you  must  turn  it  upside  down."
Father  was  astonished,  for  he  saw  at  once  that  it  would  be  better  to  have
the  mould  below,  and  not  above,  the  laying  machinery.  He  called  for  his
horses,  and,  taking  my  mother  with  him,  drove  out  to  Mill  Bank.  As  he
came  near  the  house  he  was  surprised  to  see  his  father  waiting  for  him,
saying.,  as  he  drove  up  to  my  father,  "  Coleman,  I  am  glad  thee  has  come.
I  expected  thee,  for  I  have  had  a  dream  and  want  to  tell  thee  about  it."
Upon  comparing  notes  the  dreams  were  the  same  and  at  the  same  moment.
My  ancestors  were  Quakers,  but  of  course  grandfather's  joining  the  army
lost  him  his  place  in  the  society,  and  his  son  had  no  birthright,  but  in  the
family  they  both  used  the  language  of  Quakers.

I  have  given  this  story  as  it  was  given  to  me ;  but  at  the  same  time,  with
the  most  implicit  faith  in  the  veracity  of  all  connected  with  it,  I  cannot
but  think  that  perhaps  it  has  been  exaggerated,  and  I  have  very  little  in-
terest in  such  stories  unless  they  happen  under  my  eyes.

I  met  James  Russell  Lowell  in  London,  and  presented  a  letter  from  his
predecessor,  Mr.  Welsh.  I  was  received  with  open  arms,  he  saying,  "I
am  so  glad  to  see  you ;  all  my  early  recollections  of  residence  in  Pennsyl-
vania are  connected  with  your  family,  and  I  remember  many  interesting
things  about  your  ancestors.  There  was  a  very  pleasant  old  gentleman,
one  Nathan  Sellers,  who  told  me  that  when  your  ancestor  was  about
leaving  England  for  America,  in  1682,  he  dreamed  about  seeing  a  very
singular  person,  who  showed  him  land  that  he   advised  his  taking  up.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  359

"When  he  reached  Philadelphia  he  recognized  the  person  of  the  dream  in
the  land  agent  of  William  Penn,  who  showed  him  the  land  that  he  had
dreamed  of.  Part  of  that  land  I  yet  hold."  It  seemed  odd  to  go  to  Lon-
don to  meet  a  man  unknown  to  me,  who  should  tell  me  so  many  things
about  my  people.

I  could  tell  you  many  other  things  of  this  kind,  and  many  relating  to
my  own  inventions,  which  seem  remarkable,  if  I  did  not  fully  understand
the  value  of  unconscious  cerebration.


In  a  letter  dated  Feb.  24,  1888,  Professor  Sellers  gives  us
further  information  about  his  experiences  of  unconscious  cerebra-
tion :  —

In  reply  to  one  of  your  recent  letters  I  would  say  that  the  story  of  my
father's  dream  cannot  be  obtained  from  any  of  the  parties  concerned,  as
all  have  died.  My  father  died  in  1834,  and  his  father  a  few  years  before
that.  I  have  written  to  my  older  brothers,  asking  them  to  say  what  they
have  heard  about  the  dream.

Our  brain  works  after  we  have  striven  to  give  it  rest.  In  regard  to
inventions,  I  have  many  times  worked  for  many  hours  to  obtain  a  result
much  desired,  and,  having  failed  to  devise  what  would  be  satisfactory,
have  given  it  up  for  the  time,  and  been  surprised  with  the  solution  coming
to  me  when  my  mind  has  been  directed  to  other  subjects.

This  has  happened  so  often  that  I  am  no  longer  surprised  at  it.  It  is
what  happens  to  us  continually  when,  failing  to  recall  the  name  of  a  per-
son, we  give  up  thinking  of  it,  certain  that  it  will  come  to  us  when  we
least  expect  it.  See  Dr.  Holmes  in  his  "  Mechanism  of  Thought  and
Morals."

Our  minds  receive  impressions  from  all  sounds  and  all  objects  we  see
in  the  most  heedless  manner.  Some  persons  have  the  power  to  recall
these  impressions  easier  than  others ;  to  all  they  come  Avhen  not  expected.

I  have  more  than  once  been  startled  from  my  sleep  by  an  impression
that  an  error  had  been  made  by  one  of  my  draughtsmen  in  his  work,  and
when  I  see  his  drawing  after,  I  find  that  it  is  as  I  have  dreamed.  In  this
case  I  must  have  seen  the  error  without  heeding  it,  and  my  brain,  after
awhile  at  seeming  rest,  has,  during  its  unconscious  cerebration,  called  my
attention  to  the  fact ;  once  when  we  were  making  the  large  planing-machine
for  the  Russian  government,  a  machine  to  be  used  on  the  bed-plates
of  the  large  steam  engines  used  in  ships-of-war,  the  slotting  attachment
was  to  be  operated  by  a  large  screw  of  quick  pitch,  which  would  require  some
restraining  device  to  prevent  its  reaction  from  the  weight  of  the  part
lifted.     I  gave  one  of  my  men  the  idea  and  asked  him  to  make  a  drawing.

That  night  I  was  impressed  with  the  notion  that  the  idea  was  not  origi-
nal, but  had  been  patented,  and,  to  avoid  complication,  I  tried  to  think  of
some  other  way  to  do  what  was  wanted.  I  told  the  man,  the  next  day,
that  he  would  have  to  think  of  some  other  method,  as  that  was  patented,  I
felt  sure.  He  looked  surprised,  and  when  he  found  I  was  in  earnest  he
went  to  the  patent-drawing  drawer  and  showed  me  my  patent  for  the  in-
vention, taken  out  some  years  before.  You  see  I  was  right,  but  mistaken
in  regard  to  the  fellow  who  had  made  the  invention.


360  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments*

The  following  is  added  by  Prof.  Sellers  in  a  letter  of  Dec.  20,

1888  :  —

As  another  example  of  the  unconscious  mental  work  that  has  with  me  so
often  accomplished  good  results,  I  will  give  you  a  recent  example.  I
called  to  see  the  agent  of  the  Remington  Typewriter  and  asked  him  why
they  did  not  place  on  the  instrument  a  means  of  "  racking  back  "  after  the
manner  of  the  spacing-key,  which  will  cause  the  sheet  to  advance  without
letters  being  formed.  He  said  such  a  thing  Avould  be  good,  but  he  did
not  know  how  it  could  be  done,  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  of  any  way  of
doing  that  kind  of  "  racking  back."  I  replied  that  I  did  not  know  how  to
accomplish  it,  but,  as  I  thought  it  would  be  a  good  thing  for  me,  I  intended
to  make  the  attachment  to  my  machine.  I  left  him,  giving  little  thought
to  the  subject,  and  went  home  —  reaching  my  house  in  about  forty  minutes
—  and  as  I  was  entering  the  front  gate  I  was  astonished  by  a  flash  of
thought  coming  to  me  with  the  full  and  perfect  invention  so  well  worked
out  that  the  next  day  I  made  the  required  attachment,  and  am  now  at  the
present  time  using  it  as  needs  be  in  writing  this  letter.  This  is  one  of  the
many  examples  of  thought  going  on  after  it  is  once  started ;  and  some-
times the  mind,  if  not  forced,  will  do  work  more  rapidly  for  the  want  of  at-
tention. I  have  so  much  confidence  in  this  kind  of  mind-work  that  I  am
used  to  trusting  to  it  many  times  when  I  want  to  reach  any  desired  con-
clusion requiring  invention.


Ancestral  stories  of  any  sort  can  have,  of  course,  as  such,  very
little  historical  worth,  and  I  give  the  family  stories  communicated  by
our  correspondent  merely  because  they  are  in  the  context  with  Prof.
Sellers'  own  personal  experiences.  A  natural  explanation  in  case  of
the  incident  of  the  microscopist  i3,  of  course,  that  Prof.  Sellers  had
really  had  some  previous  knowledge  of  his  travelling  acquaintance,
and  was  merely  unable  consciously  to  recall  where  and  when  he  had
met  him.  This  amnesia  happened  to  be  interrupted  in  respect  of  the
one  matter  of  the  acquaintance  with  the  microscopist.  The  coincident
forgetfulness  of  both  the  travellers  is,  after  all,  not  so  astonishing.
Travelling  on  sleeping-cars  is  probably  peculiarly  favorable  to  forget-
fulness, and  if  one  may  judge  by  the  people  whom  one  usually  sees
in  the  smoking-room  at  the  beginning  of  night  jo  urn  e}rs,  most  of  the
cerebration  that  occurs  in  Pullman  cars  is  probably  of  the  uncon-
scious type.

Unconscious  cerebration  is  well  known  to  have  frequent  reference,
in  some  people,  to  estimates  of  time.  A  good  case  of  this  sort  comes
to  us  from  a  trustworthy  source.  A  correspondent  in  Providence,
R.I.,  writes,  "  The  only  personal  experience  which  I  have  had  that
would  be  of  any  interest  was  a  dream,  in  which  I  saw  an  enormous
flaming  clock-dial  with  the  hands  standing  at  twenty  minutes  past
two ;  awaking  immediately  I  struck  a  match,  and  upon  looking  at


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  361

my  watch  found  it  was  a  few  seconds  past  twenty  minutes  past
two."  But  phenomena  of  just  this  sort,  i.e.,  unconscious  but  cor-
rect reckoning  of  time,  are  not  known  to  science  merely  through
hearsay,  but  can  be,  and  have  been,  verified  experimentally  in  the
study  of  hypnotic  patients.

Of  the  finding  of  lost  articles  through  dreams  I  have  three  fairly
good  cases  to  report  here.  Unfortunately  only  one  of  them  depends
upon  the  memory  of  more  than  a  single  person,,  But  partly  in  view
of  the  known  reality  of  the  class  in  question,  partly  because  I  feel
pretty  sure  of  the  general  correctness  of  these  instances,  and  finally,
because  the  stories  are  all  told  con  amore,  I  report  all  three.  Of
course  what  seems  to  have  happened  in  each  case  is,  that  the  loser  of
something  valuable,  though  unable  to  pay  conscious  attention  to  the
place  of  the  lost  article,  had  actually  seen  it  in  its  hiding-place.
This  knowledge  of  the  lost  article  was  then  restored  by  the  uncon-
scious activit}'  to  the  personal  consciousness  of  the  loser  during  a
dream.

The  first  case  comes  to  us  from  a  lady  (M.  B.)  to  whom  we  had
applied  for  an  account  of  another  and  more  remarkable  experience,
which  she  was  unable,  however,  to  relate  to  us  at  present.  As  a
compensation  she  gave  us  this  less  important  experience,  of  whose
incidents  she  feels  very  sure  :  —

[4]  A  number  of  years  ago  I  was  invited  to  visit  a  friend  who  lived  at  a

large  and  beautiful  country-seat  on  the  Hudson.  Shortly  after  my  arrival
I  started,  with  a  number  of  other  guests,  to  make  a  tour  of  the  very  exten-
sive grounds.  "YVe  walked  for  an  hour  or  more,  and  very  thoroughly  ex-
plored the  place.  Upon  my  return  to  the  house  I  discovered  that  I  had
lost  a  gold  cuff-stud,  that  I  valued  for  association's  sake.  I  merely  remem-
bered that  I  wore  it  when  we  started  out,  and  did  not  think  of  or  notice  it
again  until  my  return,  when  it  was  missing.  As  it  was  quite  dark,  it
seemed  useless  to  search  for  it,  especially  as  it  was  the  season  of  autumn
and  the  ground  was  covered  with  dead  leaves.  That  night  I  dreamed  that
I  saw  a  withered  grape-vine  clinging  to  a  wall,  and  with  a  pile  of  dead
leaves  at  the  base.  Underneath  the  leaves,  in  my  dream,  I  distinctly  saw
my  stud  gleaming.  The  following  morning  I  asked  the  friends  with  whom
I  had  been  walking  the  previous  afternoon  if  they  remembered  seeing  any
such  wall  and  vine,  as  /did  not.  They  replied  that  they  could  not  recall
anything  answering  the  description.  I  did  not  tell  them  why  I  asked,  as  I
felt  somewhat  ashamed  of  the  dream,  but  during  the  morning  I  made  some
excuse  to  go  out  on  the  grounds  alone.  I  walked  hither  and  thither,  and
after  a  long  time  I  suddenly  came  upon  the  wall  and  vine  exactly  as  they
looked  in  my  dream.  I  had  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  seeing  them,  or
passing  by  them  on  the  previous  day.  The  dead  leaves  at  the  base  were
lying  heaped  up,  as  in  my  dream.  I  approached  cautiously,  feeling
rather  uncomfortable  and  decidedly  silly,  and  pushed  them  aside.  I  had
scattered  a  large  number  of  the  leaves  when  a  gleam  of  gold  struck  my


362  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

eye,  and  there  lay  the  stud,  exactly  as  in  my  dream.  My  friends  refused
to  believe  when  I  told  them,  and  vowed  there  was  some  trick  about  it,  but
as  I  had  not  told  any  one  the  particulars  of  the  dream,  that  was  impossible,
and  the  matter  will  always  be  somewhat  "  uncanny"  in  my  memory.

The  next  case  depends  upon  a  memory  of  many  j^ears'  standing,
and,  were  it  not  for  the  cleverness  and  the  freedom  from  superstition
which  the  narrator  shows,  I  should  lay  no  stress  upon  the  incident.
But  pretty  plainly  something  of  the  sort  did  occur  to  our  corre-
spondent, although,  after  twenty-five  years,  memory  is  a  poor  guide,
and  obviously  his  story  has  been  often  told  by  him  :  —

[5]  {From  C.  H.  II,  C.E.  and  Surveyor.)

California,  Dec.  2G,  1887.

Seeing  an  invitation,  or  request,  in  the  "  New  York  Herald  "  from  any  and
all  parties  in  reference  to  Dreams  or  Hallucinations,  —  is  not  the  latter
a  rather  harsh  term?

I  don't  think  there  is  a  particle  of  foolishness  in  my  composition ;  at
least,  I  hope  not.  I  don't  say  this  boastingly,  but  treating  the  present
subject.  In  former  days  I  have  endeavored  to  investigate  spiritualism  and
other  so-called  supernatural  phenomena,  but  failed  to  find  anything  that,
in  my  opinion,  would  be  beneficial  to  the  human  family,  and  am  unusually
free  from  superstition.  I  would  wish  the  above  to  read,  failed  to  find  in
spiritualism  anything  beneficial,  but  other  phenomena  I  think  worthy  the
most  profound  investigation.     With  this  preface?  I  will  state  my  dream  :  —

Upwards  of  twenty-five  years  ago  I  was  residing  on  the  banks  of  the
Delaware  river,  in  Sullivan  co.,  State  of  Neve-  York.  Before  I  left  home
my  only  sister  had  presented  me  with  a  goll  ring  and  told  me  to  never
lose  it.  In  a  beautiful  little  grove  near  the  bank  of  said  river  a  lot  of  us
young  folks  had  fixed  up  a  scup,  or  swing,  among  the  trees,  and  we  indulged
in  that  pastime  to  that  extent  that  the  land  immediately  under  the  swing
became  so  lively  that  my  foot  would  make  a  deep  impression.  One  beau-
tiful moonlight  night,  after  getting  tired  of  swinging,  I  had  seen  my  best
girl  home,  as  in  duty  bound,  and  was  returning  along  towards  morning,  as
usual,  when  I  missed  my  ring.  It  gave  me  quite  a  shock  when  I  made  that
discovery;  the  first  impression  I  had  was,  there  I've  lost  that  ring,  but  it
must  be  found,  and  that  I  would  find  it.  Went  home  and  searched  round
my  room  and  went  to  bed.  Had  a  hazy  sort  of  dream  about  the  ring,  but
nothing  definite.  Got  up  early  and  searched  before  breakfast.  After
breakfast  followed  the  direction  we  had  taken  the  night  before  to  the
swing,  and  from  there  to  the  young  lady's  home ;  but  found  it  not.  In  fact,
I  searched  diligently  all  day,  and  went  to  bed  thinking  very  seriously  of
the  ring.  Along  towards  morning  had  a  very  impressive  dream.  I  saw
the  ring  covered  by  a  little  ridge  of  sand,  between  two  footprints  under
the  swing.  That  dream  was  so  vivid  that  on  awaking  I  could  see  the  road,
buildings,  fences,  trees,  swing,  and  sand,  with  the  footprints  therein  the
same  as  in  the  dream,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  light  enough  to  see  I  started
for  that  swing,  not  attempting  to  look  for  it  on  the  way.  On  arriving  at
the  swing  I  walked  deliberately  into  the  sand  until  I  reached  the  before-


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  363

mentioned  ridge,  between  said  footprints,  and  with  the  toe  of  my  boot  re-
moved a  little  sand  from  the  top  of  the  ridge,  and  out  rolled  the  ring.  The
birds  were  singing  overhead  in  the  trees,  the  river  was  rushing  on  its  way
to  the  sea,  a  train  of  cars  on  the  York  and  Erie  R.R.  across  the  river  passed
along.  I  banged  my  head  several  times  with  my  fist,  to  make  sure  I  was
not  still  in  the  land  of  dreams ;  no,  I  was  there,  standing  in  the  sand,  and
there  laid  the  ring.  There  was  no  hallucination  about  that,  but  a  good,
square,  honest,  useful  dream.  I  picked  up  the  ring  and  went  home,  and
ate  more  for  breakfast  than  I  had  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  and  I  kept
up  an  awful  thinking,  and  am  thinking  yet.  I  would  state  I  Avas  about  nine-
teen years  of  age  at  that  time,  enjoyed  perfect  health,  and  thought  I  knew
more  than  all  creation ;  but  don't  think  so  now.  My  sister  was  also  living
at  that  time.

Several  years  after  the  above  I  had  another  dream,  and  the  last  one ;  but
this  has  been  so  long  that  I  will  close  for  this  time  to  see  what  you  think
of  it,  and  whether  the  second  will  be  of  interest  to  you,  and  will  merely
remark  that  I  have  endeavored  to  work  this  dream  business  up  to  a  prac-
tical use  in  the  years  gone  by ;  but  it  has  been  a  total  failure,  so  far,  —  can't
concentrate  the  mind  with  that  intenseness  that  seems  to  be  necessary  with
me  to  bring  forth  dreams.

Any  one  used  to  narratives  recognizes  at  once  that  this  story,  as  I
have  suggested,  has  grown  not  a  little  with  years,  and  I  am  not  sure
of  more  than  that  it  has  a  probable  foundation  in  fact,  and  is  no
doubt  sincerely  told.

The  third  case  to  be  quoted  in  this  connection  has  a  better  basis,
and  is  more  critically  told :  —

The  narrator  is  a  Southern  gentleman,  Col.  A.  v.  S.,  of  Texas.

[6]  December  15,  1887.

In  the  "New  York  Herald"  of  Dec.  11th  inst.  I  have  noticed  your  in-
terview, in  which  you  say  that  you  request  any  person  having  some  unu-
sual experience,  such  as  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream,  etc.,  etc.,  should
address  you.  The  following  seems  to  me  a  very  extraordinary  dream,
for  the  truth  of  which  I  pledge  you  my  word  of  honor.

About  five  years  ago  I  lived  with  my  four  children,  one  boy  and  three
girls,  on  a  farm  in  Massachusetts.  This  only  son,  at  the  age  of  about
fourteen  years,  lost  his  life  in  an  accident,  about  six  months  previous  to
this  narration.  The  youngest  of  my  girls  was  the  pet  sister  of  his  since
her  birth.  My  wife  had  died  some  six  years  previous  to  this  story ;  being
motherless,  made  these  children  unusually  affectionate  toward  each  other.
One  day  I  had  occasion  to  buy  for  my  girls  each  a  very  small  lady's  knife,
about  two  and  a  half  inches  long.  A  few  days  afterwards  the  girls  received
company  from  our  neighbors'  girls,  some  five  or  six  of  them.  My  youngest
one,  some  eight  or  nine  years  old,  was  so  delighted  with  this,  her  first
knife,  that  she  carried  it  with  her  at  all  times.  During  the  afternoon  the
children  strolled  to  the  large  barn,  filled  with  hay,  and  at  once  set  to  climb-
ing the  mow  to  play,  and  jumping  on  the  hay.  During  the  excitement  of
the  play  my  little  girl  lost  her  knife.     This  terrible  loss  nearly  broke  her


364  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

heart,  and  all  hands  set  to  work  to  find  the  lost  treasure,  but  -without  suc-
cess. This  finally  broke  up  the  party  in  gloominess.  In  spite  of  my
greatest  efforts  to  pacify  the  child  with  all  sorts  of  promises,  she  went  to
bed  weeping.  During  the  night  the  child  dreamed  that  her  dead  dear,
beloved  brother  came  to  her,  taking  her  by  the  hand,  saying,  "  Come,  my
darling,  I  will  show  you  where  your  little  knife  is,"  and,  leading  her  to
the  barn,  climbing  the  mow,  showed  her  the  knife,  marking  the  place.
The  dream  was  so  life-like  that  she  awoke,  joyfully  telling  her  sister
that  her  brother  had  been  here,  and  showing  her  where  she  would  find  her
knife.  Both  girls  hastily  dressed,  and  running  to  the  barn,  the  little  girl,
assisted  by  her  sister,  got  on  top  of  the  hay,  and  walked  direct  to  the  spot
indicated  by  her  brother,  and  found  the  knife  on  top  of  the  hay.  The
whole  party  said  that  they  all  looked  there  many  times  the  day  before,  and
insisted  that  the  knife  was  not  there  then.
This,  I  think,  is  a  very  remarkable  dream.

Yours,  etc.


In  answer  to  a  request  for  further  confirmation,  our  correspondent
writes,  under  date  of  December  29,  1887  :  —

Yours  of  Dec.  22  inst.  to  hand.  According  to  your  request  I  will  give
the  statement  of  my  girls.     The  little  dreamer  says  :  —

"  I  have  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  my  dream  up  to  this  day.  I  could
to-day  walk  every  step  that  I  walked  in  my  dream  with  brother.  I  cannot
recollect  at  what  time  of  the  night  I  had  my  dream.  I  don't  think  I  ever
was  awake  during  the  night,  but,  on  awaking  in  the  morning,  I  had  the
feeling  that  I  was  sure  I  could  go  and  get  the  knife.  I  told  my  sisters.
They  at  first  laughed  at  my  dream,  but  I  insisted  that  brother  had  shown
me  the  knife,  and  I  could  not  have  peace  in  my  mind  until  I  went  to  the
barn  to  get  it.  One  sister  went  with  me.  On  reaching  the  hay,  I  told  her
to  let  me  go  ahead,  and  Avalked  direct  to  the  spot  without  hesitating  a  mo-
ment, and  picked  up  my  knife  !  "

She  never  had  any  other  similar  experience,  and  no  other  similar  expe-
rience happened  in  my  family.  The  sister  who  went  along  with  her
says  :  —

"  As  we  got  up  and  were  dressing,  sister  told  me  she  knew  where  her
knife  was ;  that  brother  took  her  out  to  the  barn  during  the  night  and
showed  it  to  her.  I  laughed  and  tried  to  persuade  her  that  this  was  only  a
dream,  but  she  said  that  she  was  so  sure  of  seeing  the  knife  that  she  would
show  it  to  me.  She  said  that  brother  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led
her  to  the  place,  talking  to  her  all  the  way,  and  tried  to  quiet  her.  She
would  not  give  peace  until  I  went  along.  On  getting  on  top  of  the  hay  she
walked  direct  to  the  spot,  saying,  '  Here  brother  picked  the  knife  up  out
of  the  hay,'  and  at  once  said,  '  and  oh,  here  it  is,'  picking  up  the  knife.
We  had  been  looking  this  place  all  over,  again  and  again,  the  previous
evening."

The  case  calls  for  no  special  comment,  except  a  remark  that  its
details  are  now  probably  somewhat  too  vivid  in  the  minds  of  the  family,


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  36


rv


who  have  often  talked  the  matter  over,  and  have  often  told  the  stor}'.
Yet  there  can  be  no  error  as  to  the  main  fact,  of  the  finding  of  the
knife  through  a  dream  that  depended  upon  an  unconscious  memory  of
where  the  knife  had  been  lost.

I  close  this  study  of  cases  of  unconscious  cerebration  with  an  in-
stance of  a  decidedly  different  sort.  As  the  society  knows,  we  have
done  what  we  could  to  collect  cases  of  unrealized  presentiments,  as
well  as  of  realized  ones.  And  we  have  at  hand,  from  a  very  obliging
correspondent  (one  of  our  own  members),  a  rather  amusing  instance
where  an  unconscious  mental  process  led  him  to  dream  of  a  calamity
as  happening  to  a  friend  in  Europe,  whose  intention  to  visit  Italy,
where  the  dream  placed  the  scene  of  the  calamity,  had  even  been
forgotten  by  his  conscious  self.  The  dream,  by  good  fortune,
proved  to  be  entirely  without  connection  with  fact.  I  give  the  case
because  it  illustrates  so  well  what  we  desire  our  friends  to  do  for  us
in  all  this  inquiry.  Note,  namely,  the  kindness  and  the  forethought  of
our  correspondent  in  making  an  exact  note  of  his  dream  at  once.
Here  is  the  statement  of  W.  S.  :  —

[7]  Boston,  Feb.  19,  1888.

In  the  latter  days  of  March,  1887,  we  bade  farewell  to  an  elderly  friend
who  was  soon  to  sail  for  several  months'  travel  in  Europe.  From  this
time  until  the  night  of  my  dream  I  think  I  did  not  hear  her  name  men-
tioned, nor  do  I  remember  that  I  ever  thought  of  her.

On  the  morning  of  May  12,  1887,  I,  not  being  accustomed  to  dream,
awoke  my  wife  suddenly  (about  6.45  A.M.)  and  asked,  "  Did  you  tell  me
that  Mrs.  E.  was  dead?"—"  Why,  no.  What  Mrs.  R. ?"  she  answered.
"  But  surely  some  one  has  said  so,  or  did  I  dream  it?  "  I  asked,  now  fully
awake,  and  continued,  "  Professor  A.  (somewhat  doubtful  about  the  per-
son) came  to  me  with  a  cablegram,  which  read,  '  Mrs.  R.  dropped  dead  on
the  steps  of  a  building  in  Rome.'"  •

My  wife  asked  that  I  should  get  up  at  once,  write  down  my  dream,  with
the  date  and  hour,  which  I  did.

This  autumn  my  wife  called  on  Mrs.  R. ,  who  had  returned,  told  her  my
dream,  and  asked  if  she  could  recall  what  happened  on  May  12.  (I  had
known  that  Mrs.  R.  intended  to  visit  Italy,  sailing  as  she  did  by  the  Italian
line,  but  I  had  entirely  forgotten  it.)  As  it  happened,  Mrs.  R.  kept  a
journal  through  the  summer,  and  it  read,  "May  12,  arrived  at  Venice
in  the  best  of  health  and  spirits."

An  officer  of  the  society  has  added,  from  his  own  knowledge  of  the
persons,  the  following  statement :  —

A  few  days  after  this  dream  occurred  Mrs.  S.  mentioned  it  to  me,  re-
ferring to  Mr.  S.  for  corroboration.  He  told  me  the  story  as  written
above,  with  this  exception;  he  said,  "  A  curious  thing  was  that  I  never
even  heard  that  Mrs.  R.  was  going  to  Rome."


366  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

I  said  nothing  about  it  at  the  time,  but  mentally  noted  the  fact  thai  he
had  heard  that  she  was  going  to  Italy,  for  I  was  also  at  the  house  of  Mrs.
E.  on  the  evening  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  bade  Mrs.  E.  farewell.  Mr.,
Mrs.  S.,  and  I,  all  left  at  the  same  time  and  walked  up  the  street  together.

Mrs.  S.  exclaimed  that  she  envied  Mrs.  E.  more  than  any  woman  in
Boston.  When  Mr.  S.  asked  why,  she  replied,  "Because  she  is  going  to
Eome  (?)  or  Italy  (?)."     I  don't  remember  which  place  she  named.

This  case,  viewed  quite  impersonally  and  scientifically,  arouses,  of
course,  certain  —  shall  I  dare  to  say? — but  no,  I  do  not  mean  that
—  my  pen  was  about  in  its  insensibility  to  write  regrets.  The  case
was  so  well  noted,  the  presentiment  was  so  demonstrable  !  If  it  had
only  been  a  kindly  presentiment,  leaving  Mrs  R.  an  immense  fortune,
or  declaring  that  she  had  just  discovered  for  us  the  real  truth  about
telepathy,  and  if  the  dream  so  well  noted  had  then  only  been  verified,
both  our  friends  and  ourselves  would  have  rejoiced  together,  science
would  have  advanced  appreciably,  and  nobody  would  have  been  hurt.
Meanwhile,  as  it  is,  let  us  use  this  occasion  once  more  to  beg  all  our
friends  and  correspondents  to  make  instant  note  of  their  dreams,
hallucinations,  and  presentiments,  with  mention  of  day,  hour,  and
precise  content.  I  will  not  trouble  the  society  with  further  cases  of
this  sort,  although  I  have  more  than  one  on  hand.

III.  —  Pseudo-Presentiments.

I  now  come  to  a  class  of  facts  whose  very  existence  has  not  here-
tofore been  generally  recognized,  and  I  think  that  the  discovery
of  their  existence  among  the  people  at  large  is  an  important  result
of  the  investigations  of  our  committee.  This  result,  in  fact,  is  the
one  that  1  referred  to  in  the  beginning  of  this  paper  as  an  example
of  the  value  of  a  comparative  method  of  study  in  matters  of  this
sort.  The  societ}^  has  already  heard,  in  the  before-mentioned  prelim-
inary and  unpublished  report  of  my  own,  the  hypothesis  for  which  I
now  undertake  to  give  further  evidence  in  the  present  report.  This
hypothesis  is,  that  in  certain  people,  under  certain  exciting  circum-
stances, there  occur  what  I  shall  henceforth  call  pseudo-presentiments,
i.e.,  more  or  less  instantaneous  and  irresistible  hallucinations  of  mem-
ory, which  make  it  seem  to  one  thai  something  which  now  excites  or
astonishes  him  has  been  prefigured  in  a  recent  dream,  or  in  the  form
of  some  other  warning,  although  this  seeming  is  wholly  unfounded,
and  although  the  supposed  prophecy  really  succeeds  its  own  fulfil-
ment. On  the  subject  of  these  pseudo-presentiments  I  some  time
since  wrote  a  letter,  which  was  published  in  last  April's  number  of
Mind.     I  shall  here  quote  the  argument  of  this  letter  in  so  far  as


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  867

it  is  relevant,  in  order  to  introduce  the  present  study.  After  classi-
fying supposed  telepathic  cases  in  three  groups,  and  disposing  of  two
of  them,  my  letter  went  on  :  —

4t  The  third  class  of  cases  consists  of  stories  of  recent  date,  told  by
people  of  good  character,  and  of  generally  sound  memory,  whose  'tele-
pathic '  experiences  have  been  sporadic,  and  who  are  not  themselves
open  to  the  charge  of  being  systematically  or  superstitiously  imagi-
native.    That  such  stories  are  comparatively  frequent,  and  that  they
cannot  be  dismissed  as  mere  folk-lore,  or  as  mere  superstition,  or  as
mere  fraud,  Mr.  Gurney's  book  has  pretty  clearly  shown.     Now,  my
hypothesis  concerns  not  all  of  these  stories,  but  a  very  large  propor-
tion* of  them.     I  ask  myself,  '  Why  should  people  who  have  no  in-
terest in  believing  in  telepathy,  who  are  themselves  often  despisers
of  the  whole  idea,  and  also  haters  of  all  superstitions,  whose  own
personal  honesty  is  undoubted,  and  whose  memory  is  generally  good,
—  why  should  such  people  suddenly  believe  and  relate  that  at  some
very  recent  time,  just  before  an  affliction,  or  at  the  moment  of  a  ca-
lamity, they  knew,  or  were  warned  by  dream  or  presentiment,  of  the
distant  and,  for  them,  otherwise  unknowable  fact  of  the  affliction  or
calamity  in  question?     Why  should  such  tales  be  told  at  once,  or
very  soon  after  the  accident,  and  before  the  ordinary  errors  of  imag-
inative memory  could  have  time  to  distort  the  facts?     Why  should
the   experiences  be   sporadic   for  such  people,  so  as  to   be   almost
wholly  isolated  in  their  lives,  and  so  as  not  especially  to  affect  their
beliefs  thenceforth  ?  '    And  I  answer  these  questions  hypothetically,  by
suggesting  that  in  such  cases  we  probably  have  to  do  with  a  not  yet
recognized  type  of  instantaneous  hallucination  of  memory,  consisting
in  the  fancy,  at  the  very  moment  of  some  exciting  experience,  that  one  has
expected  it  before  its  coming.    Such  an  hallucination  might,  of  course,
be  as  irresistible  as  a  delusion  of  the  senses  often  is.     Two  or  more
persons  among  those  concerned  in  any  case  might  be  equally  subject
to  it,  and  then  their  stories  might  corroborate  each  other.     On  the
other  hand,  as    some  peculiar   state   of   health  or    some  peculiarly
painful  excitement  might  be  required  for  its  appearance  in  any  one
person,  a  given  sane  and  sound  individual  might  plod  on  for  years
without  any  '  telepathic '  experiences,  and  then  at  the  very  moment
when  he  heard  of  his  brother's  death  might  with  a  sudden  assurance
exclaim  :  '  How  strange  !     I  dreamt  of  receiving  this  news  only  last
night,   and  have  been   oppressed    in  mind   by  the  presentiment   all
day.'     Members  of  the  same  family  would  be  especially  apt  to  be
similarly  subject  to  this  form  of  illusion,  and  then  the  same  news
would  show  them  all  the  same  mirage  of  memory  with  startling  re-
sults in  the  way  of  '  telepathic'  evidence.     As  for  mere  supplemen-


368  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

tary  corroboration,  taking  the  well-known  shape  of  a  friend's  assur-
ance that  '  he  believes  the  story  to  be  true  as  it  is  told,  for  the
people  directly  concerned  assured  him  of  its  truth  from  the  very
first,'  all  that  would  be  forthcoming  in  a  very  few  weeks,  and  with
the  best  intentions  on  the  part  of  all  concerned.

"  The  illusion  of  double  memory  in  one  familiar  type,  viz.,  in  case
of  the  feeling  that  one  'has  been  here  before,'  is  universally  recog-
nized. This  newly  suggested  form  of  instantaneous  hallucination  is  a
priori  just  as  probable  as  that  old  and  well-recognized  form.  Its  ex-
istence, however,  is  hard  to  verify,  because  while  the  double  memory
of  the  first  and  well-known  type  at  once  corrects  itself  through  the
sane  knowledge  that  we  are  not  living  our  lives  twice  over,  the  illu-
sion of  the  second  kind  might  persist  as  long  as  you  please,  either  in
the  form  of  a  general  belief  in  presentiments,  or  else  merely  in  the
shape  of  an  isolated  '  telepathic  '  experience  that  one  looks  back  upon.
Even  so  diplopia  is  self-correcting  for  a  normal  consciousness ;  but
a  projected  hallucination  of  vision  is  not  so  self-correcting.  Such
might  also  be  the  case  with  the  two  illusions  of  memory.

kCBut,  of  course,  to  verify  this  hypothesis,  even  remotely,  requires
more  than  such  &  priori  suggestions.  And  it  has  occurred  to  me  that
the  best  course  would  be  to  ask  whether  any  such  hallucination  of  mem-
ory as  my  hypothesis  demands  is  ever  observed  among  the  actually
insane  in  asylum  practice.  I  have  consulted  the  literature  to  this  end,
and  for  some  time  had  little  success.  Krafft-Ebing  (Lehrbuch  der
Psychiatrie^  2d  ed.,  II.  146)  mentions  one  case  where  a  patient  suffer-
ing from  Primare  Verrucktheit  was  accustomed  to  say  that,  as  he  fell
asleep  at  night,  he  sometimes  heard  voices  telling  him  what  he
was  to  dream  that  night,  and  he  dreamt  accordingly.  This  looks
like  our  desired  form  of  hallucination  of  memory.  But  only  re-
cently, and  very  opportunely,  have  I  met  with  two  cases,  fully
described,  in  the  Archie  f.  Psychiairie  (XVIII.,  397),  by  Prof.  Emil
Kraepelin.  Kraepelin  himself  had  already  distinguished  the  very
class  of  hallucinations  of  memory  of  which  I  was  in  search.  He
speaks  of  it  (1.  c,  p.  395)  as  represented  by  a  '  small  group  of  ob-
servations.' He  classifies  the  cases  as  those  where  the  patient,  with
perfect  consciousness  of  his  real  surroundings,  regards  these  sur-
roundings as  in  some  respect  familiar  or  expected,  because  a
supposed  previous  warning  has  given  him  notice  of  what  was  to
come.  Kraepelin  adds  that  he  himself  has  sought  in  vain  through
the  literature  for  auj'  previous  account  of  such  hallucinations.  Of
the  two  cases  the  first  is  less  marked.  A  servaut  girl,  twenty  years
of  age,  is  taken  ill,  first  with  hallucinations  and  general  excitement,
and  these  pass  over  into  what  Krafft-Ebing  has  called  Erotomania,


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  369

i.e.,  innocent  love-madness  of  the  Elaine  or  Ophelia  type.  The  actual
lover  had  in  this  case  been  a  soldier.  In  her  madness  the  girl  con-
verts him  into  a  prince,  and  expects  a  wonderful  future.  In  the
asylum  she  declares,  from  time  to  time,  when  a  new  event  attracts
her  notice,  that  her  lover  not  long  since  predicted  it  to  her.  So  a
change  of  plxysicians  in  the  asylum  has  been  prophesied  to  her.  And,
in  particular,  when  she  is  sent  away  to  another  place,  she  remembers
at  once  precisely  how  her  lover  had  predicted  this  event  also,  and  in
what  words.  The  second  case,  which  Kraepelin' regards  as  'quite
classical,'  is  one  of  Primare  Verrucktheit.  A  young  commercial
traveller,  who  from  childhood  up  had  been  eccentric,  ill-tempered,  and
foppish,  devoted  to  fine  toilets  and  to  money-spending,  but  otherwise
free  from  vices,  first  makes  himself  impossible  in  business  by  continual
quarrels,  and  then  begins  to  discover  that  he  is  a  person  of  conse-
quence, whose  life  is  the  object  of  great  consideration  on  the  part  of
both  friends  and  enemies.  The  Fliegende  Blatter  publishes  para-
graphs about  him  ;  the  journal  Ueber  Land  und  Meer  makes  cari-
catures of  him.  At  last  he  reads  in  the  newspapers  that  he  is  a
promising  pretender  to  the  throne,  and  so  he  reaches  the  asylum.
He  appears  at  first  very  cool  and  rational,  and  evades  discussion  of
all  delicate  subjects.  But  at  length  he  begins  to  confide  to  the  phy-
sician his  curious  observation  that  nearly  all  the  patients  in  the  asylum
are  known  to  him  from  previous  experience  or  from  warnings.  In
fact,  he  heard  in  conversation  some  time  before  he  reached  the  asylum
all  the  details  concerning  everybody  there,  and  concerning  the  man-
agement of  the  establishment.  Characteristic  is  his  assertion,  given
in  Kraepelin's  words  (p.  399),  that  when  he  heard  these  things
spoken  of  before  he  came,  the  matter  did  not  especially  attract  his
attention.  But  when  he  saw  the  various  things  and  people,  these
reminded  him  ere  long,  he  said,  of  the  previous  conversations.  Such
assurances  from  the  patient  were  not  in  this  case  occasional  incidents,
but  soon  became  fixed  features  of  the  illness.  The  asylum,  so  the
patient  said,  had  once  beer  described  in  detail  in  the  Fliegende
Blatter.  The  chapel  also  appeared  well  known  to  him  from  previous
descriptions.  The  news  of  the  day  was  sometimes  a  matter  not  so
much  of  direct  presentiment  to  him  as  of  curious  and  imperfect  coin-
cidence with  long  past  conversations.  Thus,  a  murder  being  com-
mitted in  Munich,  he  remembers,  after  hearing  of  it,  how  he  had  not
long  since  been  asked  about  that  very  street  where  the  murder  was
committed.  In  short,  his  abnormal  memory  gave  him,  in  the  form  of
somewhat  slowly  formed,  but  always  irresistible,  hallucinations,  all
our  own  best-known  types  of  reported  presentiments.  Meanwhile  he
possessed  an  actually  very  good  memory  for  real   events.     In   addi-


370  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

tion  to  the  delusions  of  memory,  the  same  patient  had  elaborate
systematic  delusions,  which  included  among  other  things  the  discovery
that  a  great  quantity  of  what  he  read  in  the  papers  had  been  really
composed  by  himself.

"  Had  I  not  been  in  search  of  evidence  of  the  possibility  of  this
form  of  hallucination,  I  should  probably  not  have  read  Kraepelin's
article,  at  least  at  the  present  time.  I  hardly  need  add  that  I  find
in  his  discussion  no  effort  to  draw  analogies  with  sane  presentiments
of  the  type  discussed  in  4  Phantasms  of  the  Living.'  The  fact,
however,  mentioned  by  Kraepelin  (1.  c,  p.  428),  that  our  so  well-
known  .hallucination  of  the  ordinary  double-memory  consciousness
appears  almost  exclusively  among  the  sane,  encourages  me  to  sup-
pose that  this  new  form  of  double  memory,  once  verified  as  an  exist-
ing fact  among  the  insane,  may  be  found  to  be  an  incident  of  normal
life  sufficiently  frequent  to  explain  a  large  number  of  '  telepathic '
incidents.  At  all  events,  if  there  is  any  fair  chance  of  such  an  ex-
planation for  stories  that  are  not  based  upon  purely  documentary
evidence,  nearly  the  whole  mass  of  narrative  facts  in  the  4  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living '  will  have  to  be  reviewed  with  this  hypothesis
in  mind.

"  The  foregoing  suggestion,  as  soon  as  formulated,  seems  so  simple
and  commonplace  that  I  should  not  have  ventured  to  bring  it  forward
here  had  I  found  Messrs.  Gurney  and  Myers  apparently  well  aware  of
the  force  of  such  a  consideration.  I  have  looked  in  vain  in  *  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,'  as  well  as  in  Mr.  Gurney's  reply  to  Professor
Preyer,  for  evidence  of  any  consciousness  of  this  hypothesis.  I  need
not  say  that  the  value  of  the  collection  of  stories  in  4  Phantasms  of
the  Living'  is  in  no  wise  affected  for  scientific  purposes  by  the  dis-
covery that  these  stories  may  prove  rather  the  existence  of  a  typical
hallucination  of  the  human  memory,  than  the  reality  of  4  telepathic '
communication  between  mind  and  mind.  If  it  is  the  truth  as  such,
that  we  want  to  '  bag,'  it  is  not  ours  to  decide  whether  the  truth
shall  turn  out  to  be  a  wild  goose  or  some  other  fowl."

The  new  evidence  lhat  I  have  to  present  upon  the  subject  of  my
letter  to  Mind  is  varied,  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  fairly  convincing
as  to  the  actual  existence  of  pseudo-presentiments.  Of  course,  in
classing  for  this  one  purpose,  as  belonging  to  one  group  with
Kraepelin's  insane  cases,  a  large  number  of  the  experiences  of  some
of  our  best  and  most-honored  correspondents,  I  fear  no  misunder-
standings. What  occurs  as  a  regularly  repeated  phenomenon  in  an
insane  case  can  occur  sporadically  and  rarely  in  perfectly  sane  life.
This  we  all  realize,  and  every  hallucination,  yes,  even  every  mere
dream,  is  an  instance  of  a  state  in  sane  life  that  more  or  less  exactly


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  371

resembles  symptoms  such  as  persist  through  the  whole  course  of  cer-
tain forms  of  insanity.  These  pseudo-presentiments  do,  then,  as  I
maintain,  occur  sporadically  among  the  sane,  even  as  they  occurred
persistently  in  Kraepelin's  young  patient.

I  begin  the  evidence  with  a  comparatively  insignificant,  but  still
suggestive,  case.     Possibly  here  is  a  mere  coincidence :  —

[8]  {From  J.  E.,  Boston,  Mass.)

On  the  night  of  April  17,  1888,  I  had  a  (for  me)  quite  vivid  dream,  in
which  I  caused  a  guitar  to  fall  and  break,  injuring  in  particular  the  head,
which  was  so  broken  as  to  show  almost  the  whole  of  the  white  tuning-
pins.

On  the  following  morning  about  9.30,  while  in  a  horse-car  near  Hollis
street,  a  passenger  in  going  out  stumbled  against  a  violin  case  held  by  a
lady,  which  fell  to  the  floor,  and,  opening,  threw  out  a  violin,  stringless,
and  with  the  head  broken  off.

The  foregoing  may  be,  however,  no  coincidence,  but  an  instance
of  a  curious  incident  attracting  the  narrator's  attention,  and  there-
upon producing  a  sort  of  secondary  image  of  itself,  —  a  psychical
mirage  in  the  form  of  a  seemingly  remembered  dream,  which  had
very  probably  never  taken  place  at  all.  But  if  the  hypothesis  is
barely  possible  in  this  instance,  how  about  its  value  when,  as  in  the
following  case,  that  which  I  suppose  to  be  a  pseudo-presentiment  is
a  repeated  experience,  and  has  curious,  characteristic  relations  to
other  dreamy  fantasies.     Here  is  the  statement  of  our  informant :  —

[9]  (From  E.    C.  P.,   Cambridge,  Mass.)

I,  E.  C.  P. ,  of  Harvard  College,  Cambridge,  Mass. ,  do  hereby  declare  :  —
I  have  been  in  situations  and  experienced  certain  incidents  of  actual
occurrence  which,  at  the  time,  startled  me  vividly,  upon  recollecting  that
previous  to  occurrence  of  said  situation,  or  experiencing  of  certain  inci-
dents, I  had  previously  had  a  mental  vision  of  some  future  time  in  which
said  situation  or  experiencing  of  incidents  would  be  realities.  I  can  rec-
ollect distinctly  three  such  coincidences.

I  have  in  mind  now  very  often  a  scene,  always  alike,  in  which  I  seem
to  be  standing  with  a  female  figure  alone  upon  a  lofty  mountain  top
watching  the  sun  rise.  I  have  clearly  had  this  scene  in  my  mind  at  least
four  times,  always  exactly  the  same  as  to  details.

Our  correspondent  supplied  us  with  an  outline  sketch  of  his
romantic  phantom  trysting-place,  and,  in  answer  to  further  inquiries,
added  an  account  of  one  of  his  fulfilled  presentiments :  —

There  lingers  in  my  mind  an  obscure  recollection  (truthful  even  if
hazy)  of  a  dining-table  with  certain  people  enjoying  a  meal  at  it,  and  some


372  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

turn  that  the  conversation  took  that  sent  the  laugh  around  the  table.
Suddenly,  some  remark  caused  me  to  stop  laughing  suddenly,  and  I
repeated  to  myself  the  words,  and  added  (out  loud  I  think,  though  it  may
have  been  to  myself),  "  Why,  those  are  the  very  words  !  "

There  came  to  me  a  distinct  recollection  that  I  had  foreseen  the
dining-room  with  its  occupants ;  had  been  conscious  that  there  was  merri-
ment, and  heard  the  words  before  which  were  then,  in  reality,  uttered,
with  the  identical  tenor  of  voice  and  shade  of  inflection.

I  think  the  foreseeing  was  one  particular  time  when  I  was  in  the
United  States,  the  realization  I  think  almost  surely  was  in  Bermuda.

I  think  I  can  make  myself  plain  by  saying  that  I  distinctly  remember
this  foreseeing  and  realizing  to  have  actually  occurred,  and  to  have  had
mental  recognition,  but  all  knowledge  of  definite  time  or  place  has  gone
from  me.

Mat  22, 1888.


This  dim   recollection   suggests   the  well-known   reminiscence   in
Tennyson's  "  Maud  "  :     "  Viziers  nodding  together  in  some  Arabian
night."     But  the  very  defects  of  the  narrative  constitute,  to  speak
not  very  paradoxically,  its  merits.     Here  is  plainly  a  subjective  ex-
perience, of   no   historical    importance    whatever,  because    it  is  far
too  dreamy.     Yet  just  that  makes  it  instructive.     It  is  almost,  but
not  quite,  an  ordinary  case  of  doubleness  of  memory,  —  the  vague
feeling,   "  I  have  been  here  before,"  which  so  many  people  report
and  know.     Yet  the  not  quite^  shows  us  that  we  are  on  the  border-
land of  another  kind  of  experience.       Our  correspondent  feels  not
exactly,     "I  have  seen  and  heard  this  all  before;"  but  he  rather
feels,   "I  have  been  warned  of  this  before  —  warned  in  the  United
States  of    what  now  occurs   in  Bermuda."       Here  we    are   on   the
boundary   line    between    the   pseudo-presentiment  proper   and   that
ordinary  double  vision  of  memory  from  which  one  must  of  course
carefully  distinguish  our.  new  form  of  typical  hallucination.     In  the
next  case  that  I  shall  cite  we  have  crossed  the  boundary  line,  and
are   dealing    with   a   pair   of   most   beautiful    pseudo-presentiments.
They  belong,  to  be  sure,  so  many  years  back  in  time  that,  were  it
not  for  the    person    from  whom    they   come,  and    for  the    evidence
that  one  of  the  supposed  presentiments  was  mentioned  a  good  many
years  since,  nearer  to  the  time  when  it  was  experienced,  I  should
hardly  venture  to  use  them  as  evidence.     A  well-known  gentleman
of   a  suburban  community  has,   namely,  a  reminiscence  concerning
Mr.    Lowell's  Commemoration  Ode,  and  another  concerning  Presi-
dent Lincoln's  speech  at  Gettysburg,  both  of  which,  with  the  com-
ments of  Mr.  Lowell  himself  in  a  letter  to  Prof.  Wm.  James.  I  am
able  to  quote  here.     The  position  of  our  informant,  Mr.  W.,  leaves


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  373

no  question  as  to  his  general  good  judgment  and  his  integrity,  and
what  he  remembers  is  this  :  —

[10]  My  dear  Mr.  James,  —  I  passed  the  night  hefore  commemoration
day  on  a  lounge  in  Hollis  21,  the  room  of  my  college  chum  H.,  who
had  been  tutor  since  our  graduation,  three  years  before.  I  woke
(somewhat  early,  I  should  say)  saying  to  myself  these  words:  "And
what  they  dare  to  dream  of  dare  to  die  for."  I  was  enough  awake  to
notice  the  appropriateness  of  the  words  to  the  occasion,  but  was  sleepy
enough  to  wonder  whether  they  really  expressed  a  lofty  thought,  or  were
lofty  only  in  sound.  Before  I  bad  made  up  my  mind  I  dropped  to
sleep  again.

In  the  afternoon  I  was  in  about  the  middle  of  the  tent.  Mr.  Lowell
stood  under  Hollis,  at  nearly  the  same  table.  I  heard  very  distinctly
as  he  read  "  Those  love  her  best."  I  felt  that  something  was  coming
which  was  familiar,  and  as  he  ended  the  line  I  felt  that  I  could  repeat  the
next  one,  and  I  did  so,  ahead  of  him.  But  as  we  proceeded  I  was  con-
founded with  the  fact  that  apparently  my  line  would  not  rhyme  with  his.
As  I  said  "  die  for,"  he  said  "  do."  I  spent  some  minutes  in  trying  to  de-
termine whether  I  liked  his  sentiment  or  mine  the  most.

That  is  all.  After  twenty-one  years,  details  are  dim.  Some  years
ago,  just  before  Mr.  Lowell  sailed  for  England,  I  sent  him  a  statement,
more  detailed  probably  than  this ;  but  no  doubt  it  became  carbonic  acid
and  water  before  he  left  the  house.

I  do  not  know  that  I  have  any  further  contribution  to  make  to  the
facts  which  you  are  collecting.  On  the  day  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  address  at
Gettysburg  I  was  walking  at  about  the  time  when,  as  I  supposed,  the
exercises  were  taking  place.  Eemembering  this  I  tried  to  invent  such  a
speech  as  Mr.  Lincoln,  or  I  in  his  place,  would  probably  deliver.  I  was
astonished  the  next  morning  to  find  that  I  had  duplicated  his  address,
from  the  third  or  fourth  sentence  to  the  end;  and  to  the  passage  "  It  is
for  us  the  living  rather  to  be  dedicated  "  I  had  given  almost  exactly  the
words.

But  I  am  vain  enough  to  think  that  this  coincidence  is  to  be  explained
in  a  different  way  from  the  other.

Hoping  that  these  reminiscences  may  be  amusing  to  your  society,

I  am  very  truly  yours,


Here  follows  the  letter  of  Mr.  Lowell,  who  was  asked  what  he
could  contribute  to  a  possible  use  of  this  experience  for  the  purpose
of  illustrating  telepathy  :  —

17th  Feb.,  1888.
Dear  Dr.  James  :  —  My  Commemoration  Ode  was  very  rapidly  written,
and  came  to  me  unexpectedly,  for  I  had  told  Child,  who  was  one  of  the
committee  (I  suppose) ,  that  he  must  look  for  nothing  from  me.  I  sat  up
all  the  night  before  the  ceremony,  writing  and  copying  out  what  I  had
written  during  the  day.  I  think  most  of  it  was  composed  on  that  last  day.
I  have  no  doubt  the  verse  quoted  by  Mr.  W.  came  to  me  in  a  flash,  but


374  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

whether  during  that  last  night  or  not  I  cannot  say.  Perhaps  my  MS.
would  show,  if  I  had  kept  it,  or  if  anybody  else  has.  Child  will  remember
my  taking  him  apart  under  an  elm,  between  Massachusetts  and  the  Law
School,  that  morning,  that  I  might  read  him  a  part  of  the  Ode,  "to  see  if
it  would  do,"  for  'twas  so  fresh  that  I  knew  not,  having  probably  not  even
had  time  to  read  it  over.  It  was  such  a  new  thing  in  more  senses  than
one.

I  recollect  Mr.  W.'s  letter,  and  think  it  was  substantially  like  that  to  you.
I  did  not  burn  it,  I  am  sure,  and  'twill,  no  doubt,  turn  up  somewhere  in  my
haystack  of  letters  when  I  am  "  up  back  of  the  meetin'-house,"  as  Yankees
used  to  say  while  there  were  any  Yankees  left.

But  what  he  says  about  the  Gettysburg  address  waters  my  interest  in
what  he  had  told  me  about  the  verse  in  my  Ode.  Had  I  known  of  his
talent  beforehand  I  might  have  saved  myself  a  very  killing  piece  of  work.
That  one  day's  labor  mi  fece  magro.  I  believe  I  lost  ten  pounds  of  flesh,
which  it  took  me  weeks  to  pick  up  again.  Vaya  f or  a  single  verse,  but  so
much  of  Lincoln's  incomparable  English?  Fancy  must  come  in  for  a
share  in  the  miracle.  A  man  who  has  heard  so  many  speeches  as  I,  can,
alas,  make  a  pretty  good  forecast  of  what  is  coming;  but  I  trust  that  Mr.
W.  has  not  been  exposed  to  such  trials.

There  is  one  painful  suggestion  in  the  fact  of  Mr.  W.'s  anticipation,  which
I  hardly  venture  to  speak  of.  Was  the  verse  already  da  ?  Did  I  steal  it?
Not  to  my  knowledge ;  but  perhaps  it  might  be  well  to  set  a  literary  de-
tective on  my  trail.

I  return  the  letter.

Faithfully  yours,

J.  K.  LOWELL.

An  experience  as  old  as  this  one  is  no  very  satisfactory  evidence,  of
course,  but  still  it  seems,  after  all,  tolerably  clear  that,  at  the  two  times
in  question,  our  correspondent,  a  literary  student  himself,  and  one
much  interested  in  the  study  of  style,  was  so  deeply  struck  by  these
two  passages  that  they  produced  in  his  mind,  in  this  irresistible
fashion,  memory  hallucinations  similar  to  those  which  Kraepelin's
paranoiac  patient  so  regularly  had.  Notice  the  similarity  in  detail.
Kraepelin's  patient  recognizes  as  his  own  product  whatever  he  finds
to  be  of  interest  in  the  newspapers  that  he  reads.  Our  informant,
in  these  two  cases,  where  his  literary  interest  was  excited  in  an  es-
pecially passionate  way,  recognized  as  passages  before  known  to
him,  and  as  even  composed  by  him,  the  very  words  that  had  so
much  excited  his  interest.  That  this  was  a  case  of  prophecy  after
the  fact  no  one  can  easily  doubt.  The  puzzle  would  be  to  see  how
so  sincere  an  impression  could  arise.  Our  hypothesis  partially  ex-
plains this  fact  by  the  excitement  of  the  moment  when  our  corre-
spondent first  heard  or  read  the  passages  in  question,  and  by  the
general  law  that  makes  pseudo- presentiments  likely  to  happen.

But  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  the  existence  of  a  still  un-


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  375

recognized  class  of  mental  facts  recent  instances  are  peculiarly  val-
uable. My  next  case  is  one  related  but  a  week  after  the  events  in
question,  which  occurred  in  December  of  last  year.  Of  course,  if
pseudo-presentiments  exist,  they  may  easily  be  created  or  reinforced
by  dreams.  In  the  case  now  to  be  reported,  a  man  had  heard  a  grue-
some bit  of  bad  news.  My  theory  is,  that  he  dreamt  about  it  when
next  he  slept,  and  then,  by  an  instantaneous  and  irresistible  halluci-
nation of  memory,  projected  the  dream  backwards  so  as  to  make  it
seem  prophetic,  or  at  least  telepathic.  The  informant  is  a  mem-
ber of  Harvard  University,  whose  statement  was  taken  down  and
signed.

[11]  (From  F.  C.  W.)

One  week  from  to-night  (Friday,  Dec.  9)  I  had  a  vivid  dream.  I  was
in  a  store  with  a  friend,  selecting  a  pistol.  My  friend  was  purchasing  the
pistol  with  the  intention  of  committing  suicide.  I  seemed  to  favor  my
friend's  project,  and  was  busy  helping  him  pick  out  a  suitable  one.  I  can
see  the  store,  the  pistols,  and  all,  very  vividly  now.  The  picture  has  fixed
itself  in  my  mind.

The  following  night,  my  friend,  G.  Z.,  shot  himself  in  a  New  York
hotel.

I  did  not  mention  the  dream  to  any  one,  thinking  it  of  no  consequence.
The  shooting  was  a  great  shock  to  me,  as  I  had  no  suspicion  of  such  a
thing.

(Signed)  E.  C.  W.

The  gentleman  from  whom  we  received  the  case  adds :  —

He  (i.e.,  F.  C.  W.)  saw  Mr.  Z.  for  a  few  minutes  "Wednesday  night,
but  there  was  no  conversation  that  would  in  any  way  suggest  pistols  or
suicide.  He  does  not  recognize  the  store,  though  he  can  form  a  vivid
picture  of  it.     In  the  dream  it  seemed  as  if  it  were  a  New  York  shop.

This  is  correct.

(Signed)  E.  C.  W.

From  Mr.  F.  C.  W.  we  have  received  this  further  statement :  —

As  was  said  before,  the  shop  seemed  to  be  in  New  York.  It  was  deep
and  narrow,  and  we  were  at  the  further  end  of  it.  Crosby's,  on  the  cor-
ner of  Washington  and  Avon  streets,  Boston,  is  the  kind  of  shop,  save
that  it  was  not  on  a  corner,  and  was  dark  at  the  further  end,  there  being
only  front  windows.  The  shop-keeper  was  short  and  round,  with  gray
side-whiskers  and  bald  head.  He  stood  behind  counter,  two-thirds  down
the  store,  on  left.  My  friend  received  the  pistols  across  the  glass  case
(which  was  full  of  them),  from  the  man,  and  passed  them  to  me  for  in-
spection. I  was  standing  some  four  feet  away  from  the  counter,  and  nearer
the  end  of  the  shop.  We  decided  upon  one,  — a  very  handsome  make,  — >
and  took  it.     We  were,  seemingly,  selecting  it  for  suicidal  purposes.

(Signed)  E.  C.  W.


376  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

In  a  third  statement  F.  C.  W.  further  assures  us  of  the  coincidence
by  saying,  "I  was  certainly  dreaming  of  Mr.  Z.,  as  his  face  was
the  most  vivid  part  of  the  whole  picture."

I  think  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  dream  actually  oc-
curred, only,  in  all  probability,  it  followed  the  news  of  the  suicide.
That  we  are  here  dealing  with  no  exaggeration  of  the  ordinary  sort,
with  no  myth-making  of  the  kind  so  customary  when  people  have
often  repeated  a  tale  for  the  benefit  of  their  friends,  is  sufficiently
clear  from  the  freshness  and  the  elaborate  detail  of  the  story  in  their
combination.

My  next  case  has  the  advantage  not  only  of  being  ver}r  recent  in
date,  but  also  of  coming  from  one  of  our  best-known  correspondents,
a  lady  of  this  city,  whose  accuracy  is  undoubted  except  as  to  the  fact
of  what  I  suppose  to  be  the  irresistible  pseudo-presentiment  itself,
which  of  course  her  own  judgnent  could  not  be  expected  to  correct,
as  she  did  not  know  it  to  be  possible;  as  usual  in  these  reports,  I
give  no  name  :  —

[12]  Boston,  March  28,  1888.

I  have  long  intended  complying  with  your  request  to  write  out  the  fol-
lowing experience,  but  time  has  prevented.

On  the  morning  of  July  6,  1887,  I  wakened  about  5  A.M.  from  a  singu-
larly profound  sleep,  and  with  a  feeling  of  wonderful  freshness  and
elasticity,  as  if  unconscious  of  a  body  at  all.  I  had  fallen  asleep  about
4  P.M.  the  previous  afternoon.  Eor  some  days  the  heat  had  been  intense,
and  I  had  had  very  little  sleep,  so  on  the  previous  afternoon  I  had  thrown
myself  down  for  a  little  sleep  before  dinner,  telling  my  maid  not  to  let  me
be  disturbed  by  any  call,  and  thus  my  slumber  had  been  prolonged  till  the
following  morning,  and  I  wakened  in  a  kind  of  semi-bewilderment,  and
looked  out  in  the  gray  dawn,  hardly  knowing  whether  I  was  in  the  to-
day or  the  yesterday.  I  recalled  the  vivid  dream  from  which  I  wakened,
to  this  effect.  In  the  dream  I  was  reading  aloud  to  a  friend,  Miss  N. ,  a  letter
just  received  from  another  friend,  Miss  T.  This  letter  was,  in  my  dream,
written  on  the  Fourth  of  July  (two  days  previous),  and  bore  playful
inscriptions  of  the  national  flag,  and  related  to  the  health  of  the  mother
of  the  writer,  and  to  a  new  poem  that  the  writer  had  just  produced.  The
entire  subject-matter  of  the  letter  was  perfectly  clear  in  my  mind.  On
rising  I  went  to  my  parlor,  where  lay  untouched  the  mail  of  the  previous
evening.  In  it  was  a  letter  from  my  friend  Miss  T. ,  of  the  identical  date
(July  4),  and  the  identical  subject-matter  of  the  dream,  even  to  the  play-  .
ful  illustrations  of  the  stars  and  stripes.

My  theory  is,  that  in  this  unusually  profound  sleep  my  spirit  looked  out
of  the  body,  and  was  so  far  released  as  to  read  this  letter  with  the  spiritual
sight.  I  wakened  with  an  indescribable  feeling  of  having  been  abroad,  so
to  speak,  and  was  conscious  of  an  exceptional  elasticity  and  freshness  of
feeling.

The  letter  in  question  I  believe  I  gave  to  you  at  the  time.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  377

Our  correspondent's  hypothesis  is  not  ours,  but  what  we  find  to  be
of  especial  importance  is  her  account  of  her  eondition  at  the  moment.
She  wakes  from  the  long  sleep  uncommonly  sensitive,  impressionable,
active-minded.  She  opens  the  friend's  letter,  and  at  once  (such  is
our  hypothesis)  the  feeling  comes  over  her,  "  Why,  I  just  dreamed  all
this  before  I  woke  !  "

But  next  I  come  to  a  statement  that,  if  there  were  no  other  evi-
dence, would  by  itself  suffice  to  show  how  the  ordinary  vague  experi-
ence of  double  memory  does,  in  some  cases,  take  forms  which  give  it
the  character  of  a  pseudo-presentiment.  I  quote  in  full  the  letter  of
one  who  proves  in  this  connection  a  very  helpful  correspondent,  Mr.
T.  L.  D.,  of  New  York  city  :  —


[13]  I  was  very  pleased  [he  says,  under  date  of  Dec.  13,  1887]  to  read  the
article  .  .  .  in  "Herald"  of  last  Sunday,  and  think  it  very  interest-
ing, especially  to  me.  I  am  rather  a  sceptic  in  the  belief  in  dreams,  etc. ;
but  it  seems  strange  that  I  almost  invariably  have  dreams  before  anything
unusual  happens,  indeed  so  much  so  that  after  the  occurrence  of  these
dreams  I  always  look  for  something  unusual.  What  I  wish  more  particu-
larly to  bring  under  your  notice  is  the  prevalence  of  what  I  call  recurrent
ideas.  Formerly  it  was  continually  happening  to  me,  but  not  so  now.  I
will  endeavor  in  some  shape  to  describe  what  I  mean,  but  the  real  facts  as
regards  myself  I  could  not  possibly  put  into  language.  Sometimes,  when
in  a  room,  something  would  be  going  on  of  which  I  had  a  most  vivid  recol-
lection of  having  occurred  before,  and  I  could  always  tell  what  was  going
to  happen  next,  which  has  been  fully  carried  out  in  precisely  the  manner  I
had  realized.  1  could  have  no  control  under  the  circumstances,  but  only
knew  exactly  what  is  next  going  to  happen.  Now,  I  am  a  fairly  educated
man,  not  at  all  given  to  superstition,  but  it  has  often  and  often  unsettled
and  upset  my  mind  for  days  when  this  has  happened.  Even  in  the  day-
time these  ideas  frequently  come  to  me.  Perhaps  in  the  course  of  your
deliberations  you  may  possibly  assign  some  reason  for  same;  and  apolo-
gizing for  trouble,

Yours,  etc.


P.S. — I  am  now  salesman  in  one  of  N.Y.'s  largest  chemical  houses.
Age,  35.  These  things  most  frequently  occurred  between  the  ages  of
22-30.


Here  our  correspondent,  for  a  term  of  years,  found  pseudo-pre-
sentiments a  constantly  disturbing  factor  in  his  busy  and  practical
life,  and  so  strong  was  the  experience  as  frequently  to  "  unsettle  and
upset"  his  mind  for  days  together,  i.e.,  the  phenomenon  was  attended
with  vexatious  confusions  of  consciousness,  or  was,  in  other  words,
a  very  mildly  pathological  condition.     As  he  approaches  middle  life


378  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

this   condition  vanishes  from  waking  life,  but  his    dreams  are  still
often  full  of  it.1

Can  there  be  any  doubt,  then,  that  the  pseudo-presentiment  is  a  vera
causa,  accounting  for  man}T  otherwise  incomprehensible  experiences?
The  final  section  of  this  paper  will,  indeed,  show  plainly  enough  that  I
have  no  desire  to  use  this  hypothesis  beyond  its  own  field,  and  that  I
am  very  far  indeed  from  imagining  it  to  be  a  settlement  of  the  ques-
tion of  telepathy.  But  this  society  is  not  here  to  settle  the  affairs  of
the  universe  overnight,  and  if  anybody  either  puts  arbitrary  limits
d  priori  to  the  hypotheses  that  shall  here  be  propounded,  or,  on  the
other  hand,  tries  to  settle  any  question  either  by  a  vague  guess,  or  by
a  sneer,  or  by  anything  but  a  square  looking  of  facts  in  the  face,  we
all  know  what  to  do  with  him.  My  present  hypothesis,  only  under-
takes to  look  certain  facts  in  the  face  ;  the  facts  that  do  not  belong
to  its  province  rest  or  soar  in  their  own  regions,  and  it  plods  along  in
its  humble  way  in  its  appointed  path.

What  it  can  do,  however,  I  must  exemplify  by  cases  that  still  more
full}'  establish  its  rights  to  existence.  For  this  further  study  I  have
here  eight  cases,  each  involving  either  one  narrative,  or  a  group  of
narratives.  All  of  these  cases  I  regard  as  coming  from  sincere  per-
sons, and  all  of  them  suggest  to  my  mind  more  strongly  the  hypothe-
sis of  pseudo-presentiment  than  they  do  any  other.  They  are  not  all
of  them  cases  of  first  rank,  by  any  means.  Lapse  of  time  or  inexact-
ness of  statement  has  left  much  room  in  some  of  them  for  other
sources  of  error  to  creep  in.  Others  are  again  decidedly  good  cases.
I  give  them  for  what  they  are  worth.  In  addition  to  these  cases,
however,  I  have  material  which  has  come  to  us  from  two  distinctly
insane  persons,  neither  of  whom,  however,  was  at  the  time  of  writing
under  asylum  treatment.  Both  of  these  persons  are  capable  of  very
fluent  and  moderately  coherent  statement,  and  both  of  them,  in  the
course  of  their  elaborate  account  of  inner  life,  have  supplied  us  with
unconscious  testimony  to  the  existence,  in  their  own  cases,  of  typical
pseudo-presentiments.  I  consider  their  contributions  to  this  branch
of  the  investigation  as  a  useful  addition  to  Kraepelin's  material,
although,  of  course,  all  that  these  subjects  can  give  us  on  paper  is
not  nearly  as  valuable  as  even  very  brief  clinical  observations  of  an
expert  might  prove,  and  that  even  as  to  this  minor  matter  of  their
psychology.     I  proceed  first  to  the  normal  cases.

A  series  of  narratives  begin  this  list,  all  coming  from  a  lady,  C.  W.

1  In  Westphal's  Allgemeine  Psychopathologie,  p.  130,  the  phenomenon  of  the  ordinary
"  doubleness  of  memory  "  is  described  as  often  accompanied  by  this  feeling,  "  as  if  one  could
predict  ichat  is  about  to  happen  next."  In  "Westphal's  observations,  however,  this  feeling  re-
mains always  anur  dunkele  Ahnung"  and  never  acquires  the  importance  attributed  to  it  by  our
correspondent.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  379

E.,  who  is  vouched  for  by  a  very  well-known  and  competent  member
of  the  society,  as  a  person  with  whom  he  is  well  acquainted,  "  and
who  is  incapable  of  conscious  misstatement  or  inaccuracy."  All
of  her  experiences,  when  taken  in  connection  with  her  own  very  clear
and  straightforward  replies  to  our  questions,  seem  to  me  sincere  and
well-remembered.  Only  the}'  are  all  of  them,  as  I  think,  pseudo-pre-
sentiments. An  exciting  event  occurs,  and  the  lady  unconsciously  pro-
jects a  presentiment  of  it  into  the  past.  She  is  most  likely  to  do  this
when  she  is  in  a  poor  state  of  health,  or  is  otherwise  over-sensitive.

[14]        •  February  4,  1888.

(a.)  In  Chicago,  about  December,  1869,  I  dreamed  that  an  engine  ran
into  a  heavy  stone  wall  in  a  dark  place,  causing  great  commotion  and
throwing  down  the  wall.  I  told  my  dream  at  the  breakfast-table,  because
it  seemed  so  real  to  me.  A  few  moments  after  I  told  it  a  member  of  the
family  read  from  the  newspaper  that  in  the  night  a  steam  fire-engine,  in
passing  through  the  tunnel,  ran  into  the  wall,  causing  a  serious  break,  so
that  it  would  be  obliged  to  be  closed  for  repairs.

(b.)  In  Worcester,  July,  1874,  I  dreamed  that  a  friend  was  danger-
ously ill,  and  that  her  brother  was  extremely  anxious  about  her.  Her
brother  and  I  seemed  to  be  spending  much  time  in  the  horse-cars  hunting
for  nurses.  I  wrote  my  sister  of  the  dream,  I  was  so  impressed  with  its
vividness.

In  October  the  lady  called  upon  my  sister  and  me,  and  told  us  that  she
was  dangerously  ill  in  July,  and  that  her  brother  was  quite  worn  out  with
anxiety.

I  was  not  at  all  intimate  with  the  family,  nor  had  they  been  in  my
thoughts  previous  to  the  dream.

(c.)  In  Chicago,  1879,  I  had  a  disturbing  dream  of  sailors  in  distress  at
sea.  The  sea  was  tempestuous,  and  the  sailors  were  hanging  to  the  rig-
ging calling  piteously  for  help.  I  told  the  dream  at  breakfast,  and  while
I  was  telling  it  we  saw  the  lifeboat  rushing  through  the  avenue.  We  ran
to  the  back  windows,  from  which  we  saw  a  schooner  and  the  men  hanging
to  the  rigging  as  in  my  dream.

(d.)  In  Chicago,  January,  1884,  about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I
awoke  from  a  very  vivid  dream  of  a  vessel  at  sea.  At  first,  everything
seemed  bright  and  pleasant.  Then  a  man  came  to  me  and  said  that  the
captain,  whose  name  I  thought  was  Moonshine,  had  mistaken  the  course
of  the  vessel,  and  that  we  were  in  danger.  In  a  few  moments  we  were  all
in  the  water  among  rocks.  I  told  my  dream  because  I  was  impressed
with  its  intense  reality.  In  a  few  hours  we  read  of  the  loss  of  the  "  City  of
Columbus  "  among  the  rocks,  and  in  bright  moonlight,  at  the  hour  I  had
dreamed  of  the  wreck.

In  answer  to  the  questions  suggested  by  these  statements  the  lady
says :  —

I  suppose  it  will  be  no  unexpected  disappointment  to  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research  to  learn  that  I  am  unable  to  answer  their  questions
satisfactorily,  but  I  will  do  the  best  I  can.


380  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

I  think  that  people  who^hear  the  accounts  of  dreams,  and  also  know  of
the  events  in  connection  with  them,  are  often  so  absorbed  in  the  events  as
to  forget  the  dreams,  particularly  if  they  are  contemptuous  of,  or  have  no
interest  in,  what  is  mysterious.  I  will  reply  to  the  questions  in  the  order
that  they  were  given  to  me  :  —

1.  Is  the  contemporary  account  of  the  engine  accident  still  in  your
possession?     No.

2.  Can  accounts  be  obtained  from  any  other  members  of  the  family  to
whom  you  mentioned  your  dream  before  the  account  was  read?     No.

3.  Had  any  member  of  the  family  read  the  account  in  the  newspaper
before  you  had  your  dream?  No;  the  dream  happened  in  the  night,  also
the  accident,  and  I  spoke  of  the  dream  at  breakfast.

Dream  of  1879.

1.  Did  the  room  in  which  you  dreamed  look  over  the  sea,  and  if  so
were  the  blinds  up  or  down?  (Answer.)  My  room  looked  south.  The
lake  was  east  and  the  wreck  north-east,  a  block  north  and  two  blocks  east.
I  could  see  the  lake  from  my  window,  but  not  the  wreck.

2.  Could  you  have  seen  the  ship  before  when  you  were  wide  awake,
and  had  the  dream  afterwards?     (Answer.)     No.

3.  Can  you  obtain  accounts  from  any  other  members  of  your  family  to
whom  you  mentioned  your  dream  at  breakfast?     (Answer.)     No.

Of  the  dream  of  1874  we  find,  after  inquiry,  that  it  is  impossible  to
get  any  account  that  amounts  to  confirmation  from  any  source  but
the  narrator's  own  memory.

Dream  of  1884.

1.  Can  accounts  of  the  dream  of  1884  be  obtained  from  any  persons  to
whom  you  told  it  before  you  heard  of  its  corroboration?  (Answer.)
Possibly.  The  friends  I  was  visiting  are  in  Paris,  and  I  have  not  been
able  to  hear  from  them  for  some  months,  on  account  of  illness  in  their
family.

2.  Had  any  member  of  your  family  read  of*  the  loss  of  the  vessel
before  you  told  your  dream?  (Answer.)  No;  I  dreamed  at  four  A.M.,
—  the  hour  the  vessel  was  wrecked,  —  and  told  it  that  morning  at  break-
fast, and  the  telegram  of  the  news  did  not  reach  Chicago  for  some  hours
later.

3.  Could  it  have  been  possible  that  you  yourself  could  have  read  of  the
loss  of  the  vessel  before  you  had  your  dream?     (Answer.)     No.

4.  How  long  before  your  dream  was  the  ship  lost?  (Answer.)  At  the
very  same  hour.

General  Questions.

1.  Have  you  any  explanation  to  offer  concerning  the  periodical  occur-
rence of  these  dreams,  which  seem  to  have  been  separated  by  intervals  of
five  years?     (Answer.)     No.

2.  Were  you  in  good  health  at  the  time  of  these  dreams?


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  381

Have  you  any  objection  to  stating  your  age?

(Answer.)  At  the  time  of  the  first  dream  I  was  in  perfect  health,  and
very  active  in  mind  and  body.  I  was  under  much  excitement,  in  a  gay
life.

At  the  time  of  the  second  dream  I  was  a  great  invalid.  In  the  evening
I  had  seen  a  boy  thrown  from  a  carriage  and  dangerously  hurt.  At  the
time  of  the  third  dream  I  was  in  fairly  good  health.  At  the  time  of  the
fourth  dream  I  was  in  a  peculiarly  excitable  condition,  preceding  a  seri-
ous illness  of  congestion  of  the  brain  from  blood-poisoning.  My  age  is
thirty-seven.

3.  Are  you  in  the  habit  of  dreaming?     (Answer.)     Yes.

4.  Are  these  the  only  incidents  in  your  experience  where  the  dreams
correspond  with  the  real  facts?     (Answer.)     Yes.

I  have  no  doubt  the  society  will  have  less  respect  for  my  dreams  on
account  of  the  nervous  conditions  I  confess  to ;  but  I  think  nervous  people
are  more  receptive,  and  often  more  acute,  than  those  who  are  not
nervous.  I  always  hear  more,  and  am  more  acutely  conscious,  at  such
times  than  when  in  rugged  health.  I  felt  that  the  dreams  were  unusual
before  I  knew  of  the  corresponding  facts.

Narratives  (a),  (c),  and  (d)  in  this  statement  most  strongly  sug-
gest the  hypothesis  of  psendo- presentiment.  Narrative  (b)  may  bean
ordinary  error  of  memory,  in  view  of  the  length  of  time  that  had
elapsed  between  the  illness  and  the  announcement  of  the  news  to  our
informant,  as  well  as  in  view  of  the  impossibility  of  getting  in  this
case  the  much-needed  confirmation  of  the  letter  that  is  supposed  to
have  been  written.  Our  correspondent's  "  nervous  conditions  "  have
an  obvious  bearing  on  the  theory  that  these  were  all  pseudo-presenti-
ments.

Next  in  order  I  give  a  case  that  belongs  to  a  long-past  period  ;  yet
the  vividness  of  the  memory  of  the  coincidence  in  question  is  hard  to
explain,  in  case  of  a  person  free  from  systematic  superstitions,  unless
we  suppose  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  pseudo-presentiment ;
granting  the  substantial  accuracy  of  our  correspondent's  account  of
his  experience,  the  hypothesis  of  a  pseudo-presentiment  is  simply
irresistible :  —

[15]  (From  M.    V.   F.)

Providence,  K.I.,  Dec.  12,  1887.

Tn  response  to  the  article  on  Psychical  Research  in  the  "  Herald  "  of  to-
day, I  write  you  of  a  dream  of  mine  and  its  connecting  circumstances.

With  as  little  detail  as  possible  it  is  as  follows  :  I  dreamed  of  being  in  a
ship-yard  and  climbing  the  rigging  of  a  vessel  still  on  the  ways,  and  was
accompanied  by  some  person  entirely  unknown  to  me,  nor  bearing  the
slightest  resemblance  to  any  one  whom  I  had  ever  seen.

The  dream  was  forgotten,  apparently,  in  a  few  days.     Some  time  after-


382  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

ward,  certainly  two  years,  my  school-class  had  occasion,  in  connection
with  certain  studies,  to  visit  a  large  factory.

In  a  lower  class,  just  entered  the  school,  was  a  young  man  with  whom
I  had  become  quite  intimate,  and  his  request  to  go  with  us  to  the  factory
was  readily  granted.

Having  finished  our  tour  of  inspection,  my  friend  suggested  that  he  and
I  should  take  a  tramp  into  the  country,  which  we  started  to  do,  passing
on  the  way  a  marine  railway  in  which  a  large  schooner  was  being  repaired.

Never  having  seen  a  ship  hauled  up  on  the  dry  dock,  in  fact  never  hav-
ing been  in  a  ship-yard  before,  we  left  our  intended  road  and  entered  the
yard,  where  he  (not  I)  proposed  climbing  on  shipboard  and  into  the
rigging.

Not  until  we  were  in  a  certain  position  in  the  rigging  and  he  had  made
a  joking  remark,  accompanied  by  a  peculiar  expression  of  countenance,  did
the  circumstances  of  the  dream  occur  to  me.  And  then  when  I  saw  it
work  itself  out,  even  in  the  minutest  details,  after  two  years'  duration,  it
seemed  to  me  rather  curious.

More  recent  is  a  case  which  I  transcribe  from  the  letter  of  a  lady
in  Boston,  a  person  of  well-known  family  and  position,  whom  we
shall  call  Mrs.  X.  :  —

[16]  Boston,  July  15,  1887.

...  It  was  last  December.  I  knew  Mrs.  J.  was  very  ill,  and  either  one
or  two  nights  before  she  died  I  dreamt  that  I  received  a  letter,  directed  to

Mrs.  X. , street.  On  opening  it  I  read  the  first  few  lines,  beginning  with

a  name  (not  my  own  first  name,  but  I  forget  now  what  it  was) ,  and  mourn-
ing the  loss  of  a  mutual  friend ;  in  my  dream  I  knew  the  letter  was  meant
for  Mrs.  Q.  X.  [i.e.,  not  for  our  correspondent,  but  for  a  lady  of  the
same  family  name,  with  whom  our  correspondent  is  not  personally  ac-
quainted, and  who  lives  on  another  street],  and  that  it  was  from  Mrs.  Y.,
in  Paris  [whom  our  correspondent  knows,  but  only  slightly],  on  the  sub-
ject of  Mrs.  J.'s  death.  Next  morning  I  remembered  the  dream  perfectly,
and  the  words  as  much  as  I  had  read  of  the  letter.  Then  came  the  news
of  Mrs.  J.'s  death,  after  which  I  confidently  expected  the  letter,  which  ar-
rived a  fortnight  later,  directed  to  Mrs.  X., street;  and  when  I  opened

it,  it  began  in  exactly  the  words  I  read  in  my  dream.  I  sent  it  to  Mrs.  Q.
X.  [for  whom,  of  course,  it  had  been  meant]  .  .  .  and  she  said  it  was  her
letter,  and  from  Mrs.  Y.    I  cannot  offer  any  explanation  of  my  dream.

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  our  correspondent  can  give  no  pre-
cise dates,  but  remains  confident  about  the  relative  order  of  events  as
described  in  her  first  letter.  Asked  whether  she  mentioned  her  dream
to  any  one  before  its  fulfilment,  Mrs.  X.  replies :  —

I  did  not  mention  my  dream  to  any  one,  except  my  husband,  who  has
forgotten  all  about  it,  and  two  other  people,  about  a  month  later,  I
think.

Our  correspondent  adds  that  her  "  memory  is  very  bad,"  and  that


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  383

she  can  tell  us  nothing  further.  But  she  seems  to  be  free  from  any
systematic  craving  for  wonders,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  experi-
ence was  a  typical  pseudo- presentiment,  which  had  its  origin  at  the
moment  when  she  opened  the  misdirected  letter.

I  shall  put  next  what  I  take  to  be  a  pseudo-presentiment,  relating
to  a  boating  accident.     It  may,  however,  be  a  mere  coincidence.


[17]  (From  F.  G.,  C ,  Minnesota.)

For  the  benefit  of  your  society  I  will  state  the  following  facts  :  —

A  number  of  years  ago  the  writer  was  in  a  boat  alone,  on  a  lake  in  this
State.  It  was  a  beautiful  day  in  May.  Your  correspondent  was  looking
over  the  side  of  the  boat  down  among  tbe  roots  of  the  water-lilies,  which
at  that  season  had  not  yet  commenced  to  grow.  Suddenly  a  feeling  of
impending  evil,  and  a  feeling  that  death  was  near,  came  over  the  occu-
pant of  the  boat.  It  appeared  to  be  an  impression  on  the  mind  ;  nothing
was  seen  or  heard.  The  impression  was  very  vivid ;  can  scarcely  be
described  in  words.  The  next  day  the  writer  heard  that  a  very  near
relative  of  his  came  very  near  death,  by  drowning,  at  the  very  hour  the
singular  impression  was  made  upon  his  mind  in  the  boat.  The  person
who  came  nearly  being  drowned  was  upset  in  a  boat  on  a  river  many
miles  from  the  occupant  of  the  boat  on  the  lake.

The  writer  is  not  superstitious.  Never  had  such  an  experience  before
or  since.  Might  it  not  be  the  mind  has  some  way  of  taking  note  of
events  sometimes,  in  other  manner  than  through  the  usual  sensory  nerves?

I  have  another  experience  that  I  might  relate,  but  it  relates  to  altogether
a  different  branch  of  psychical  research ;  but  I  have  already  said  enough
about  what  is  now  a  very  obscure  subject,  but  which  I  hope  some  day
may  be  made  plain  to  everybody,  that  is,  so  far  as  God  sees  fit  to  let  the
mind  of  mortal  take  cognizance  of  what  we  can't  see  with  our  eyes  or  hoar
with  our  ears.


The  experience  is  plainly  sporadic,  and  I  will  not  dispute  the
possibility  of  using  it  to  illustrate  telepathy.  To  my  mind  it  looks
much  more  like  a  pseudo-presentiment  than  even  like  a  coincidence.
I  am  unable  to  know  more  of  the  narrator  than  his  own  statement
shows.

The  case  which  follows  would  have  no  value,  in  view  of  its  very
great  age,  were  it  not  for  the  peculiar  detail  of  the  narrative.  If
it  is  remembered  with  approximate  accuracy,  it  is  unquestionably  a
pseudo-presentiment.  Our  correspondent's  second  narrative  is  of  a
different  sort,  and  is  given  here  only  as  throwing  light  on  the  general
course  of  her  experience.  Without  confirmation,  a  story  of  1864,  of
the  sort  here  told,  can  neither  be  explained  nor  criticised.  It  lacks
the  points  of  detail  which  make  the  earlier  narrative  valuable.


384  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

[18]  {From  Mrs.  J.  W.  B.)

March  26,  1888.

I  shall  try  to  give  you  a  correct  account  of  the  dream  concerning  which
you  inquire,  and  trust  I  shall  not  seem  verbose.  Perhaps  it  is  in  order
for  me  to  state  that  my  memory  —  except  where  figures  are  in  question  —
has  always  been  better  than  the  average.  I  distinctly  remember  the
dream  and  attendant  circumstances,  but  can  come  no  nearer  the  date  than
that  it  was  in  the  summer  of  1855.

I  was  then  a  young  wife;  my  friend,  Miss  H.,  a  girl  seventeen.  My
relations  with  all  her  family  were  of  an  intimate  and  affectionate  charac-
ter. The  death  of  her  mother,  five  years  previous  to  the  time  of  which  I
write,  was  the  deepest  grief  of  my  girlhood.  Several  months  before  the
dream,  while  her  father  was  in  the  West,  where  he  expected  to  be  for  a
year  or  more,  some  [circumstances  which  do  not  affect  the  narrative]
led  to  the  removal  of  Miss  H.  and  her  young  brother  to  Provi-
dence, R.I.  They  were  all  originally  from  that  place,  and  the  young
people  were  in  charge  of  relatives  of  their  father.  An  elder  brother  had
settled  in  Providence,  and  I  did  not  think  any  of  them  likely  to  return  to
Louisville.  One  night,  about  a  year  after  this  change  of  residence,  I
dreamed  that  I  was  sitting  sewing  in  my  room,  which  opened  into  a  hall.  I
heard,  I  thought,  a  knock  on  the  door, —  a  timid,  tentative  sort  of  a  knock;
went  to  the  door,  opened  it,  and  saw  standing  there  Miss  H.,  in  a  gray
dress,  her  head  hanging  down,  and  her  face  half-hidden  by  what  was  then
called  a  corded  sun-bonnet,  made  of  pale  yellow  —  buff  —  cambric.  She
lifted  her  head  with  a  demure  smile  at  my  surprise,  as  her  features  were  dis-
closed. She  was  very  small,  below  the  average  stature  of  woman,  while  I
am  tall.     I  either  wakened  at  this  point,  or  went  off  into  another  dream.

The  bonnet  would  perhaps  be  "curious"  now,  but  was  not  so  then,
and  may  still  be  found  in  some  rural  districts.

This  is  a  rough  sketch.  [Our  correspondent  here  adds  sketch.]  A
shade  bonnet,  that  a  lady  would  not  wear  when  calling,  but  might  put
on  when  about  to  drop  in  on  a  near  neighbor.  The  front  was  stiffened  by
cords  stitched  close  together,  and  all  edges  were  ruffled.

When  I  arose  next  morning  I  recalled  all  the  details  of  the  dream,  but
thought  no  more  of  it  until  in  the  afternoon,  as  I  sat  alone  in  my  room
sewing,  I  heard  the  same  sort  of  knock  at  the  door.  I  opened  it,  and  saw
my  friend  standing  there  in  the  dress  and  attitude  of  the  dream.

The  explanation  of  the  visit  was  simple  enough.  The  father  had
returned  from  the  West,  and  notified  the  children  to  meet  him  here.  They
had  arrived  on  the  day  previous  and  taken  rooms  in  my  neighborhood.
As  we  had  not  then  heard  of  thought-transference,  we  did  not  know  how
to  look  for  a  solution  of  the  affair  of  the  dream.  I  now  suppose  she  was
planning  the  visit,  probably  picturing  in  her  mind  her  appearance  and  my
surprise,  and  her  thought  was  reflected  on  my  mind,  shaping  the  dream.
Miss  H.  has  long  been  dead.  You  will,  of  course,  understand  that  the
names  and  some  of  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  story  must  be
private.

I  was  once  strongly  impressed  by  an  experience  of  my  waking  hours,
but  that  sort  of  thing  is  usually  dismissed  with  the  easy  verdict  of  "  coin-
cidence."


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  385

In  the  summer  of  1864  a  dear  and  intimate  friend,  Mrs.  S.,  was  spend-
ing two  or  three  weeks  with  me.  On  this  occasion  she  had  gone  to  spend
a  long  day  with  Mrs.  C,  to  whom  she  was  much  attached,  and  whose
society  she  always  enjoyed.  She  had  gone  early  in  the  forenoon,  intend-
ing to  remain  until  after  tea.  A  certain  matter  had  occurred  which  I  was
anxious  to  discuss  with  Mrs.  S.  confidentially.  After  the  children  had
gone  to  school,  and  the  house  was  quiet,  I  fell  to  thinking  of  the  affair  and
longing  for  Mrs.  S.  I  felt  that  I  could  hardly  be  patient  till  evening,  and
also  that  then  there  would  be  little  opportunity  for  the  long  private  talk
I  wanted.  I,  not  very  wisely,  kept  thinking  and  wishing  until  about
eleven  o'clock,  when  Mrs.  S.  appeared,  and  with  a  somewhat  excited
manner  explained  that  she  had  for  some  time  been  so  strongly  impressed
by  a  feeling  that  she  must  return,  and  had  become  so  uncomfortable  and
distrait  at  last  that  she  made  some  lame  excuse  to  Mrs.  C,  and  asked  that
lady  to  let  a  servant  bring  her  home.

I  should  state  that  Mrs.  S.  has  been  entirely  blind  from  her  childhood.
Her  son,  then  a  little  boy,  was  her  usual  guide,  but  he  had  gone  to  school,
expecting  to  join  her  at  Mrs.  C.'s  in  the  afternoon.  She  is  a  lady  of  deli-
cate sensibilities,  and  would  not  have  done  anything  that  seemed  like  a
bit  of  caprice,  or  made  even  a  slight  trouble  for  her  friend,  except  under
very  strong  stress  of  feeling.  When  I  related  to  her  my  morning's
experience,  she  quietly  said,  "  I  see  it  all  now;  you  drew  me  back  here."

Thank  you  for  the  circulars.  I  am  deeply  interested  in  psychical
research,  though  only  as  an  uninstructed  outsider.  I  trust  you  will  not
find  this  tedious,  and  that  you  will  excuse  the  irregularity  of  the  hand-
writing.

A  lady  who  has  frequently  cooperated  with  us,  and  who  has  been
one  of  our  best  friends  in  this  research,  has  obtained  for  us,  from  a
Miss  C,  for  whose  character  she  vouches,  the  following,  which  further
illustrates  my  hypothesis.  I  give  the  relevant  portions  of  two  state-
ments, one  given  by  Miss  C.  herself  to  our  correspondent,  the  other
an  answer  reported  by  our  correspondent  to  a  further  question  that
was  communicated  to  Miss  C.  :  —


[19]  First  Statement.

{By  Miss  G.)

On  the  morning  of  Friday,  April  22,  1887, 1  had  the  following  dream  :  —
I  thought  I  was  walking  up  the  steps  to  my  aunt's  house,  when  some
one  met  me  and  told  me  that  my  aunt  was  ill,  but  that  it  was  impossible  at
that  time  to  say  what  was  the  matter  with  her,  but  it  would  be  decided
very  soon.  I  went  to  the  steps  again  in  an  hour  or  two,  and  then  was  told
(I  think  by  the  doctor)  that  there  was  no  doubt  now,  —  it  was  pneumonia.
On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  we  hwird  that  my  aunt  had  been  taken  ill
the  day  before,  and  that  the  trouble  was  nearly  akin  to  pneumonia;  it  was
acute  bronchitis,  of  which  she  died  on  the  Monday  following.  I  ought,
perhaps,  to  state  that  my  aunt  was  a  particularly  vigorous  woman,  and
very  seldom  ill ;  also  that  she  was  particularly  dear  to  us  all.


386  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

Second  Statement.
(Reported  by  our  correspondent.}
Mr.  Hodgson  asks  a  question,  which  Miss  C.  thus  answers  :  Her  own
younger  sister  came  home  from  town,  and  began  to  say,  "  Aunt  G.  is
ill  —  "  —  "  Stop !  "  said  the  elder  sister.  "  Before  you  say  another,  word
let  me  tell  a  singular  dream  which  I  have  had,"  and  she  related  her  dream
in  the  words  of  the  preceding  statement.  She  is  as  conscientious  as  her
handwriting  looks,  and  has  doubtless  weighed  every  word  before  record-
ing it.

At  every  turn  in  this  study  one  comes  upon  new  evidence  of  the
liveliness  of  our  typical  hallucination  :  "  Aunt  G.  is  ill — "  —  "  Stop  !
let  me  tell  jtou  of  a  singular  dream."  The  news  and  the  dream  may
have  been  a  mere  coincidence  ;  but  the  chances  are  that  the  news  pro-
duced the  dream,  or  rather  the  pseudo-reminiscence  of  it.

The  mysterious  importance  which  has  seemingly  been  attached  to  a
pseudo-presentiment  by  a  person  of  decided  intelligence,  who  reports
her  experience  in  the  next  case  on  my  list,  makes  me  all  the  more
convinced  of  the  practical  value  of  the  discovery  that  there  are  such
things  as  constitute  our  new  class  of  mental  phenomena.  How  much
that  sincere  people  have  found  mysterious  in  their  lives,  and  that  un-
sympathetic people  have  laughed  at  as  mere  superstition,  becomes  thus
familiar,  and,  in  one  sense,  obvious.  In  order  to  show  how  much
attention  these  now  so  comparatively  simple  phenomena  have  at-
tracted, and  do  attract,  amongst  people  who  do  not  understand  their
nature,  I  therefore  quote  almost  in  full  the  correspondence  of  our  in-
formant in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  her  own  case.  She  reports  an  expe-
rience of  some  one  else,  which  I  also  regard  as  a  pseudo- presentiment,
but  which  I  am  unable  to  discuss  at  present.  Our  correspondent
consents  freely  to  the  use  of  her  name,  and,  although  we  have  not
any  personal  acquaintance  with  her,  I  regard  her  narrative  as  very
satisfactory  :  —

[20]  [First   Letter.]

(From  Mary  H.  Wdtkins.)

November  14,  1887.
Mr.  Hodgson,  Secretary  American  Society  Psychical  Research  :

Dear  Sir,  —  In  the  year  1868  I  had  an  intensely  vivid  dream  of  the
drowning  of  some  one  dear  to  me,  and  awoke  in  tears.  That  afternoon,  on
my  return  from  school,  I  was  told  that  my  brother  had  been  drowned  that
morning  by  the  burning  of  the  steamer  "  Sea-Bird,"  on  Lake  Michigan.
According  to  all  accounts,  my  dream  and  his  death  must  have  taken  place
at  nearly  the  same  time.

It  has  always  been  mysterious  and  unaccountable  to  all  who  have  heard
of  it.  If  you  will  send  me  Blank  G,  I  will  try  to  send  you  a  clear  narrative
of  the  dream.  Very  respectfully,

MARY  H.  WATKINS.

380  Congress  St.,  E.  Detroit,  Mich.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  387

[Second  Letter.]

380  Congress  St.,

E.  Detroit,  Mich.,  Nov.  21,  1887.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, —  Enclosed  you  will  find  an  account  of  the  dream  about
which  I  wrote  to  you.  At  the  time  I  sent  for  Blank  G,  I  supposed  it
was  one  that  I  should  fill  with  my  statement.  I  shall,  however,  try  to
fill  it  as  requested,  although  with  the  little  time  at  my  disposal  I  shall  not
be  able  to  do  so  very  soon.

In  regard  to  the  action  of  one  mind  on  another,  I  would  say  that  I  think
that  I  have  sometimes,  when  very  anxious  that  a  pupil  should  acquit  him-
self well,  caused  him  to  know  what  was  required  by  willing  him  to  do  so.
I  cannot  do  it  at  all  times,  or  with  all  pupils,  nor  have  I  given  the  subject
attention  enough  to  know  the  conditions  under  which  my  mind  has  this
power  over  others.     The  fact  I  cannot  doubt.

Hoping  that  I  may  some  time  be  able  to  give  the  society  some  interest-
ing data,  I  am  Very  sincerely  yours,

MARY  H.  W ATKINS.

STATEMENT   APPENDED.
A  Singular  Dream.

I  was  living  in  Ypsilanti,  and  was  in  my  usual  health  and  good  spirits,
when  I  had  the  following  remarkable  dream  :  —

Between  six  and  seven  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  ninth  of  April,
1868,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  standing  on  the  shore  of  a  large  lake  or  sea,
with  a  wall  extending  for  some  distance  along  the  bank  between  myself
and  the  edge  of  the  water.  Suddenly  I  became  conscious  that  people  were
hurrying  around  the  nearest  end  of  the  wall,  and  knew  that  something
had  happened.  But  when  I  attempted  to  follow  the  crowd,  I  could  not
move ;  I  was  powerless  under  the  terrible  realization  that  some  one  dear
to  me,  I  knew  not  who,  lay  drowned  on  the  other  side.

Just  then  I  awoke,  weeping  bitterly.  All  that  morning  I  was  oppressed
by  a  feeling  of  impending  evil,  a  feeling  that  I  struggled  unsuccessfully
to  throw  off,  as  having  its  source  in  the  unreal  experience  of  a  few  hours
previous.

On  my  return  from  school  that  noon  I  found  the  household  in  a  state  of
great  agitation,  caused  by  the  receipt  of  a  despatch  from  a  friend  in
Chicago,  saying  that  the  "Sea-Bird"  had  burned  on  Lake  Michigan
that  morning;  that  Steve,  my  brother,  was  among  her  passengers,  and
was  supposed  to  have  perished.  As  my  mother  broke  the  sad  tidings  to
me,  she  hastened  to  add,  "  But  we  do  not  think  that  Steve  is  lost,  for  he  is
a  splendid  swimmer,  and  always  self-possessed."

"  Oh,  but  he  is  lost  —  he  is  drowned!  I  know  it!  And  that  is  why  I
had  that  terrible  dream."     And  I  could  receive  no  consolation.

I  then  related  my  dream,  and  the  intensity  of  my  belief  in  the  truth  of
it  so  affected  the  rest  of  the  family  that  I  think  their  loss  of  hope  dated
from  the  telling  of  my  tale.  A  few  sorrowful  days,  and  the  uncertainty
was  ended,  —  my  dream  was  a  reality.


388  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

Our  rector,  the  Rev.  John  A.  Wilson,  was  desirous  of  finding  a  cause
for  my  sleeping  vision,  and  thought  that  it  probably  lay  in  the  association
of  ideas  ;  but  upon  questioning  me  he  was  unable  to  find  anything  in  sup-
port of  his  theor}',  and  confessed  that  it  was  indeed  "  very  strange."

My  brother  cared  more  for  me  than  for  any  one  else  in  the  world,  and
when  he  realized  that  his  hours  were  numbered,  his  thoughts  would  natu-
rally turn  to  me.  And  that  in  this  case,  at  least,  mind  was  stronger  than
matter,  I  have  always  believed.

MARY  H.  WATKINS.
Detroit,  Mich.

[Third  Letter.]
(From  Mary  IT.   Watkins.}

380  Congress  St.,

E.  Detroit,  Mich.,  Nov.  30,  1887.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  the  25th  was  duly  received.  In  regard  to  the
statement  appended  to  my  account,  I  would  say  that  it  was  made  by  my
sister.1  The  Rev.  John  A.  Wilson  died  several  years  ago.  I  am  sorry
that  you  cannot  correspond  with  him  concerning  the  dream,  as  I  think  he
was  much  impressed  by  it  at  the  time.

As  you  know  nothing  about  me  save  what  I  have  written,  I  think  that  I
may  take  the  liberty  of  referring  you  to  Messrs.  Bela  Hubbard  and  S.  M.
Cutcheon  of  this  place,  Prof.  W.  H.  Payne  of  the  Michigan  University,
and  Prof.  F.  A.  Gully  of  the  A.  and  M.  College  of  Miss.,  in  case  you  may
wish  to  assure  yourself  of  the  trustworthiness  of  any  statement  that  I
make.  I  am  teaching  in  the  public  schools,  the  building  in  which  I  am
being  the  Barston  School.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  scene  of  the  dream  corresponded  with  any
place  on  the  shore  of  Lake  Michigan  or  not.  The  disaster  occurred  be-
tween Milwaukee  and  Chicago,  and  it  was  owing  to  the  intense  cold  of  the
water  that  my  brother  lost  his  life.

I  have  no  objections  to  the  use  of  my  name,  and  shall  be  glad  to  answer
any  questions  that  may  arise,  as  I  am  very  much  interested  in  your  work,
and  shall  do  all  I  can  to  further  it.  I  am  making  slow  progress  in  filling
of  Blank  G,  as  I  have  but  little  time  at  my  disposal.  I  do  not  despair,
however,  of  eventually  getting  the  report  from  a  number  of  people.

Yours  truly,

(MISS)  MARY  H.  WATKINS.

[Enclosures.]

I  have  known  Mary  H.  Watkins  for  many  years,  and  have  always
found  her  not  only  perfectly  truthful,  but  more  than  ordinarily  exact  in
her  statements.

The  dream  relating  to  the  death  of  a  brother  by  drowning  was  told  me

years  ago.

CAROLINE  CROSMAN,

Principal  Barston  School.
Detroit,  Mich.,  Dec.  1, 1887.

1  These  words  refer  to  the  second  "  enclosure  "  appended  below.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  389

The  foregoing  account  of  the  strange  dream  is  the  same  that  I  heard  at
the  time  of  the  calamity  which  it  foreshadowed.

SARAH  B.  STEVENS.
(Sister  of  Miss  Watkins.)

I  pass  without  further  comment  to  the  last  case  of  this  class  which
I  shall  use  in  the  body  of  the  present  report.  A  supplement  will
contain  some  further  illustrative  material.  The  closing  case  is  oue
that  may  possibly  be  regarded  as  almost  too  good  a  story  ;  but  at
all  events  it  is  plausible,  and,  if  accurately  remembered,  it  illus-
trates most  perfectly  our  type.     It  happens,  moreover,  to  be  quite


[21]  [STATEMENT   OF  A.   V.   H.]

New  York,  Dec.  8,  1887.

I  have  touched  lightly  upon  psychological  phenomena,  studied  a  little
here,  and  read  a  little  there,  so  that  I  am  not  absolutely  ignorant  upon  the
subject,  but  I  am  perplexed  as  to  the  following :  —

One  night  in  June,  1886,  I  retired  at  half-past  eleven.  I  awoke  at
three  o'clock,  but  fell  asleep  in  fifteen  minutes.  At  once  I  was  in  Japan,
at  what  appeared  to  be  a  dramatic  representation.  At  a  distance  of
perhaps  ten  feet  from  me,  on  my  right  hand,  were  three  young  women
chatting.  I  noticed  one  very  closely.  Her  face  was  of  a  very  light  yel-
lowish hue;  her  hair  was  very  yellow;  strangest  of  all  were  her  eyes,  —
they  were  perfectly  round,  the  white  of  the  eye  showing  very  little ;  they
were  purple  in  color,  and  they  were  without  pupils,  —  the  iris  appeared  to
have  grown  all  over  the  eye.  This  young  lady  separated  herself  from
her  companions,  and  I  followed.  We  came  to  a  bridge  over  a  small  gully  ;
as  she  reached  the  centre  of  the  bridge  she  stopped  and  leaned  over  the
hand-rail,  which  instantly  broke,  and  she  fell  into  the  gully.  I  awoke  a
few  minutes  before  eight  o'clock,  with  the  face  and  peculiar  eyes  still
before  me.  I  lived  in  Thirty-first  street  then,  near  Eighth  avenue.  After
breakfast  I  got  an  Eighth-avenue  car,  to  go  down  town.  At  Twenty-second
street  the  car  stopped  to  let  a  gentleman  get  off ;  he  was  lame  and  moved
slowly.  The  driver  became  impatient.  Unknown  to  the  driver  or  con-
ductor a  young  lady  was  waiting  to  get  on  the  car,  on  the  same  side  the
gentleman  was  leaving.  As  soon  as  the  gentleman  was  off  the  car,  the
conductor  pulled  the  bell-strap,  and  the  same  instant  the  young  lady
attempted  to  mount  the  step.  I  stood  upon  the  platform  and  saw  her  face
distinctly.  It  was  the  young  woman  I  had  seen  in  the  dream  of  the  night
before,  absolutely  the  same  in  every  feature  except  the  color  of  the  skin.
At  the  instant  she  put  her  foot  upon  the  step  the  car  started  quickly  and
she  was  thrown  violently  to  the  pavement.  Several  people  went  to  her
aid,  and  the  car  continued  its  way.

I  had  never  known  her  or  anybody  resembling  her.  I  had  completely
forgotten  the  incident  when,  as  I  was  dozing  upon  the  sofa,  I  fell  asleep,
and  in  a  moment  I  saw  the  young  woman  again ;  this  time  in  her  own
home,  sitting  in  an  easy-chair,  and  her  husband  standing  by  a  grate-fire,
holding  a  little  girl  on  his  shoulder.     Her  eyes  were  exactly  like  those  of


390  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

her  mother,  whom  she  greatly  resembled.     I  have  never  seen  this  young
woman  except  that  one  instant  when  she  was  thrown  from  the  car.     I  have
searched  diligently,  but  I  cannot  find  a  trace  of  her.     Perhaps  I  shall  hear
further  from  you.


I  have  promised  to  make  some  mention  of  the  contributions  of  our
two  insane  correspondents  to  the  data  of  mj'  hypothesis.  I  am  at
present  without  any  means  of  getting  direct  advice  from  those  who
know  them  as  to  the  precise  nature  of  their  maladies,  since  neither
is  under  treatment,  and  both  communicate  with  us  in  confidence,  so
that  I  may  not  print  their  names.  But  the  elaborate  statements  that
they  make  in  giving  the  committee  the  benefit  of  their  newer  insight
furnish  us,  of  course,  with  much  internal  evidence  as  to  their  condi-
tion. One  of  them  is  a  systematic  subject,  who  has  long  been  devel-
oping a  scheme  of  delusions  of  a  well-known  type.  He  was  originally
in  business  ;  but  ill-health,  and,  still  more,  the  persecutions  of  certain
people,  particularly  of  a  very  malignant  woman,  have  more  and  more
separated  him  from  his  ki  id.  Meanwhile,  however,  there  are  com-
pensations. Symbolic  visions  have  revealed  to  him  that  a  great
future  as  a  spiritual  teacher  is  before  him  ;  only  he  must  first  pass
through  much  "darkness."  The  "  darkness,"  which  seems  to  be  a
painful  confusion  of  judgment  joined  with  moodiness,  und  even  with
occasional  temporary  dementia,  but  which  plainly  never  takes  the
form  of  true  melancholia,  does  not  deprive  him  of  frequent  spiritual
revelations,  nor  yet  of  continual  growth  in  his  systematic  delusions.
Persecutions  still  beset  him ;  but  his  relations  with  his  spiritual
environment  are  growing  constantly  more  elaborate.  A  band  of  nine
spirits  have  recently  entered  into  intimate  relations  with  him.  These
44  protect  him  from  evil;"  the}' are  sharply  distinguished  from  one
another  by  the  special  feeling  of  the  sort  of  "magnetism"  that
each  one  excites  in  him  when  it  is  present ;  and  their  name3  are
known.  Our  correspondent  is  meanwhile,  as  it  seems,  comparatively
uninfluenced  by  mediums  or  clairvoyants  ;  he  has  found  it  worse  than
useless  to  consult  them,  and  his  experiences  are  strictly  his  own.  In
short,  if  one  may  venture  to  judge  him  by  his  manuscript,  he  is  a
fairly  well-developed  paranoiac.  He  gives  us  his  recent  biography  at
great  length,  and  with  fair  coherency.  Every  page  of  it  is  full  of
illustrations  of  his  type  of  disease.  His  sincerity  and  industry  are
meanwhile  as  obvious  as  his  prolixity.  He  seems  to  have  had  occa-
sional pseudo-presentiments  from  the  first.  How  far  his  experiences
of  this  general  type  are  sufficiently  well-related  to  be  capable  of  iden-
tification as  what  I  here  call  pseudo-presentiments,  is  hard  to  say,  of
course  ;  yet  I  feel  tolerably  sure,  from  internal  evidence,  that  at  least


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  391

the  following  was  experienced,  in  the  form  of  a  pseudo-presentiment,
very  much  as  the  story  tells  it :  —

At  one  time,  during  the  period  of  his  "  persecution"  by  his  malig-
nant enemy,  a  woman  whom  we  may  call  L.  T.  Z.,  our  informant  re-
members that  he  rose  one  morning  and  said  to  an  acquaintance,  "  That
woman"  (meaning  L.  T.  Z.)  "will  come  to  see  me  to-day."  He
"  named  the  particular  kind  of  business,  and  the  lawyer  she  would  want
me  to  go  with  her  to  see."  The  acquaintance  replied,  M  That  woman
will  never  come  here  to  see  you."  For  the  bitter  enmity  between  the
two  was  well  known.     But

about  9  A.M.  I  was  called,  and  told,  "a  lady  wished  to  see  me  in  the
parlor."  —  "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  it  is  Mrs.  Z."     It  was,  and  she  wanted  me
to  go  to  the  same  lawyer's  office,  and  about  the  same  business  that  I  had
named.     I  was  about  one-half  mile  l  from  where  Mrs.  Z.  lived,  and  did
not  know  she  was  in  the  city.
i
When  taken  in  connection  with  other  experiences  of  presentiments
narrated  in  this  correspondent's  lengthy  paper,  the  evidence  to  my
mind  is  considerable,  that  in   his  case  our  typical   hallucination  of
memory,  whereby  the  present,  in  many  specific  details,  is  projected
back  into  the  past  as  a  prophecy,  coexists  with  the  vaguer  and  more
frequently  observed  belief,  natural  to  his  disease,  that  the  present  has
been  in  its  outlines  symbolically  foreshadowed  in  visions.

The  other  case  of  insane  t}fpe  is  one  that  needs  further  considera-
tion ;  and  I  have  reason  to  hope  that  without  misusing  any  confi-
dences we  shall  receive  a  fuller  account  of  the  symptoms  and  of  the
disease  of  this  subject,  and  that,  too,  from  a  competent  source.
Meanwhile  our  correspondent,  who  reveals  no  system  of  delusions,
and  who  is,  on  the  whole,  in  a  cheerful,  mildly  exalted,  unsteady
but  very  active  state  of  mind  when  he  writes,  begins  his  letter  to
Mr.  Hodgson  in  a  very  characteristic  way.

I  have  never  had  such  a  dream  as  you  speak  of  [he  says,  in  answer  to
our  committee's  request  for  cooperation],  but  I  have  powerful  impres-
sions.

For  instance,  my  brother  brought  your  letter  up  from  the  post-office
this  noon.  I  looked  out  at  the  window  and  saw  him  coming,  and  knew  at
once  that  your  letter  was  in  his  pocket.  This  is  a  common  occurrence
with  me.  To  know  whom  I  am  going  to  meet  before  I  go  out  anywhere
is  also  quite  common.

Our  correspondent  later  gives  other  instances,  but  some  of  these
are  so  closely  connected  with  expressions  of  his  generally  exalted

1  Italics  in  original.


392  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

sense  of  his  own  powers,  that  one  cannot  easily  tell  where  the  pseudo-
presentiment  ends,  and  where  an  ordinary  delusion  of  power  takes  its
place,  and  creates  the  very  facts  that  shall  have  been  predicted  by
the  presentiment  which  he  recounts.

The  indications  given  by  these  two  cases  suggest  strongly  that
Kraepelin's  observations  of  our  pseudo-presentiments  in  insane  pa-
tients ought  to  be  easily  verifiable  in  asylum  practice,  and  I  look
hopefully  for  further  light  to  the  cooperation  of  the  specialists  in  in-
sanity when  once  their  attention  has  been  directed  to  the  existence  of
this  curious  class  of  mental  facts.

I  have  little  doubt  but,  now  that  pseudo-presentiments  may  be  re-
garded as  genuine  and  not  infrequent  human  experiences,  a  further
study  will  throw  great  light  on  their  connection  with  other  mental
processes.  Theoretically  speaking,  they  may  possibly  stand  in
normal  people  for  what  one  might  call  momentary  spasms  of  the
activity  of  apperception.  A  sensitive  or  weary  person,  in  an  excit-
able state,  is  surprised  by  a  noteworthy,  perhaps  very  painful,  event.
There  follows  the  effort,  as  one  says,  to  "  realize  "  the  thing,  to  rec-
ognize it  as  familiar,  to  give  it  its  place  in  the  mental  home  which  it
has  so  confused  by  its  invasion.  As  one  to  whom  a  stranger  has
accidentally  bowed  on  the  street  momentarily  tries  to  believe  that  he
does,  after  all,  recognize  the  stranger,  so  one  surprised  by  a  calam-
ity, even  in  the  midst  of  the  shock  of  it,  still  dumbly  tries  to  believe
that  things  were  always  so  with  him.  "  Just  my  luck  !  "  cries  one
man  at  such  a  moment.  "  Yes,  I  always  knew  it  would  turn  out
so,"  says  another.  These  are  only  half  sincere  ways  of  meeting  the
strange  experience.  They  are  conventional  resources  ;  they  produce
in  general  no  hallucinations ;  we  know  them  to  be  falsehoods  even
while  we  utter  them.  But  sometimes,  under  the  quick  strain,  or  soon
after  the  surprise,  during  the  hours  of  weakness  and  suffering,  the
stunned  consciousness  gives  wa}'  under  its  strain,  and  a  sort  of  cramp
of  recognition  takes  place.  We  must  recognize  this  intolerably  new
thing.  "  Well,  then,"  our  unconscious  memory-building  process
seems  to  declare,  "  we  will  remember  it  despite  its  novelty."  And
so  the  pseudo-presentiment  enters  consciousness,  possibly  to  remain
there  forever  in  the  form  of  the  memory  of  some  more  or  less  fan-
tastic presentiment.  In  abnormal  cases  this,  which  is  ordinarily  a
mere  spasm,  may  become  a  more  or  less  regularly  recurrent  process.1

I I  feel,  of  course,  that  the  theoretical  half  explanation  here  indicated  for  pseudo-presentiments
has  value  only  as  a  provisional  and  also  very  vague  suggestion,  and  I  beg  in  advance  the  in-
dulgence of  critical  students  for  my  boldness  in  attempting  any  such  account  at  the  present
stage.  But  it  is  not  well  in  science  for  facts  to  be  alone,  if  they  can  find  even  temporary  part-
ners. Only,  of  course,  their  provisional  marriages,  like  Adam's  first  union  with  Lilith,  may
Boon  have  to  be  followed  by  divorce.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  393

IV.  —  Coincidences.

The  whole  value  of  this  research  into  narratives  of  Phantasms  and
Presentiments  is  popularly  supposed  to  centre  about  the  discovery  of
coincidences  of  what  are  now  commonly  known  as  the  "  telepathic"
sort.  I  hope  that  I  have  sufficiently  shown,  in  what  precedes,  how
significant  our  research  may  be,  and  what  new  light  it  may  throw
upon  obscure  matters,  quite  apart  from  an}r  true  connection  between
its  facts  and  Telepathy.  But  still  I  now  have  coincidences  to  describe,
coincidences  which  are  dependent  for  their  reality  upon  the  memory
of  more  than  one  person,  and  which  are  of  a  sort  that,  in  case  they
should  prove  sufficiently  numerous,  well-established,  and  detailed,
would  demand  from  us  either  an  acceptance  of  the  hypothesis  of
Telepathy  as  the  true  hypothesis,  or  the  invention  of  some  still  more
novel  mode  of  explanation,  or,  finally,  an  entire  abandonment  of  the
facts  in  questiou  as  wholly  inexplicable.  The  coincidences  of  this
sort  actually  on  hand,  after  the  sifting  out  by  Mr.  Hodgson  and
myself  of  a  very  great  number  of  less  significant  cases,  and  after  the
separation  of  all  that  probably  represent  pseudo-presentiments,  may
be  said  to  be  numerous  enough,  sufficiently  well-established,  and
sufficiently  detailed,  to  require  serious  attention,  and  to  justif}7  in
great  measure  the  trouble  that  has  been  taken  to  bring  them  together.
They  warrant  as  yet,  in  my  opinion,  no  final  inferences,  but  perhaps
some  of  the  members,  on  considering  certain  of  these  cases,  may  find
me  too  stubborn  a  sceptic.  To  this  accusation  I  can  only  respond
that  stubborn  sceptics  make  the  best  converts  ;  and  that  whenever
Telepathy,  this  capricious  Undine  of  recent  discussion,  really  gets  her
head  above  water,  and  takes  to  dry  land,  as  a  creature  of  immortal
soul  and  of  mortal  steadfastness  of  purpose,  I  shall  be  the  most
devoted  of  her  knights.  As  it  is  I  can  only  fish  for  her  in  deep
water,  and  therefore  I  have  to  spread  my  nets  with  great  care,  and
take  heed  lest  she  rend  them  altogether  and  whirl  awa}r  with  a
foamy  shake  of  her  tail.

Meanwhile  the  success  of  our  investigation  of  the  pseudo-pre-
sentiments encourages  me  to  hope  that  the  comparative  method  will,
in  time,  enable  us  to  get  definite  results  in  this  field  also,  whereby  I
do  not  mean  to  imply  that  these  results  must  be  telepathic,  nor  that
they  must  be  opposed  to  telepathy.

In  reporting  our  coincidences  I  shall  here  begin  with  the  best  of
the  group,  namely,  three  cases  of  the  sort  that  I  call  "  documentary,"
*'.e.,  cases  where  a  significant  part  of  the  testimony  is  in  a  document
or  in  documents  accessible  to  us.  These  I  shall  call  Sub- Class  A  of
our  coincidences.     Then  I  shall  mention,  as  Sub-Class  B,  non-docu-


394  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

mentary  cases  of  a  comparatively  high  degree  of  value.  Under  Sub-
class C,  I  shall  finally  mention  a  few  cases  of  less  value,  in  some  of
which  there  may,  indeed,  be  a  telepathic  coincidence,  but  either  the
coincidence  is  too  slight,  or  the  evidence  is  too  inconclusive,  to  make
the  cases  as  important  for  present  purposes  as  those  in  Sub-Class  B.


Sub-Class  A.

Coincidences  supported  not  merely  by  memor}T,  but  by  any  sort  of
documents,  are  extremely  rare  in  these  researches.  Hence  the  high
relative  value  of  the  three  cases  now  to  be  presented.  One  was
reported  to  the  society  in  my  earlier  informal  statement.  A  second
was  also  once  read  to  the  society  when  the  principal  letters  were  first
received,  but  now  it  is  fortified  by  interviews  with  one  of  the  persons
concerned,  and  by  two  brief  but  valuable  documents  which  our
secretary  has  seen  and  copied.  The  third  case  is  now  for  the  first
time  reported.

The  first  of  these  "  documentary  cases"  came  to  us,  along  with
much  other  valuable  material,  from  a  professor  in  a  "Western  college,
whose  name  we  need  not  give,  but  who  is  well  known  to  Rev.
Edward  Everett  Hale.  From  the  latter  we  have  the  best  assurances
as  to  our  correspondent's  high  character.  Tbe  experience  in  ques-
tion did  not  happen  to  our  correspondent  himself,  but  to  family  con-
nections of  his,  from  whom  he  obtained  for  us  the  documentary
evidence.  The  narrative  may  be  introduced  by  a  few  words  of
explanation  :  In  the  latter  part  of  February,  1886,  a  very  severe
snow-storm  visited  England  and  the  British  Provinces.  It  was
especially  inconvenient  in  the  North,  and  long  blockades  on  the
northern  railways  were  the  result.  In  the  ''Boston  Advertiser"
of  Tuesday,  March  2,  I  find  a  despatch  from  Halifax,  reporting
that  "  the  storm  in  northern  New  Brunswick  is  the  worst  known  for
many  years,"  the  snow  being  fifteen  feet  at  one  place.  "  The  special
train"  (continues  the  despatch)  "which  should  have  arrived  here
Saturday  noon"  (February  27)  "is  not  likely  to  reach  Halifax  till
Wednesday."  "  Another  heav\T  snow-storm  is  now  raging  along  the
entire  line  of  the  Intercolonial,  accompanied  by  a  gale  of  wind.  No
American  mails  have  been  received  since  last  Thursday  "  (February
25).  This  item,  which  I  have  hunted  up  in  the  news  of  the  day,
will  form  a  sufficient  basis  for  understanding  the  letter  which  follows.
A  gentleman,  Mr.  J.  T.,  a  connection  of  our  Western  correspond-
ent, was  at  this  time  in  New  Brunswick,  on  business  for  a  Mon-
treal house.  Wednesday,  March  3,  he  wrote  a  letter  dated  St.  John,
N.B.,  and  written  on  the  paper  of  the  Hotel  Dufferin.     I  have  had


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  395

a  part  of  the  original  in  my  hands.     The  letter  is  addressed  to  his
wife.

[22]  I  have  not  heard  of  you  for  an  age.  The  train  that  should  have  heen
here  on  Friday  last  has  not  arrived  yet.  I  had  a  very  strange  dream  on
Tuesday  night.  I  have  never  been  in  Ottawa  in  my  life,  and  yet  I  was
there,  in  Mr.  E.'s  house.  Mrs.  E.,  Miss  E.,  and  the  little  girls  were  in
great  trouble  because  Mr.  E.  was  ill.  I  had  to  go  and  tell  my  brother
[Mr.  E.'s  son-in-law],  and,  strange  to  say,  he  was  down  a  coal-mine.

When  I  got  down  to  him  I  told  him  that  Mr.  E.  was  dead.  But  in
trying  to  get  out  we  could  not  do  it.  We  climbed  and  climbed,  but  always
fell  back.  I  felt  tired  out  when  I  awoke  next  morning,  and  I  cannot
account  for  the  dream  in  any  way.

This  fragment,  obtained  for  us,  after  much  trouble  and  delay,  by
the  kindness  of  our  correspondent,  from  the  family  of  Mr.  J.  T.,
bears  his  special  certificate  that  it  is  authentic,  and  that  it  was
written  at  the  time  in  question.  There  is  no  postmark  or  envelope
accompanying  the  document,  but  I  think  that  we  now  cannot  doubt
its  genuineness,  nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  writer,  when  he  wrote
these  words,  could  have  had  no  ordinary  information  of  the  actual
deatli  of  the  Mr.  E.  of  whom  he  speaks.  This  death,  according  to  our
Western  correspondent,  had  actually  occurred  at  New  York  City  at
midnight,  on  Tuesday,  February  23,  one  week  before  the  dream.1  The
delay  of  the  mails,  the  substance  of  the  "Advertiser"  despatch  of
March  2,  and  the  tone  of  the  letter  itself,  seem  to  make  it  very
improbable,  in  any  case,  that  Mr.  J.  T.  could  have  had  any  in-
timation of  the  death  of  Mr.  E.,  or  any  special  cause  for  anxiety
about  him  before  the  occurrence  of  the  dream.  As  to  the  circum-
stances of  Mr.  E.'s  death,  they  were  as  follows,  according  to  our
correspondent :  —

1  The  coincidence  may  have  been  much  closer.  The  letter  quoted  Bays  "  Tuesday  night,"
not  specifying  the  date.  Was  Tuesday,  February  23,  meant,  or  the  night  immediately  preceding
the  date  of  the  letter?    On  this  point  we  have  the  following  further  correspondence  :  —

January  22, 1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.:  —

My  dear  Sir,  —  ...  I  enclose  a  slip  which  puts  a  new  aspect  on  the  dream  of  my
brother  in-law.  Vou  will  remember  that  I  promised  to  inquire  and,  if  possible,  obtain  from
him  definite  information  of  the  date  of  the  dream;  whether  on  the  day  of  Mr.  E.'s  death,  or,
as  the  letter,  looked  at  on  its  face,  seemed  to  imply,  a  week  afterwards.  Mr.  T.  sent  me  word,
as  you  will  see,  that  it  occurred  on  the  very  night.  This,  of  course,  renders  needless  all  proof
that  there  had  been  no  communication  between  Montreal  and  the  town  where  he  then  was.

The  note  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Mrs.  C.'s  mother,  who  is  in  Montreal,  and  has  been  staying
at  his  house.  1  requested  her  to  inquire,  as  he  himself  is  so  busy  and  so  much  away  from  home
that  it  was  not  likely  that  I  should  get  an  early  answer  from  himself.

Yours  truly,

E.  W.  C.

Enclosed  Statement  of  Mrs.  T.,  Mother  ov  J.  T.

John  says  he  dreamed  that  dream  the  very  night  Mr.  E.  died.  He  told  me  of  one  he  had
some  time  since,  —  that  he  went  to  hell.    Horrible,  was  it  not?


896  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

Early  in  February,  1886,  a  gentleman,  Mr.  E.,  living  at  Ottawa  (a
connection  of  my  family  by  marriage,  and  with  whom  I  was  well  ac-
quainted),  went  from  home  on  business.  He  was  at  the  time  suffering
from  a  severe  cold.  While  in  New  York  he  became  worse,  and  was
finally  seized  with  pneumonia,  and  taken  to  a  private  ward  in  one  of  the
hospitals  in  that  city.  His  situation  became  critical,  and  the  physician  in
attendance,  or  his  daughter,  who  was  with  him,  telegraphed  to  his  rela-
tions at  Ottawa.  Later  an  improvement  set  in  and  more  favorable  accounts
were  despatched.  Suddenly,  however,  and  before  any  of  the  rest  of  his
family  could  reach  him,  he  became  worse,  sank  rapidly,  and  died  about
midnight  on  the  23d  of  February.  This  was  on  Tuesday.  He  had  then
been  unconscious  for  some  hours.

Mr.  J.  T.,  also  connected  with  Mr.  E.'s  family,  but  having  no  close
connection  with  himself,  was  at  the  time  somewhere  in  New  Brunswick  on
business  for  his  firm  in  Montreal,  which  had  no  transactions  with  Mr.  E.

In  confirmation  of  this  account  our  correspondent  has  sent  us  a
letter  from  his  wife's  mother  to  his  wife,  dated  February  28,  and
giving  an  account  of  the  facts.  From  the  original  letter  we  have  the
following  copied  extract;  the  original  letter  was  seen  in  June,  1887,
bv  Mr.  Hodgson  and  mvself :  —

.  .  .  The  events  of  this  week  have  been  such  a  shock  —  I  have  not  re-
covered from  it  —  poor  Mr.  E.  dying  there  all  alone!  His  daughter  was
there  three  hours  before  his  death,  but  he  was  insensible ;  she  thought  he
returned  the  pressure  of  her  hand,  but  it  is  doubtful.  .  .  .  Your  brother
and  his  wife  had  come  in  on  "Wednesday  morning  to  make  purchases.  Then
the  telegram  came  telling  of  his  death;  they  had  not  heard  of  his  illness,
only  of  his  having  a  cold.  Of  course  it  put  other  business  aside,  and  W.
had  to  make  arrangements  for  the  funeral,  and  everything  devolved  on  him.
Mrs.  E.  came  in  from  Ottawa.  I  did  not  hear  anything  till  Thursday,
when  B.  came  up  to  tell  us  —  it  was  all  so  hurried.

.  .  .  Pneumonia  had  caused  paralysis  of  the  heart,  which  caused  his
sudden  death.  They  had  telegraphed  that  he  was  very  ill,  and  they  feared
the  result ;  then,  again,  that  he  was  better,  and  they  hoped  danger  was  past ;
then  in  a  few  hours  that  he  was  gone.  In  less  than  two  days  he  was
brought  to  Montreal  and  buried  —  so  very  hurried.

In  addition,  we  have  the  following,  written  in  a  letter  from  the  wife
of  Mr.  J.  T.  to  a  member  of  the  family.  The  original  of  this  letter
also  has  been  in  our  hands.

...  I  expect  J.  home  about  the  middle  of  next  month.  What  a  strange
dream  J.  had  about  Mr.  E.'s  death!  He  last  saw  him  a  few  days  after
Christmas,  when  they  both  called  to  see  us.  I  will  answer  your  questions
about  the  dream  as  far  as  I  can;  I  fortunately  kept  J.'s  letters  telling
about  his  dream,  as  I  thought  it  very  remarkable.  For  several  days
before,  and  exactly  a  week  after  Mr.  E.'s  death,  there  were  heavy  snow-
storms in  N.B.,  so  that  J.  did  not  see  a  Montreal  paper  or  hear  from  me


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  397

in  that  time ;  eleven  trains  were  snowed  up  on  the  line  together.     This  ex-
plains why  he  did  not  hear  from  me.

I  will  copy  what  he  says  in  his  letter  of  Wednesday,  the  3d  of  March,
from  St.  John,  N.B.     [Then  follows  the  extract  already  given.]

In  answer  to  questions  Mrs.  J.  T.  has  assured  us  in  writing,  (1)
that  her  husband  had  heard  nothing  of  Mr.  E.  for  a  long  time,  and  did
not  know  where  he  was,  and  (2)  that  she  herself  heard  of  Mr.  E.'s
death  on  Thursday,  the  25th,  and  at  once  wrote  to  her  husband,  but
that  he  did  not  get  this  or  any  further  letter  from  her  before  Thurs-
day, March  4.  The  coincidence  is  remarkable,  and  is  excellently
established.  As  to  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence,  the  dream  either
occurred  (as  is  possible)  at  the  time  of  the  death  or  else  (as  I  think
likely)  a  few  days  later,  while  in  any  case  no  news  of  the  actual
death  could  have  passed ;  and  it  was  a  dream  of  serious  illness,  with
a  sense  of  something  mysterious  and  dark  connected  with  the  matter,
and  in  the  course  of  it  the  impression  arises  that  Mr.  E.  is  dead.
Seldom,  however,  is  the  fact  of  a  coincidence  so  well  proved  by  the
data  at  hand  ;  and  seldom,  indeed,  is  a  correspondent  more  courteous,
laborious,  and  obliging  than  our  informant  has  been  in  getting  us
the  evidence  for  this  case,  and  for  others  of  which  he  has  written
us.1

The  second  case  comes  from  a  gentleman  of  this  city,  who  has  put
us  under  no  small  obligations  by  his  various  communications.  We
know  him  now  by  frequent  interviews,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
of  his  high  character  and  general  good  judgment.  His  own  account
of  an  experience  which  he  remembers  is  next  given ;  we  shall  call
him  M.,  and  his  companion  in  the  curious  experience  related  we  shall
callN.

[23]  Boston,  Nov.  16,  1886.

Prof.  Eotce  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Some  years  ago,  perhaps  eight  or  nine,  while  in  a  city  of
Ehode  Island  on  business,  my  house  being  then,  as  now,  in  Boston,  I  re-
ceived news  which  was  most  unexpected  and  distressing  to  me,  affecting
me  so  seriously  that  I  retired  to  my  room  at  the  hotel,  a  large  square  room,
and  threw  myself  upon  my  bed,  face  downward,  remaining  there  a  long
time  in  great  mental  distress.  The  acuteness  of  the  feeling  after  a  time
abating,  I  left  the  room.  I  returned  next  day  to  Boston,  and  the  day  after
that  received  a  short  letter  from  the  person  whose  statement  I  enclose
herewith,  and  dated  at  the  town  in  western  New  York  from  which  her
enclosed  letter  comes.     The  note  begged  me  to  tell  her  without  delay  what

xThe  family  of  the  wife  of  our  correspondent,  E.  W.  C,  have  had  numerous  more  or  leas
well-remembered  experiences  of  this  sort  amongst  the  various  brothers  and  sisters.  I  feel  it
well  to  add,  therefore,  to  this  particular  case,  that  all  of  this  family  are  apparently  good  dream-
ere,  and  that  they  seem  to  me  to  have  often  been  subject  to  pseudo-presentiments  of  a  vivid  sort.


398  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

was  the  matter  with  me  "on  Friday,  at  2  o'clock,"  —  the  very  day  and
hour  when  I  was  affected  as  I  have  described.

This  lady  was  a  somewhat  familiar  acquaintance  and  friend,  but  I  had
not  heard  from  her  for  many  months  previous  to  this  note,  and  I  do  not
know  that  any  thought  of  her  had  come  into  my  mind  for  a  long  time.  I
should  still  further  add  that  the  news  which  had  so  distressed  me  had  not
the  slightest  connection  with  her.

I  wrote  at  once,  stating  that  she  was  right  as  to  her  impression  (she  said
in  her  letter  that  she  was  sure  I  was  in  very  great  trouble  at  the  time  men-
tioned) ,  and  expressed  my  surprise  at  the  whole  affair.

Twice  since  that  time  she  has  written  to  me,  giving  me  some  impression
in  regard  to  my  condition  or  situation,  both  referring  to  cases  of  illness  or
suffering  of  some  kind,  and  both  times  her  impressions  have  proved  cor-
rect enough  to  be  considered  remarkable,  yet  not  so  exact  in  detail  or  dis-
tinctness as  the  first  time.  I  feel  confident  that  I  have  her  original  letter,
but  have  not  been  able  to  command  the  time  necessary  to  find  it.

I  will  add  that  the  lady  has  told  me  that  her  vivid  impression  about  me

was  only  one  of  ten  or  twelve  experiences  of  like  sort  near  that  time  in

relation  to  other  people,  and  that  in  every  case  her  impression   proved

correct.     She  was  recovering  then  from  a  long  and  nearly  mortal  illness,

malarial  fever  contracted  in  Italy,  and  was  for  a  long  time  in  most  delicate

and  precarious  condition.     As  her  restoration   to   health  progressed  she

tells  me  she  found   herself  less  and  less  susceptible  to   impressions  of

the  sort  described.

(Signed)  M.

P.S.  — The  three  occurrences  above  detailed  comprise  all  the  experiences
of  this  sort  which  I  have  had  in  my  life.

The  accompanying  statement  from  N.  reads  as  follows, — N.  is
a  physician  by  profession,  and  writes  from  New  York  State ;  we
have  not  interviewed  her  personally  :  —

[Postmarked  Aug.  16,  1886.]
Prof.  Royce,  —  In  the  convalescence  from  a  malarial  fever  during
which  great  hyperesthesia  of  brain  had  obtained,  but  no  hallucinations  or
false  perceptions,  I  was  sitting  alone  in  my  room  looking  out  of  the  win-
dow. My  thoughts  were  of  indifferent  trivialities  ;  after  a  time  my  mind
seemed  to  become  absolutely  vacant;  my  eyes  felt  fixed,  the  air  seemed
to  grow  white.  I  could  see  objects  about  me,  but  it  was  a  terrible  effort  of
will  to  perceive  anything.  I  then  felt  great  and  painful  sense  as  of  sym-
pathy with  some  one  suffering,  who  or  where  I  did  not  know.  After  a
little  time  I  knew  with  whom,  but  how  I  knew  I  cannot  tell;  for  it
seemed  some  time  after  this  knowledge  of  personality  that  I  saw  dis-
tinctly, in  my  brain,  not  before  my  eyes,  a  large,  square  room,  evidently
in  a  hotel,  and  saw  the  person  of  whom  I  had  been  conscious,  lying  face
downward  on  the  bed  in  the  throes  of  mental  and  physical  anguish.  I
felt  rather  than  heard  sobs  and  grieving,  and  felt  conscious  of  the  nature
of  the  grief  subjectively;  its  objective  cause  was  not  transmitted  to  me.
Extreme  exhaustion  followed  the  experience,  which  lasted  forty  minutes
intensely,  and  then  very  slowly  wore  away.     Let  me  note  :  —


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  399

1st.  I  had  not  thought  of  the  person  for  some  time  and  there  was  no
reminder  in  the  room.

2d.  The  experience  was  remembered  with  more  vividness  than  that
seen  in  the  normal  way,  while  the  contrary  is  true  of  dreams.

3d.  The  natural  order  of  perception  was  reversed,  i.e.,  the  emotion
came  first,  the  sense  of  a  personality  second,  the  vision  or  perception  of  the
person  third.

I  should  be  glad  to  have  a  theory  given  of  this  reverse  in  the  natural
order  of  perception.

Respectfully,

N.

The  letters  that  passed  between  the  persons  at  the  time  of  this
singular  experience  have  probably  been  preserved,  but  are  now  lost
in  a  mass  of  old  letters,  but  may  yet  be  found.  Meanwhile  we  have
used  every  urgency  to  get  our  friend  to  discover  any  correspondence
bearing  upon  these  experiences  ;  but  he  is  a  very  busy  man,  and
only  lately  have  letters  bearing,  not  upon  this  first  experience,  but
upon  one  of  the  later  ones,  come  to  hand.  The  originals  of  these
letters  have  been  seen  by  Mr.  Hodgson.  I  quote,  however,  next  in
order,  an  explanatory  letter  front  M.  to  myself :  —


Boston,  Dec.  6,  1888.
Prof.  J.  Eotce,  20  Lowell  street,  Cambridge,  Mass. :  —

My  dear  Sir, — At  suggestion  of  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  I  write  you
in  regard  to  the  experience  I  once  reported  to  you,  viz.,  with  M.  of  New
York.  Mr.  Hodgson  especially  wants  me  to  send  you  details  of  the
second  and  third  experiences  reported.  It  is  at  present,  I  am  very  sorry
to  say,  quite  impossible  for  me,  on  account  of  pressure  of  business  duties,
to  undertake  another  search  for  letters  received  from  N.  at  the  time  of  the
experiences  mentioned.  I  think  that  they  are  in  existence,  but  it  would
take  much  time  to  find  them.  My  recollection  of  the  three  experiences  is
that  the  first  was  far  more  pronounced  and  distinct  in  its  details,  and  that
the  second  and  third  were  yet  sufficiently  so  to  be  called  somewhat  re-
markable and  worthy  of  notice.  There  was  less  definiteness  about  them
as  to  time,  etc.,  and  the  last  was  least  definite.  It  may  be  worthy  of
note  that,  as  Dr.  N.  gradually  recovered  her  health,  her  impressiona-
bility in  this  manner  seemed  to  decrease,  and  I  understand  that  of  late
years,  being  in  good  health,  she  has  had  no  experiences  of  the  kind.

This  is  my  recollection  of  our  last  words  on  the  subject.  The  second
and  third  experiences  referred  to,  on  her  part,  had  sufficient  cause  in  my
own  condition,  if  my  condition  (of  suffering  and  trouble)  may  be  con-
sidered the  cause,  though  it  should  also  be  said  that  in  that  sense  the  cause
of  the  first  experience  was  much  more  pronounced.

With  great  regret  that  I  cannot  at  this  time  give  you  additional  data,
I  am,

Yours  very  truly,


400  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

And  now  follow  the  two  letters,  —  one  is  a  very  brief  note,  —  as
follows :  —

(Copy.     June  0,  1887.     R.   IT.)

Doctor's  Office.

If  I  don't  hear  from  you  to-morrow  I  shall  write  you  a  letter !  I

I  am  anxious  about  you.

N.
July  24.     [Year  not  given.]

The  answer  runs  as  follows  :  —

(Copy  made  June  6,  1887.     R.  Hodgson.)

Boston,  July  26,  1883.

"What  clairvoyant  vision  again  told  you  of  me  Monday  and  Tuesday
and  Wednesday?  Was  it  as  vivid  and  real  as  the  other  time?  It  had,  at
least,  a  very  closely  related  cause.

It  is  past  1  A.M.,  but  I  will  not  go  to  bed  till  I  have  sent  you  a  word.
A  letter  will  follow  very  soon.  For  two  days  I  have  been  thinking  of  the
way  you  wrote  to  me  that  time,  and  I  should  have  written  to  you  within
twenty-four  hours  if  I  had  not  received  the  note  from  you.  Please  write
to  me  as  you  proposed.  This  is  only  to  tell  you  that  I  am  alive  and  not
ill,  but  tired,  tired !  Tell  me  of  yourself.  I  have  had  a  hard  three
months  in  the  West,  eighteen  to  twenty  hours  a  day,  scarce  a  respite  —
I  am  not  ill ;  I  am  sure  I  am  not,  but  I  am  worked  out.  I  couldn't  get  to
or  write.

I  used  the  telegraph  even  with  my  sisters.

I  hope  for  a  letter  and  will  surely  send  you  one.

Yours,

M.

Pending  the  discovery  of  the  documentary  evidence  for  the  first
instance,  I  need  only  remark  that  the  coincidence  as  reported  is, 'by
reason  of  the  remarkable  definiteness  of  the  remembered  experience,
the  most  promising  of  the  coincidences  that  have  come  into  our  hands
in  cases  where  the  evidence  is  nearly  as  good  as  here.  If  there  is  here
no  entirely  unsuspected  source  of  error,  this  case  may  be  considered,
therefore,  even  in  the  present  incomplete  state  of  the  evidence,  as  in
the  highest  degree  noteworthy.  And  if  many  such  cases  come  to
light  in  the  course  of  our  inquiries,  they  may  have  a  bearing  on  the
hypothesis  of  telepathy  whose  significance  we  can  now  only  faintly
conjecture.  The  trouble  is  that  such  cases  are  so  rare,  and  the  links
of  the  chain  are  so  hard  to  piece  together  into  perfect  completeness.

The  third  of  our  documentary  cases  is,  I  think,  a  case  of  an
unquestionable  coincidence.  Only  here  the  coincidence  has  far  less
significance  than  in  the  former  case,  because,  after  all,  it  is  not  so
uncommon  to  dream  of  death  as  happening  to  one  busy  in  a  mine.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  401

Our  informant  is  a  Mrs.  N.  W.  C.  H.,  with  whom  Mr.  Hodgson  has
had  several  interviews.  She  has  had  some  other  experiences  of  co-
incidences of  a  type  that  might  be  telepathic.  But  after  a  discussion
with  Mr.  Hodgson  she  wrote  to  him  as  follows :  —

[24]  Perhaps  you  remember  when  you  asked  me  if  I  ever  had  other  dreams
which  coincided  with  real  events,  I  told  you  I  once  dreamed  that  Wm.
T.  H.  was  dead,  and  that  the  same  night  he  was  in  a  mine  where  he  had
on  exhibition  a  diamond  drill,  and  was  thrown  down  several  feet  on  to
one  of  two  working  engines  which  ran  the  drill.  The  injuries  which  he
received  did  not  prove  to  be  serious,  though  when  he  was  taken  up  it  was
thought  he  was  dead,  and  he  remained  unconscious  some  time.

You  then  asked  if  I  had  letters  which  were  received  at  the  time,  relat-
ing to  either  dream.  I  said  I  did  not  think  I  had.  I  was  about  five
minutes  too  late  to  mail  the  account  of  the  first  dream  and  paper  with
mother's  signature  to  you  by  the  morning  mail,  and  curiously,  to  me,  be-
fore the  next  mail  left  I  accidentally  came  across  "Wm.  T.  H.'s  letter  to
me,  in  reply  to  one  from  me  to  him,  telling  him  of  the  dream  I  had  about
him.  and  I  hastily  enclosed  it  to  you.  If  you  look  at  it  again  you  will  see
it  to  be  from  him  to  me,  not  to  my  mother.  Perhaps  he  addressed  to
"  Dear  N.,"  as  he  often  used  to  do.

He  is  living.

Yours  respectfully,

N.  W.  C.  H.

The  original  of  the  letter  mentioned  above  is  in  our  hands,  and  it
is  sufficient  by  itself  to  establish  the  fact  of  a  certain  coincidence.
Unfortunately  we  have  not  received  permission  to  publish  it,  the
exact  closeness  of  the  coincidence  between  dream  and  event  not  yet
having  been  ascertained.    (See  p.  527  forlater  statements.)

Sub-Class  B.

A  decidedly  interesting  coincidence  dependent  upon  the  observa-
tion and  memory  of  several  people  is  reported  to  us  by  our  friend
Dr.  S.  L.  Abbot.  The  coincidence  occurred  in  his  own  practice.  He
originally  wrote  an  account  of  it  to  Dr.  Bowditch,  and  has  since
been  at  considerable  trouble  to  get  the  statements  that  are  printed
here  along  with  his  letter.  We  hoped  at  the  outset,  and  we  hope
still,  for  assistance  in  our  work  from  physicians,  whose  practice  must
give  them  many  opportunities  of  learning  what  would  interest  us.
It  is  not  too  often  that  our  hope  has  been  realized,  and  we  feel  very
strong  gratitude  to  busy  men  who  can  thus  keep  our  injury  in  mind.
All  the  names  except  Dr.  Abbot's  are  represented  in  the  following  by
initials :  Mrs.  E.  D.  was  the  patient,  M.  B.  was  her  nurse,  Miss  E.
A.  P.  is  the  sister  of  Mrs.  E.  D. :  —


402  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

[25]  {From  Dr.  S.  L.  Abbot.)

Boston,  May  15,  1886.
Dear  Dr.  Bowditch  :  —

The  story  which  I  told  you  is  as  follows  :  —

A  few  weeks  since  I  was  in  attendance  on  Mrs.  D.,  who  was  quite  ill.
One  evening  at  dessert  we  happened  to  have  some  very  nice  ice-cream
which  our  cook  had  compounded,  and  Mrs.  Abbot  said  she  should  like  to
send  some  to  Mrs.  D.  if  1  thought  it  would  do  her  no  harm.  1  told  her
that  at  that  hour  of  the  day  I  did  not  think  it  prudent  for  her  to  eat  it,  and
it  was  not  sent.  The  next  morning  I  said  to  Mrs.  D.,  during  my
professional  call,  "Mrs.  D.,  you  don't  know  what  I  saved  you  from
last  evening." — "Why,  what  was  that?  "  was  the  reply.  —  "Some  deli-
cious icecream,"  was  my  answer,  "  which  Mrs.  Abbot  wanted  to  send
you,  but  I  wouldn't  let  her."  She  then  said  that  when  she  awoke  from  her
first  nap  the  night  before,  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock,  she  said
to  her  nurse,  "I  think  I'll  have  a  little  of  my  ice-cream."  The
nurse  was  puzzled,  and  asked  her  what  she  said,  and  she  re-
peated her  remark.  The  nurse  thought  she  was  a  little  nighty,  per-
haps, and  turned  the  subject  by  saying  it  was  about  time  for  her  to  take
her  cough-pill,  which  she  proceeded  to  give  her.  After  she  had  taken
it  Mrs.  D.  said,  "  And  now  I'll  have  my  ice-cream." — "  What  ice-cream?  "
said  the  nurse.  —  "Why,  that  ice-cream  over  there,  in  a  glass,"  pointing
across  the  room,  —  "the  ice-cream  that  Mrs.  Abbot  sent  me !  "  And  Mrs.
D.  added,  in  telling  me  the  story,  "I  was  so  disappointed  in  finding
there  was  none  for  me  that  I  couldn't  help  crying."  I  will  only  add  that
neither  Mrs.  Abbot  nor  myself  had  suggested  to  her  at  any  time  the  idea

of  sending  her  any  ice-cream.1

S.  L.  ABBOT.

November  28,  1888.

I  hereby  certify  that  the  above  statement  is  true.

(Signed)  E.  D.

M.  B.

I  hereby  declare  that  the  occurrence  certified  to  by  Mrs.  D.  and  Mrs.
B.  was  reported  to  me  by  them  on  the  morning  following,  and  I  believe

that  their  statement  is  true.

(Signed)  E.  A.  P.

December  10,  1888.
We  dined  at  six  o'clock,  and  it  was  probably  towards  seven  P.M.  that

Mrs.  Abbot  made  the  remark  about  the  ice-cream.

S.  L.  ABBOT.

The  conditions  are  not  such  as  to  make  the  discovered  coincidence,
with  any  degree  of  probability,  a  mistaken  reminiscence  on  Dr.  A.'s

»  In  a  conversation  with  me  on  Jan.  3d,  1889,  Dr.  Abbot  stated  that  he  thought  that  about  four
years  before  this  incident  occurred,  Mrs.  Abbot  had  sent  Mrs.  D.  some  ice-cream,  but  that  Mrs.
Abbot  had  entirely  forgotten  it.  —  R.  H.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  403

part,  produced  by  his  patient's  own  inqui^  as  to  the  ice-cream,  and
I  think  the  case  as  it  stands  a  very  good  coincidence.

From  physicians  come  also  the  two  following  cases,  Nos.  26  and  27
on  the  list  of  this  paper.  They  speak  for  themselves,  and  I  give  the
full  evidence  without  comment.  Each  is  a  noteworthy  coincidence,
each  is  well  established  so  far  as  observation  and  memory  can  estab-
lish such  things,  and,  of  course,  neither  alone  is  enough  to  put  us  on
the  right  track  in  the  search  for  any  explanation  of  the  causes  of  such
complex  events.  In  Case  26,  documents  appear,  but  not  as  establish-
ing the  date  of  the  supposed  telepathic  experience,  only  as  establish-
ing the  reality  of  the  events  with  which  the  experience  seemed  to  have
some  connection.


[26]  [First  Letter.]

{Experience  of  Mrs.   W.  H.  X)

Philadelphia,  Oct.  13,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — ...  Dr.  X.  gave  me  the  enclosed  account  of  his  wife's
experience.  It  seems,  to  me,  interesting  from  the  coincidence  of  the  dates
pointing  to  the  probability  of  "  mental  telepathy"  between  the  writer  of
the  letters  in  France  and  Mrs.  X.  in  Philadelphia.

Permission  is  given  to  publish  this  account,  not  using  the  name.

Yours  truly,

G.  M.

Statement  of  Dr.  X.,  of  Philadelphia,  enclosed  with  first  letter,
and  written  October,  1888  :  —

On  the  evening  of  the  29th  of  June,  1888,  my  wife  became  hysterical
for  the  first  time,  to  my  knowledge,  during  seven  years'  marriage.  She
had  a  paroxysm  of  weeping,  almost  violent,  fearing  some  unknown  dis-
aster to  some  member  of  her  family  in  France.  This  lasted  about  half  an
hour.     On  the  7th  of  July  there  was  a  similar  nervous  attack.

A  letter,  bearing  date  of  the  29th  of  June,  announced  the  serious  sudden
illness  (apoplexy),  already  of  several  days'  duration,  of  her  father,  and
another  announced  his  demise  on  the  6th  July.

Statement  of  Mrs.  X.,  November,  1888  :  —

I  made  no  note  of  time  or  date  of  my  experience  as  above  noted,  and
had  forgotten  it  until  shown  your  questions  and  note  by  my  husband.  I
certainly  remember  that  I  had  the  experience  about  the  time  stated.  The
extracts  from  the  letters  are  correct.

[S.  X.]


404  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

[Second  Letter.]
{From  Br.  X.  to  Mr.  Hodgson.}

November  17,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  Sec'y  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  :  —

My  dear  Sir,  —  I  must  apologize  for  not  replying  at  once  to  yours  of
the  18th  ult.  It  reached  me  when  I  was  exceedingly  busy,  and  a  necessary
delay  degenerated  to  carelessness.  Besides  this,  my  wife  had  a  similar
nervous  attack  on  the  28th  of  September,  and  was  very  sure  that  some-
thing unpleasant  had  happened  to  her  sister.  I  desired  to  await  a  letter.
This  came  about  two  weeks  ago  (from  the  sister) ,  and  there  was  no  men-
tion of  anything  untoward.  Up  to  this  time  (the  arrival  of  said  letter)
I  had  not  spoken  to  my  wife  of  any  relation  between  her  nervous  spells  of
last  summer  (which  I  attribute  to  overwork  indoors,  and  nervous  exhaus-
tion) and  the  sickness  and  death  of  her  father.  I  consider  that  the  case
is  purely  coincidence,  although  not  prepared  to  deny  all  influence  of
telepathy.

I  have  answered  the  questions  as  fully  as  I  think  will  meet  your  require-
ments, and  my  only  objection  to  sending  letters  is  that  they  are  concerned
with  family  matters,  and  such  I  always  consider  sacred.

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  wish  to  see  a  certain  telepathy  in  the  case,
as  well  as  in  the  interest  of  impartial  judgment,  I  ought  to  state  that  be-
tween the  two  letters  mentioned  there  was  received  another,  written  on  the
6th  July,  and  mailed  before  3  P.M.,  the  same  day,  stating  that  my  father-
in-law  was  dying.  This  letter  was  received  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of
July.

(Signed)  [Dr.  X.]

Enclosed  answers  of  Dr.  X.  to  questions  :  —

1.  Q.   Did  your  wife  have  any  similar  experience  before  marriage?
A.   No.

2.  Q.  At  what  time  in  the  evening,  on  the  29th  of  June,  did  the  expe-
rience occur  to  your  wife?

A.   About  9  P.M.

3.  Q.    Can  you  ascertain  at  what  time  the  letter  was  being  written?

A.    It  was  written  before  3  P.M.,  that  being  the  hour  stamped  on
the  envelope.

4.  Have  you  any  objection  to  our  seeing  the  letter  of  the  29th  of  June,
and  taking  a  copy  of  the  passage  having  relation  to  the  case?

A.  Yes.     The  passages  are,  "  Le  pauvre  pere  est  tres  malade.  .  .  .
Le  medecin  dit  qu'il  n'ira  pas  plus  loin  qu'un  ou  deux  jours."

5.  Q.  At  what  time  on  the  7th  of  July  did  your  wife  have  her  second
experience?

A.    About  10  P.M.     It  might  have  been  as  early  as  8,  —  not  earlier.

6.  Q.    At  what  time  did  her  father  die  on  the  6th  of  July?
A.    About  6  P.M.     (See  question  10.)

7.  Q.  Had  your  wife  any  reason  to  be  apprehensive  as  regards  the
state  of  health  of  any  member  of  her  family  in  France?

A.   No.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  405

8.  Q.    At  what  date  was  the  letter  of  the  29th  of  June  received?
A.    The  morning  of  the  10th  of  July.

9.  Q.   At  what  date  was  the  letter  announcing  the  death  received?

A.  The  morning  of  the  28th  of  July.  It  was  written  (date  of  let-
ter) on  the  10th,  but  posted  on  the  17th.

10.  Q.  Can  we  see  the  letter  announcing  the  death,  and  take  copy  of
passage  referring  to  it?

A.  No.  The  passage  is,  "  Papa  est  mort  le  6  juillet,  a  6h  du  soir."
(Letter  from  my  wife's  sister. )

11.  Q.  Can  your  wife  kindly,  herself,  write  out  a  brief  statement  of  her
experiences,  or  confirm  the  account  given  by  yourself,  a  copy  of  which  I
enclose  for  her  signature?

12.  Q.   Were  you  yourself  present  at  both  her  experiences?
A.   Yes.

13.  Q.  Were  any  memoranda  made  of  your  wife's  experiences  on  the
days  of  their  occurrence,  and,  if  so,  can  we  see  them?

A.  The  only  memoranda  made  are  small  lead-pencil  marks  opposite
the  dates  on  a  calendar.  These  marks  were  not  made  until  after  the  letter
announcing  the  death  of  my  father-in-law  was  received.  I  am  sure  they
are  correct,  for  the  occurrence  was  fresh  in  my  memory.  I  would  have
forgotten  them  by  this  time.

Further  answers  to  subsequent  inquiries,  together  with  other  sup-
plementary statements  received,  show  that  the  nervous  attacks  of
this  lady  have  continued  at  intervals  since  the  time  above  mentioned,
but  leave  us  in  no  doubt  of  the  coincidence  between  the  first  two
attacks  and  the  events  in  France,  as  set  forth  above.  The  hypoth-
esis of  chance  coincidence  is,  of  course,  very  plausible  in  this  case.


[27]  [First  Letter.]

(From  W.  0.  S.)

Albany,  New  York,  Sept.  10,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boylston place,  Boston,  Mass.:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  had  a  personal  experience  during  the  past  week  which
would,  I  think,  be  of  interest  to  your  Committee  on  Apparitions,  and  I
send  it  as  I  understand  you  wish  to  collect  as  many  accounts  as  possible.
I  am  not  a  subscriber  to  your  society,  and  would  like  to  know  a  little
more  of  its  scope  and  aims.  I  have  been  aware  of  its  existence  through
an  advertisement  which  I  clipped  from  a  paper,  and  through  friends  who
are  subscribers.

Yours  truly,

W.  O.  S.

[Statement  :  For  Committee  on  Apparitions.]

(Mem.  from  W.  O.  S.,  M.D.,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  '88.)

I  am  a  physician,  have  been  in  practice  about  eleven  years;  am  in
excellent  health,  do  not  use  intoxicants,  tobacco,  drugs,  or  strong  tea  or


406


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.


coffee.  Am  not  subject  (in  the  least)  to  dreams,  and  have  never  been  a
believer  in  apparitions,  etc.

On  Monday  last,  Sept.  3,  1888,  I  went  to  bed  about  11  P.M.,  after  my
day's  work.  Had  supper,  a  light  one,  about  7  P.M. ;  made  calls  after
supper.

My  bedroom  is  on  the  second  floor  of  a  city  block  house,  and  I  keep  all
my  doors  locked  except  the  one  leading  to  my  wife's  room,  next  to  mine,
opening  into  mine  by  a  wide  sliding  door,  always  left  wide  open  at  night.
The  following  diagram  will  illustrate  the  relation  of  the  rooms.


I  occupy  room  1  and  my  wife  room  2.  Her  room  has  but  one  window,
and  a  cloor  opening  only  into  my  room.  My  room  has  three  doors  (all
bolted  at  night)  and  one  window.  Both  windows  in  our  rooms  have
heavy  green  shades,  which  are  drawn  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the  window
at  night,  shutting  out  early  daylight.  No  artificial  lights  command  the
windows,  and  the  moonlight  very  seldom.

I  undressed  and  went  to  bed  about  11,  and  soon  was  asleep.  In  the
neighborhood  of  4  A.M.  I  was  awakened  by  a  strong  light  in  my  face.  I
awoke  and  thought  I  saw  my  wife  standing  at  Pig.  3,  as  she  was  to  rise  at
5.30  to  take  an  early  train.  The  light  was  so  bright  and  pervading  that  I
spoke,  but  got  no  answer.  As  I  spoke,  the  figure  retreated  to  Fig.  4,  and
as  gradually  faded  to  a  spot  at  Pig.  5.  The  noiseless  shifting  of  the
light  made  me  think  it  was  a  servant  in  the  hall  and  the  light  was  thrown
through  the  keyhole  as  she  moved.  That  could  not  be,  as  some  clothing
covered  the  keyhole.  I  then  thought  a  burglar  must  be  in  the  room,  as
the  light  settled  near  a  large  safe  in  my  room.  Thereupon  I  called
loudly  to  my  wife,  and  sprang  to  light  a  light.  As  I  called  her  name  she
suddenly  awoke,  and  called  out,  "  What  is  that  bright  light  in  your
room?  "  I  lit  the  gas  and  searched  (there  had  been  no  light  in  either
room).     Everything  was  undisturbed.

My  wife  left  on  the  early  train.  I  attended  to  my  work  as  usual.  At
noon,  when  I  reached  home,  the  servant  who  answers  the  door  informed
me  that  a  man  had  been  to  my  office  to  see  about  a  certificate  for  a  young
lady  who  had  died  suddenly  early  that  morning  from  a  hemorrhage  from
the  lungs.  She  died  about  1  o'clock  —  the  figure  I  saw  about  4  o'clock.
There  was  but  little  resemblance  between  the  two,  as  far  as  I  noticed,


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  407

except  height  and  figure.  The  faces  were  not  unlike,  except  that  the
apparition  seemed  considerably  older.  I  had  seen  the  young  lady  the
evening  before,  but,  although  much  interested  in  the  case,  did  not  consider
it  immediately  serious.  She  had  been  in  excellent  health  up  to  within
two  days  of  her  death.  At  first  she  spit  a  little  blood,  from  a  strain.
When  she  was  taken  with  the  severe  hemorrhage,  and  choked  to  death,
she  called  for  help  and  for  me.

This  is  the  first  experience  of  the  kind  I  have  ever  had,  or  personally
have  known  about.  It  was  very  clear  —  the  figure  or  apparition  —  at
first,  but  rapidly  faded.  My  wife  remarked  the  light  before  I  had  spoken
anything  except  her  name.  When  I  awake  I  am  wide  awake  in  an
instant,  as  I  am  accustomed  to  answer  a  telephone  in  the  hall  and  my
office-bell  at  night.

[Second  Letter.]

{From   W.   0.  S.)

Albany,  N.Y.,  Sept.  29,  1888.
Dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  my  wife's  statement,  as  requested.  The  parents
of  the  young  lady  who  died  are  ignorant  and  superstitious,  and  I  can  get
no  statement  (signed)  out  of  them.     I  have  no  objection  to  publication.

Yours  truly,

W.  O.  S.
Sbo.  A.  S.  P.  R.

(Letter  from  Mrs.  W.  0.  S.)

Albany,  Sept.  27,  1888.
Dear  Sir,  —  On  the  morning  of  Sept.  4  I  was  suddenly  awakened  out
of  a  sound  sleep  by  my  husband's  calling  to  me  from  an  adjoining  room.
Before  I  answered  him  I  was  struck  with  the  fact  that  although  the  green
shade  to  his  window  was  drawn  down,  his  room  seemed  flooded  by  a  soft
yellow  light,  while  my  chamber,  with  the  window  on  same  side  as  his,  and
with  the  shade  drawn  up,  was  dark.  The  first  thing  I  said  was,  "  What  is
that  light?  "  He  replied  he  didn't  know.  I  then  got  up  and  Avent  into  his
room,  which  was  still  quite  light.  The  light  faded  away  in  a  moment  or
two.  The  shade  was  down  all  the  time.  When  I  went  back  to  my  room
I  saw  that  it  was  a  few  moments  after  four.

Very  truly,

F.  S.  [wife  of  W.  O.  S.]

[Third  Letter.]

(From  Mrs.  W.  0.  S.)
Mr.   Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, — Your  note  of  Oct.  11  is  at  hand.  In  reply  I  would  say,
in  regard  to  the  light  in  my  husband's  room,  that  it  seemed  to  me  to  be
perhaps  more  in  the  corner  between  his  window  and  my  door,  although  it
was  faintly  distributed  through  the  room.  When  I  first  saw  the  light
(lying  in  bed)  it  was  brilliant,  but  I  only  commanded  a  view  of  the  corner
of  his  room,  between  his  window  and  my  door.  When  I  reached  the  door
the  light  had  begun  to  fade,  though  it  seemed  brighter  in  the  door-way  where
I  stood  than  elsewhere.     My  husband  seemed  greatly  perplexed,  and  said,


408  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

"How  strange!  I  thought  surely  there  was  a  woman  in  my  room."  I
said,  "  Did  you  think  it  was  I?  "  He  said,  "  At  first,  of  course,  I  thought
so,  but  when  I  rubbed  my  eyes  I  saw  it  was  not.     It  looked  some  like  Mrs.

B "  (another    patient   of    his,  —  not  the    girl  who   died  that  night).

He,  moreover,  said  that  the  figure  never  seemed  to  look  directly  at  him,
but  towards  the  wall  beyond  his  bed ;  and  that  the  figure  seemed  clothed
in  white,  or  something  very  light.  That  was  all  he  said,  except  that  later,
when  he  knew  the  girl  was  dead,  and  I  asked  him  if  the  figure  at  all  re-
sembled her,  he  said,  "Yes,  it  did  look  like  her,  only  older."

Respectfully,

Mrs.  W.  0.  S.
Oct.  16,  '88.

The  case  is  interesting,  as  being  very  well  reported,  and  as  leaving
us  in  no  doubt  about  the  reality  of  this  odd  experience.  The  con-
ditions do  not  make  any  detailed  explanation  of  the  occurrence  at  all
plausible,  although  many  possible  causes  for  the  experience  may
suggest  themselves  to  our  readers.  We  will  offer  no  conjectures  at
present.

The  next  case  is  one  of  a  decidedly  puzzling  sort,  to  which  our
attention  was  attracted  by  the  following  item  from  a  Philadelphia
newspaper,  which  was  going  the  rounds  of  the  press  :  —

[28]  A    CASE    OF    REAL    CLAIRVOYANCE.

WHILE    LYING    SICK   IN   BED    A   WOMAN     SEES    A   MURDER   AND   A    SUICIDE.

A  most-  remarkable  case  of  clairvoyance  is  the  absorbing  topic  among
the  residents  of  South  Camden,  and  is  perplexing  the  wise  people  of  that
city.

The  case  is  that  of  Mrs.  Annie  Field,  of  805  Broadway,  who  died  a  few
days  ago,  and  who  was  a  very  highly  respected  and  estimable  lady.

One  day,  while  sick,  she  made  inquiry,  during  a  few  moments  of  con-
sciousness, relative  to  the  health  of  Turner  Berry,  a  well-known  business
man  in  that  locality,  and  who  had  been  seen  that  morning  in  excellent
health.  An  hour  or  two  afterward  a  little  daughter  of  Mr.  Berry  called
at  the  Fields'  residence,  and  said  her  father  had  been  taken  very  ill.  On
the  following  day  Mrs.  Field  rose  up  suddenly  from  her  stupor  and,  in
apparently  great  agony  of  mind,  declared  that  a  well-to-do  brother-in-law,
residing  in  Pennsylvania,  was  way  up  among  the  Pennsylvania  forests,
seriously  ill,  and  his  family  were  greatly  agitated  over  his  disappearance,
and  could  not  find  him.  A  day  or  two  later  a  letter  came  confirming
this.

The  most  mysterious  case  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Field's  clairvoyance,
however,  was  that  in  connection  with  the  murder  of  Amelia  Walker  by
Michael  Finnigan,  and  the  latter 's  suicide.

On  the  night  of  the  murder  Mrs.  Field  suddenly  sprang  up  in  bed,  after
having  been  in  a  stupor  for  a  long  time,  and  in  terror  cried  out:  "  See
that  man  and  woman  and  the  carriage  at  the  City  Hall ;  see  the  confusion ;
let  me  get  near  the  man ;  let  me  get  near  him !  "    The  old  lady  was  with


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  409

difficulty  quieted,  and  then  she  broke  out  again,  declaring  that  a  terrible
thing  was  happening,  and  the  man  was  causing  them  trouble.  Then,  in  a
very  weakened  condition,  the  old  lady  fell  back  in  her  bed.

On  the  following  morning,  Mr.  Field  began  to  read  the  account  of  the
murder  to  his  daughters,  when  one  of  them  seized  the  paper  from  his
hand,  and  was  shocked  to  discover  that  the  facts  were  identical  with  those
their  mother  had  seen  in  her  stupor.     Two  days  later  Mrs.  Field  died.

In  answer  to  our  inquiries  we  have  come  into  possession  of  the
following  correspondence  relating  to  Mrs.  Field's  experience  :  —

[First  Letter.]

{From  the  late  Mrs.  Field's  son-in-law.)

Camden,  N.J.,  May  1,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  March  20  and  April  21  were  duly  received.
...  I  shall  endeavor  to  narrate  the  incidents  of  the  last  illness  of  Mrs,
Anne  J.  Field,  to  which  the  "Evening  Telegraph"  of  March  6  alluded
as  "  manifestation  of  clairvoyant  power."  Should  you  desire  a  more
systematic  paper,  please  forward  the  form  used  in  such  instances.

Mrs.  Anne  J.  Field,  set.  fifty-four,  was  a  woman  of  unusual  intelligence,
possessing  all  the  characteristics  of  the  pure  English  woman  of  higher
birth,  and  no  trace  of  superstition,  save  that  found  in  a  strict  adherence  to
the  traditions  and  doctrines  of  the  High  Church  of  England.

On  the  15th  of  February  Mrs.  Field  contracted  a  cold,  which  culminated
in  pneumonia  with  typhoid  fever.  Five  days  later  the  suspicions  of  her
physician  were  aroused  by  a  marked  symptom  (the  patient  also  steadily
growing  weaker  with  the  pneumonia  and  fever  conquered),  and  an  exam-
ination revealed  undoubted  evidence  of  Bright's  disease  suffusing  the  body
with  its  fatal  poison,  — influencing  the  mind  to  the  extent  of  a  tendency
to  reflection  upon  vanished  possibilities.

Upon  the  evening  of  the  murder  and  suicide  near  our  City  Hall,  Mrs.
Field  lay,  probably  in  a  semi-comatose  condition,  though  apparently
awake,  as  her  eyes  were  open,  with  nothing  unusual  to  attract  attention  in
her  occasional  remarks,  when  suddenly  she  raised  herself  in  her  bed,  ex-
claiming, "  Help !  He's  killing  her  —  won't  some  one  go  to  her  assistance?  "
She  then  recited  to  her  daughter,  in  close  attendance  upon  her  through  her
illness,  a  long  story,  detailing  a  walk  that  evening  upon  the  avenue  upon
which  the  City  Hall  is  situated,  stating  that,  while  there,  a  sorrel  horse,
pulling  a  light  carriage  or  buggy,  in  which  a  quarrelling  pair  of  human
beings  were  seen,  passed  her,  and  shortly  after  stopped.  It  was  then  the
quarrel  became  fatally  warm,  as  Mrs.  Field,  at  this  juncture,  startled  her
daughter  with  her  outcry.

This  is  a  succinct  description  of  this  incident,  which  was  laughed  at  as  a
mere  dream,  and  accounted  for  by  the  theory  that  her  hearing,  unnaturally
quickened  by  disease,  had  caught  a  conversation  relating  to  the  occurrence
carried  on  in  the  street  outside,  appropriating  it  to  her  use  as  a  personal
adventure.  To  offset  this,  however,  is  the  fact  that  some  years  previously
Mrs.  Field's  entire  left  side  had  been  paralyzed,  and  her  brain,  eye,  ear,


410  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

and  arm  of  that  side  rendered  almost  useless,  and  at  the  time  of  this  occur-
rence she  was  at  least  fourteen  feet  from  a  closed  window.  Her  daughter,
a  young  woman  of  unusually  quick  perception,  at  that  time  thoroughly
wide  awake,  and  six  feet  (or  more)  closer  to  the  windows  of  the  room,
heard  nothing  in  allusion  to  the  matter,  — in  fact,  nothing  save  the  tramp
of  the  pedestrians  to  and  fro.

There  was  no  attempt  at  description,  either  of  personage  or  mode  of
murder,  but  a  plain,  unvarnished  tale  of  a  supposed  stroll,  aimless  as  could
possibly  be  in  comparative  midwinter,  and  the  single  descriptive  attempt
comprised  in  the  allusion  to  the  sorrel  horse  walking  out  of  the  city,  via
the  avenue  on  which  the  City  Hall  stands.

Mr.  Turner  Berry,  of  Camden,  alluded  to  in  the  publication,  was  an
acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Field,  who  had  been  in  ill-health  for  a  long  time,
though  for  a  short  while  previous  to  this  occasion  had  sufficiently  recov-
ered to  resume  his  outdoor  habits,  and  was  noticed  upon  the  street  a  few
hours  before  the  following :  —

On  the  morning  of  the  City-Hall  tragedy,  Mrs.  Field,  in  the  course  of  a
desultory  conversation,  remarked  that  she  would  like  to  know  how  Mr.
Berry  was  "  getting  on,"  as  he  was  "again  very  ill  and  in  bed," — a  re-
mark which  occasioned  a  smile,  and  the  assurance  that  she  was  wrong,  as
he  had  been  recently  seen  on  the  street.  She  insisted,  however,  that  he
was  seriously  indisposed,  and  was  indulged  in  her  belief  as  a  mere  harm-
less whim.  Toward  evening  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Berry  called,  by  advice  of
her  mother,  to  inquire  about  the  condition  of  Mrs.  Field,  informing  her
hostess  that  her  father  was  again  critically  ill,  having  been  compelled  to
retire  from  public  gaze  that  A.M.

This  covers  this  case  of  "  manifestation ,"  I  believe.

My  little  pet  dog,  left  alone  during  business  hours,  by  reason  of  my
wife's  {Miss  Field's)  attendance  upon  her  mother  some  distance  away,
and  my  absence  in  Philadelphia,  betrayed  signs  of  loneliness,  evinced  by
depression  of  spirits  and  loss  of  appetite,  crouching  in  a  corner  of  a
lounge,  and  barely  returning  my  salutations  at  night.  During  another
conversation,  at  about  the  same  time  as  the  above-mentioned,  Mrs.  Field
questioned  her  daughter  about  her  home  affairs,  woman-like,  suddenly
alluding  to  the  "  poor  little  dog  sitting  in  the  corner,"  frightened.  Upon
my  visit  that  evening,  after  the  customary  inquiries,  I  endeavored  to
change  the  current  of  thought  by  the  sportsmanlike  allusion  to  the  invalid
dog  sitting  in  the  corner  of  the  lounge  at  home,  and  was  astonished  to
learn  that  it  had  been  "divined"  correctly,  save  in  regard  to  location,
although  the  corner  of  the  lounge  was  as  near  as  could  be  in  the  corner  of
the  room.

In  the  absence  of  knowledge  of  your  wants,  this  is  the  best  I  can  do  for
you  at  present,  beyond  assuring  you  of  the  truth  of  everything  herein
contained.

I  have  not  read,  or  even  seen,  the  publication  in  the  "Evening  Tele-
graph," and  but  two  elsewhere,  one  of  about  ten  lines  in  a  "Sunday
World  "  (New  York),  and  a  twenty-liner  in  the  "  Evening  Call"  (Phila-
delphia), of  March  7,  evidently  a  condensation  of  the  original;  hence
you  have  the  story  as  I  know  it,  in  full,  without  embellishment  of  any
kind,  or  concealment  of  any  kind  on  the  other  hand.

Hoping  this  will  prove  satisfactory  to  you,  or  at  least  for  the  present,  I


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.


411


tender  you  freely  any  service  in  my  power  to  give  you.  My  delay  was
due  to  pressure  of  other  matters,  but  you  will  pardon  this  tardy  reply,  but
unintentional  discourtesy.

Very  truly  yours,

EMILE  G.  TRAUBEL,

633  Royden  st.,

Camden,  N.J.
For  family  of  Mrs.  Field  (dec'd  Feb.  24,  1888).

[Appended  Statement.']
It  may  be  necessary  to  add  that  the  events  detailed  occurred  within  a
period  of  twenty-four  hours,  beginning  with  the  allusion  to  Mr.  Berry  (1),
the  dog  (2),  and  the  trip  to  Murderland  (3).

[Endorsement  on  First  Letter.]

I  have  examined  the  foregoing  and  subscribe  to  its  correctness  in  every
detail.

Respectfully,

Mrs.  HELEN  E STEELE  TRAUBEL
[Nee  Field].

[Second  Letter.]

Camden,  N.J.,  May  16,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. :  —

Dear  Sir,  — If  you  will  send  me  a  copy  of  my  communication  of  first,
I  will  secure  the  statement  of  my  wife  regarding  correctness  of  contents,
over  her  signature.     [See  above.]

I  have  not  preserved  a  copy  of  any  paper  containing  an  account  of  the
"  Walker- Finnegan  "  murder,  but  will  try  to  secure  one  for  you,  if  desired.

A  rough  calculation  of  the  bee-line  distance  of  Mrs.  Field  from  the
scene  of  the  murder  would  give  at  least  2,500  feet,  perhaps  3,500,  about
eight  "  blocks  "  distant,  north  to  east.


RES


BENSON


BERKLEY


6       CLINTON


ROYDEN


U  I   N  E


PINE     ST.


I  will  not  vouch  for  these  figures,  as  I  have  no  means  at  hand  for  secur-
ing measurements,  but  will  assure  you  that  the  strongly  outlined  blocks
are  not  within  "  speaking  distance."


412  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

Until  you  have  Mrs.  Traubel's  version  of  these  occurrences  at  her
mother's  bedside ,  I  think  it  advisable  for  me  to  avoid  further  attempt  at
description.  You  will  receive,  I  think,  full  reply  to  your  second,  third,
and  fourth  queries  embodied  in  yours  of  11th  inst.  when  we  receive  the
copy  of  my  last.

Please  do  not  quote  me  as  endorsing  any  form  of  spiritualism  because
of  my  writing  replies  to  your  favors ;  courtesy  demanded  my  action,  and  I
am,  moreover,  quite  interested  in  mystery  unravelling,  so  much  so  at  least
as  a  plain  matter-of-fact  person  of  no  scientific  knowledge  can  be.
If  successful,  will  send  you  a  paper  containing  description  of  murder.
Respectfully  yours,

E.  G.  TRAUBEL,

633  Royden  street,

Camden,  N.J.

[Third  Letter.]

Camden,  N.J.,  June  4,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Demands  compelling  attention  have  prevented  my  reply-
ing to  yours  of  23d  ult.  until  to-day.

I  enclose  your  "typewritten"  copy  of  communication  of  May  1,  upon
which  you  will  find  (on  back  of  fifth  page)  the  statement  of  Mrs.  Trau-
bel  (Miss  Field)  over  her  signature;  it  testifies  to  the  correctness  of  the
narrative  of  the  letter,  which  will,  I  hope,  add  to  your  confidence.  [The
endorsement  in  question  has  been  printed  above,  with  Letter  1.]

It  is  impossible  to  go  further  into  detail;  the  parties  who  "heard  and
saw"  are  afraid   of  their  memories,  and  unwilling  to  add  to  the  story
though  fully  able  to  corroborate  my  compilation  of  events,  which,  it  is
claimed,  covers  the  ground  quite  fully.

I  am  compelled  to  depend  upon  accident  for  a  copy  of  a  paper  contain-
ing an  account  of  the  murder  alluded  to.  It  appears  that  the  publishers
destroy  all  papers  unused  a  few  weeks  after  publication  (fourteen  days  in
some  instances),  and  as  I  applied  six  weeks  after,  was  not  supplied;
March  1-May.  How  would  it  answer  to  request  one  of  the  papers,  say
"  The  Record,"  to  give,  in  its  correspondent's  column,  a  brief  account  of
the  occurrence?

This  would  prove  the  fact  of  the  murder,  without  extended  descrip-
tion. If  acceptable,  I  will  make  the  request  upon  advisement.  No
Philadelphia  Daily  will  part  with  a  filed  copy  of  their  publication.

Should  further  service,  as  indicated  above,  be  desired,  please  feel  at
liberty  to  demand  it.

Very  respectfully,

EMILE  G.  TRAUBEL,

633  Royden  street.
[Fourth  Letter.]

Philadelphia,  June  15,  1888.
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  I  send  you  the  story  you  desire.     It  is  written
hurriedly,   but  is   accurate.     It  happened,  as  you  see,  in   Camden,  just
across  from  Philadelphia.

Very  respectfully  yours,

H.  m.  watts.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  413

Copy  of  the  appended  statement,  with  account  of  the  murder:  —

At  half-past  eight  o'clock,  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  February  23,
within  a  stone's-throw  of  the  City  Hall  of  Camden,  N.J.,  opposite  Phila-
delphia, Michael  Finnegan,  a  dissolute  character,  aged  about  thirty-five
years,  shot  and  fatally  wounded  Amelia  Walker,  another  worthless  crea-
ture and  faithless  wife,  and  then  sent  a  bullet  through  his  own  brain.
His  death  was  instantaneous,  but  the  woman  was  taken  to  Cooper  Hos-
pital, where  she  lived  until  11.17  o'clock  without  recovering  con-
sciousness. The  murder  and  suicide  took  place  in  a  lonely  part  of  the
town,  as  the  Camden  City  Hall  is  out  in  the  suburbs.  An  old  lady  living
at  436  Trenton  Avenue  gave  the  alarm  to  the  police.  The  police  took  the
body  of  the  murderer  to  the  morgue,  and  the  woman  to  the  hospital.  On
searching  around,  they  found  a  horse  and  buggy,  which  had  conveyed  the
disreputable  pair  from  Philadelphia  to  the  fatal  spot.  Woodford  Hughes,
a  switchman  at  Haddin  Avenue,  was  the  only  witness.  He  saw  the  flash
of  the  pistol  and  heard  the  report.  He  saw  a  man  leaning  over  the  dash-
board of  the  buggy;  soon  after  he  heard  another  shot,  but  he  went  on  his
way.  It  is  supposed  that,  after  shooting  his  companion,  the  murderer
started  to  drive  off,  but,  being  overcome  with  remorse,  walked  back  to  her
body  and  killed  himself.

The  murderer  had  blond  hair  and  a  sandy  mustache.  The  woman  was
about  twenty-four,  plump  and  good-looking.  The  police  traced  them
across  the  river,  and  it  was  finally  discovered  that  the  brother  of  the  mur-
derer lived  at  713  South  Third  street,  Philadelphia.  He  identified  the
body  of  his  brother,  and  the  woman  as  "  Amelia."  Frank  Tapping,  of
314  South  Sixth  street,  Philadelphia,  identified  the  body  as  that  of
Amelia  Walker,  who,  with  her  husband,  a  huckster,  had  lodged  at  his
house.     Both  persons  were  low,  disreputable,  and  depraved.

The  story  in  brief  is  this  :  On  Wednesday,  at  two  o'clock,  the  man  and
woman  started  from  McCauley's  livery-stable,  on  Griscom  street,  Philadel-
phia. They  drove  away,  having  a  whiskey-bottle  with  them.  They
crossed  on  ferry-boat  Beverly  to  Camden,  and  finally  brought  up  at  the
City  Hall  region  at  half-past  eight  o'clock.

The  murderer  was  a  politician  of  a  low  type  in  the  fourth  ward  of  Phila-
delphia.

[Fifth  Letter.]

Philadelphia,  June  23,  1888.
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  Replying  to  your  first  question  I  answer  that
the  account  I  sent  you  was  obtained  from  the  file  of  ' '  The  Press "  for
February  23  and  24.  As  I  would  not  mutilate  the  file,  I  was  unable  to
send  you  the  printed  account ;  but  the  facts  sent  I  can  vouch  for  as  being
taken  from  the  two  reports  in  the  paper  of  the  dates  mentioned.  .  .  .

Yours  respectfully,

H.  M.  WATTS.

This  is  all  the  information  at  present  on  hand  as  to  this  interesting
case.  The  courtesy  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Traubel  in  taking  such
trouble  in   our   behalf   must   be    warmly   acknowledged.      Without


414  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

more  specific  statements,  however,  as  to  the  precise  circumstances  of
Mrs.  Field's  experiences,  statements  depending  upon  a  fuller  report
of  the  separate  memories  of  all  who  heard  her  mention  these  experi-
ences, or  who  knew  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time,  we  are  still
unable  to  decide  upon  the  value  of  the  remarkable  coincidences
reported.  We  hope  that  by  means  of  interviews  we  may  yet  succeed
in  substituting  for  the  general  summary  of  the  family's  recollection,
as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Traubel  have  given  this  summary,  the  more  specific
recollections  referred  to.  For  the  present  one  must  simply  suspend
judgment  upon  the  final  significance  of  the  case,  although  it  is  a
promising  case.

Sub-Class   C.

The  cases  which  I  finally  give  in  this  sub-class  are  by  no  means
worthless,  although  they  vary  in  value,  and  one  or  two  are  interesting
mainly  as  mere  curiosities  of  our  collection.

[29]  {For  the  American  Psychical  Society.)

One  Monday,  last  winter,  I  called  on  Rev.  and  Mrs.  X.  During  the
call  our  conversation  turned  on  their  previous  evening's  visit  with  one
of  the  Baptists'  visiting  ministers,  and  eventually  we  talked  of  dreams.

I  remarked  that  I  dreamed  nearly  a  whole  novel  the  previous  night.
On  inquiry  I  told  the  dream  as  follows :  —

The  story  was  laid  in  ancient  Greece.  It  appeared  that  a  young  man,  a
member  of  the  nobility,  was  visiting  on  the  mainland,  and  received  a
command  from  his  father,  who  lived  on  an  island  of  the  Greek  Archipel-
ago, to  return  home.  During  his  visit  he  became  acquainted  with  a  beau-
tiful young  girl  of  a  lower  station  in  society.  A  love  affair  sprang  up
between  them,  and  on  his  preparing  to  return,  she  resolved  to  run  away
and  accompany  him.  Before  doing  so,  she  visited  the  temple  and  pro-
cured a  charm  of  the  priest.  She  received  three  Greek  words,  two  of
which  I  saw  plainly  and  recalled  after  I  awoke ;  the  other  one  I  had  great
difficulty  in  seeing,  and  could  not  distinguish  or  recall  it.  It  seemed  a
matter  of  great  perplexity  that  I  could  not  do  so.

Eventually  the  girl  arrived  in  the  boat,  where  a  servant  and  a  friend  of
her  lover  had  already  arrived.     Her  lover  had  not.

Here  the  story  ended.  I  awoke  presently,  but  the  next  morning  could
not  recall  the  Greek  words,  although  my  mind  retained  a  viv}d  impression
and  desire  to  do  so.

Mrs.  X.  asked  me  a  few  questions,  and  then  said,  "  I  have  something
connected  with  that  to  tell  you."  But  some  company  calling  just  then,
her  narrative  was  deferred  until  a  later  visit,  when  she  told  the  story  she
has  written  out.

I  will  add  that  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  me  to  read  books  of  history,
poetry,  etc.,  when  asleep.  The  books  read  are  never  those  I  have  seen
while  awake.  I  have  often  recalled  one  or  tAvo  stanzas  of  poetry  which
were  well  constructed.     I  never  write  them  down  and  soon  forget  them.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  415

On  a  previous  occasion  Mrs.  X.  had  mentioned  dreaming  that  she
entered  the  room  in  which  I  sat  reading  so  intently,  that  she  entered  the
room,  came  and  stood  beside  me,  and  then  left  the  room  apparently
without  my  being  aware  of  her  presence.

To  which  I  replied,  "  I  was  reading  a  very  interesting  book  until  very
late  last  night."

These  coincidences  suggest  a  theory  of  dreams  briefly  stated  thus  :  —

The  sleeper  being  in  the  percipient  state,  receives  as  dreams,  through
thought-transference,  real  events  or  thoughts  of  one  or  more  active
agents  who  may  be  near  or  far  away.

This  will  account  for  the  foreign  elements,  complex  images,  and
incongruities  of  dreams.

Respectfully,
(Signed)  ERNEST  HOLLENBECK.

Davison,  Mich.,  May  5,  1888.

{For  the  American  Society  of  Psychical  Research.}

In  compliance  with  your  request  I  make  the  following  statement :  —

On  the  afternoon  of  Jan.  29,  1888,  in  studying  the  lesson  for  the  fol-
lowing Sunday,  I  came  upon  the  Greek  kurion,  oikos,  which  words  were
contracted  into  kuroik  and  kuriake;  hence  kirk  and  church.1  Before  I
finished  the  lesson  Mr.  F.,  our  State  missionary,  arrived.  I  went  at  once
to  prepare  tea ;  but  kurion,  kuroik,  and  kuriake  were  constantly  recurring
to  my  mind,  but  I  could  not  recall  oikos,  though  I  was  frequently  conscious
of  an  almost  involuntary  effort  to  do  so.  I  attended  evening  service,
and  afterwards  Mr.  F.,  my  husband,  and  I  conversed  on  "Psychical
Research"  until  one  o'clock.  Before  we  parted  that  night  Mr.  F.
showed  us  his  wife's  picture,  and  related  an  instance  in  which  he  appar-
ently obtained  a  mental  impression  from  her  when  at  quite  a  distance
away.  This  occurred  during  the  early  part  of  their  acquaintance,  and
led  him  to  speak  of  their  courtship  and  marriage.  He  also  informed  us
that  she  was  in  Kansas,  and  that  he  intended  going  after  her  soon.

After  nine  o'clock,  very  frequently,  I  may  almost  say  constantly,  I
thought  of  Mr.  Hollenbeck.  I  knew  that  he  was  deeply  interested  in  the
subject  under  discussion,  and  I  tried  to  impress  our  guest's  experience  and
opinions  on  my  mind  in  order  to  repeat  to  him,  and  I  remarked  to  Mr.
F.  that  had  I  known  that  he  had  made  a  study  of  such  matters  I
should  have  invited  Mr.  Hollenbeck  to  be  present.

I  was  interested  during  the  whole  time,  but  that  did  not  prevent  my  mind
from  wandering  after  the  last  word.  The  book  containing  it  lay  upon  a
table  near  me.  Once  I  was  about  to  take  it  up  to  satisfy  myself,  but  the
thought  that  Mr.  F.  might  think  that  I  was  weary  of  the  discussion  pre-
vented me.  The  book  was  still  upon  the  table  with  my  S.S.  Quarterly
laid  between  the  leaves,  marking  the  place  where  oikos  was  to  be  found,
when,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day,  Mr.  Hollenbeck  called  and
related  his  dream  and  asserted  that  the  missing  Greek  word  annoyed  him.

1  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  our  correspondent's  Greek  compounds  and  her  ety-
mology have  a  sort  of  Chautauquan  quality  (if  we  may  be  pardoned  the  word),  for  which  we
must  decline  to  be  responsible.


416  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

I   asked  if  he   had  read  Greek  lately ;  he   replied  that  he  had  not  even
thought  of  it,  and  did  not  know  why  he  should  dream  of  it.

Owing  to  the  presence  of  uninterested  persons  I  did  not  then  refer  to
my  experience  of  the  preceding  night.  I  did  not  see  Mr.  Hollenbeck  in
some  days,  and  when  I  did  he  still  had  a  clear  remembrance  of  the  dream,
but  could  not  recall  any  of  the  Greek.

Kespectfully,
(Signed)  [Mrs.  X.]

The  coincidence  is  extremely  slight,  but  my  mention  of  it  here  may
remind  some  correspondent  of  similar  and  possibly  more  important
experiences.-

The  next  case  is  interesting,  but  needs  no  further  comment,  ex-
cept, possibly,  the  remark  that  if  telepathy  were  as  well  established
as  it  is  still  questionable,  we  should  regard  this  as  a  probable  illustra-
tion of  the  process.     Meanwhile,  the  case  is  still  problematic.

[30]  {From  Mrs.  C.  L.  C.)

Washington,  Nov.  1,  1887.
Prof.  H.  P.  Bowditch  :  —

Dear  Sir, — A  paragraph  relating  to  your  Psychical  Society,  which
I  read  in  the  paper  last  evening,  induces  me  to  send  you  an  experience  of
my  own,  which  I  think  may  interest  you,  bearing,  as  it  does,  upon  the
curious  influence  of  mind  upon  mind.

Some  years  ago,  when  my  children  were  young,  I  was  sleeping  in  the
room  with  them,  they  in  one  bed,  and  I  in  another.  I  went  to  sleep  as
usual.  I  dreamed  a  fearful  dream.  I  thought  that,  with  my  oldest  child,
I  had  taken  passage  on  a  steamer,  and  was  crossing  a  wide  expanse  of
water.  My  boy  had  left  me,  to  play  about  the  boat,  when  I  suddenly
heard  the  most  piercing  shrieks,  and  recognized  his  voice.  Pilled  with
agonizing  apprehensions,  I  made  my  way  to  the  engine-room,  from  which
the  sounds  proceeded,  and  was  met  by  an  old  servant,  who  told  me  that,
the  fuel  having  given  out,  they  had  cut  up  my  boy  and  fed  his  body  to
the  flames.

I  awoke,  shivering  as  in  an  ague,  stone-cold  perspiration  bedewing  my
whole  body.  I  immediately  became  conscious  of  stifled  moans  proceeding
from  the  opposite  bed.  I  sprang  from  mine,  and,  running  across  the  room,
found  that  my  eldest  boy  was  struggling  with  nightmare,  making  inarticu-
late sounds,  in  a  vain  effort  to  speak.  I  shook  and  called  him  two  or  three
times  before  I  succeeded  in  breaking  the  spell,  when  he  cried  out,  in
tones  of  the  utmost  anguish,  "Mamma!  Mamma!  I  dreamed  they  were
cutting  me  up  for  kindling-wood"  I  slept  no  more  that  night;  the
dream  had  been  too  vivid.

I  have  told  this  experience  of  mine  several  times ;  sometimes  to  sym-
pathetic, oftener  to  scoffing,  listeners,  who  declared  that  the  boy  must
have  uttered  the  words  in  his  sleep,  thereby  giving  rise  to  my  dream.  But
that  is  impossible,  because  I  found  him  struggling  in  vain  to  speak.  His
painful  moans  would  have  accounted  for  my  having  a  painful  dream  of
him ;    but  what  except  the   sympathy   of   mind   with  mind   could  have


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,  417

caused  us  to  have  the  same  dreams,  for  I  am  never  known  to  talk  in  my
sleep,  and  therefore  no  exclamation  of  mine  could  have  caused  his
dream?

How  do  you  account  for  it?  I  am  of  an  exceedingly  anxious  tempera-
ment where  those  whom  I  love  are  concerned ;  and  my  boy  is  of  a  quick,
merry,  active  temper,  imaginative  and  impressionable,  and,  like  most  men,
impatient  at  the  thought  of  suffering,  either  in  his  own  person  or  that  of
others.

Hoping  the  incident  may  prove  of  some  value  in  aiding  your  researches,

I  am,

Very  truly  yours,

C.  L.  C.

(From  Mrs.   C.  L.   C.)

Georgetown,  April  7,  '88.
Me.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, —  I  have  delayed  returning  blank  G,  hoping  to  send  it  well
filled,  but  the  indifference  of  friends  and  my  own  forgetfulness  have
proved  obstacles.  Some  seem  to  be  afraid  that  they  are  to  be  entrapped
in  some  way;  others  fear  being  thought  superstitious;  and  others,  again,
pronounce  it  sheer  nonsense.  I  am  much  interested  myself  in  any  study
of  the  laws  of  mental  action.

You  requested  that  I  would  give  you  more  nearly  the  ages  of  my  son
and  self  at  the  time  the  dream  occurred,  of  which  I  wrote  you.  I  was
not  over  thirty-six,  and  he  could  not  have  been  more  than  ten.  I  told  the
dream,  on  the  same  day,  to  my  mother  and  the  family  generally.  Whether
they  remember  it  I  cannot  say,  but  shall  see  them  soon,  and  will  forward
any  statement  to  that  effect  that  you  care  to  have.

At  the  time  of  the  dream  my  son  and  self  were  both  in  ordinary,  though
not  rude,  health,  and  he  is  of  a  sensitive,  impressionable  temperament,
while  I  was,  and  had  been  for  many  months,  undergoing  great  mental
strain,  owing  to  troubles  it  is  needless  to  mention.

(Signed)  C.  L.  C.

Of  the  next  case  I  can  also  say  little,  except  that,  on  the  one  hand,
it  may  be  an  instance  of  a  mere  coincidence,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  notwithstanding  the  sincerity  of  our  correspondents,  there  may
be  here  only  a  pseudo-presentiment,  since  Mary  B.  may  somehow
have  learned  the  contents  of  the  telegrams  before  she  mentioned  her
dream.  Errors  of  memory  on  the  part  of  all  concerned  would  then
account  for  the  rest,  without  in  an}'  wise  making  doubtful  the  general
trustworthiness  of  the  people  in  question.  For  slight  errors  of
memory  are,  after  all,  so  easy.

[31]  (From  Miss  A.)

New  York,  April  27,  1888.
R   Hodgson  :  —

Dear    Sir,  —  A   curious  coincidence  occurred  this   morning   which   I

report  immediately.

A  young  woman  in  our  household,  North  Irish  by  birth,  Mary  B. ,  said


418  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

early  this  morning  that  she  had  had  a  bad  dream  in  the  night.  Her
mistress,  an  elderly  lady  and  an  invalid,  in  whose  room  Mary  B.  sleeps,
complained  of  being  very  restless  in  the  early  part  of  the  night,  and  of
having  unpleasant  dreams,  but  she  slept  soundly  later  on.  Mary  B.  then
got  to  sleep  too,  when  her  dream  occurred.  She  says  she  saw  distinctly
the  sister  of  her  mistress  —  whom  she  has  not  seen  in  a  year,  and  then
only  in  a  passing  sort  of  way  —  standing  on  the  threshold  of  the  door,  in
a  long  black  gown  and  her  hands  folded  in  front  of  her.  Mary  B.  related
this  as  soon  as  she  rose  in  the  morning  to  a  member  of  the  family,  and
said  impressively,  "I  am  sure  something  is  going  to  happen."  A  half-
hour  later,  the  door-bell  rang  and  the  messenger  handed  in  a  telegram,
which  was  brought  up  to  me  directly.  (Mary  B.  was  then  upstairs  and
knew  nothing  of  it  for  some  hours  after.)     The  telegram  stated  that  Mrs.

D.  of had  been  taken  suddenly  ill  and  was  not  expected  to  live.

This  was  the  lady  (the  sister  of  her  mistress)  whom  Mary  B.  had  seen  in
the  night.  .  .  .

(Signed)

[Miss  A.]

May  2d,  1888.
Mr.  R.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, — Yours  of  the  1st  inst.  has  been  received,  and  I  note  that
you  request  further  statement  concerning  the  curious  dream  coincidence
I  reported  on  April  27th.

First.  Inquiries  made  of  Mary  B.'s  mistress  evince  nothing  definite  of
the  precise  nature  of  the  bad  dreams  she  had  on  the  night  of  April  26th
before  12  o'clock.  She  could  remember  nothing  clearly  about  them,  even
on  the  following  morning,  beyond  the  very  strong  impression  they  had
made  of  a  nightmare  character.  She  retains  still  a  vivid  recollection  of
the  disagreeable  and  painful  nature  of  the  dreams,  and  speaks  of  them
with  reluctance  when  questioned.

Mary  B.  says  that  between  11  and  12  o'clock  she  noticed  how  restless
her  mistress  was,  and  that  she  moaned  in  her  sleep;  this  made  her  anxious
and  wakeful.  About  12  o'clock  her  mistress  awoke  and  then  complained
to  Mary  of  having  had  bad  dreams,  but  did  not  state  what  they  were
about,  nor  did  she  name  her  sister  at  all.  Indeed,  Mary  B.  declares  that
her  mistress  had  not  spoken  to  her  of  her  sister  in  many  weeks,  not  since
the  great  storm  of  March  12th,  when  she  was  worried  about  her  sister
being  snowed  up  in  the  country.  Mary  B.  says,  "  I  fell  asleep  and
dreamed  about  2  o'clock,  for  the  dream  was  so  sharp  that  it  woke  me  up,
and  I  thought  some  one  was  standing  in  the  room.  When  I  looked  again
I  thought  I  saw  Mrs.  D.  standing  in  the  doorway  in  a  long  black  dress  and
her  hands  in  front  of  her,  waiting  to  come  in.  It  was  so  sharp  that  I  was
frightened,  got  up  and  went  to  the  door,  because  I  thought  some  one
might  have  come  down  from  upstairs.  I  could  not  get  to  sleep  again.
Mistress  was  then  sleeping  quietly  and  slept  well  till  morning  "

Second.  The  person  to  whom  Mary  B.  related  the  dream  was  Miss  C,  a
member  of  the  family  who  is  the  first  up  and  downstairs  in  the  morning.
The  first  telegram  announcing  the  sudden  illness  of  Mrs.  D.  was  delivered
about  8  A.M.  Another,  about  2  P.M  ,  warned  us  that  there  was  no  hope,
and  a  third,  about  6  P.M.  (April  27th),  announced  the  death.     The  tele-


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,  419

grams,  I  find,  have  not  been  kept,  but  I  could  get  copies  of  them  from
the  telegraph  office,  probably.

Mrs.  D.  was  over  seventy  years  of  age  and  had  been  in  delicate  health
since  January  first,  but  her  doctors  thought  she  might  live,  with  care,
many  months,  and  in  the  strength  of  their  opinion  her  son  had  left  the
country  for  several  weeks.  The  disease  that  carried  her  off  developed
very  rapidly  and  unexpectedly.  Her  sister  (Mary  B.'s  mistress)  knew
nothing  of  her  being  worse  till  the  telegram  came.  She  had  not  been
especially  anxious  about  her  latterly,  as  she  had  a  very  cheerful  letter
concerning  her  condition  on  April  25th,  and  thought  her  sister  was  better.

Miss  B.  has  had  repeatedly  dreams  of  this  nature,  which  have  been  fol-
lowed by  death  or  illness  of  the  person  she  has  dreamed  of.  About  four
months  ago,  she  had  a  similar  dream  concerning  her  father,  an  old  man
in  Ireland,  the  news  of  whose  death  arrived  about  a  fortnight  after.  She
seems  to  have  something  of  the  Scotch  second-sight.  These  dreams  make
a  very  strong  impression  on  her,  and  she  relates  them  in  the  morning
after  having  dreamed  them.

I  will  send  the  telegrams  when  I  get  a  copy  of  them.     Hoping  this  will

prove  satisfactory.

(Signed)

[Miss  A.]

Mrs.  D.  was  wholly  unconscious  for  twelve  hours  preceding  her  death,
and  partially  so  for  twenty-four  hours  previous.

May  4th,  1888.
Mr.  R.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir, — I  enclose  the  statements  of  Mary  B.,  as  desired,  taken
down  from  her  lips  and  read  over  to  her,  to  which  she  has  added  her  sig-
nature.    Miss  C.  has  written  her  own  account.

The  copies  of  the  telegrams  are  enclosed,  but  the  first  one,  thus  worded,
"Mother  has  become  suddenly  worse,"  the  man  has  omitted  to  send.
This  was  the  one  that  was  delivered  about  8  A.M.  on  the  morning  of  the
27th.     The  other  two  were  delivered  at  about  2  P.M.  and  6  P.M.

Mary  B.'s  other  dream  experiences  are  not  sufficiently  clear  as  to  detail
(having  occurred  some  four  and  six  months  ago)  to  be  worth  very  much
now.  A  good  deal  concerning  the  exact  time  and  circumstances  is  no
longer  fresh  in  her  memory,  nor  in  ours.  Mary  B.  could  be  seen  by  any
of  your  committee  who  may  be  in  New  York,  to  whom  she  could  relate
her  experiences.

(Signed)

[Miss   A.]

The  notices  of  Mrs.  D.'s  death  can  also  be  found  in  the  New  York
papers  of  April  28th,  29th,  and  30th.

ON   THE   NIGHT    OF    APRIL    26TH,    1888.

"  Mistress  had  been  quite  restless  like  and  uneasy  in  sleep,  and  moaning
a  little  before  12  o'clock.  When  she  woke  a  little  after,  she  said  she  had
'  such  an  unpleasant  dream,'  but  she  did  not  say  anything  at  all  about
what  it  was.     When  I  fell  asleep  I  had  a  sharp  dream  of  Mrs.  D.  standing


420  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

at  the  sitting-room  door,  facing  me  and  waiting  to  come  in,  in  a  long  black
gown ;  the  long,  long  train  of  it  took  my  attention  first ;  her  hands  folded
across  her  in  front.  I  thought  it  was  really  so,  and  got  such  a  fright,
because  I  thought  Mrs.  D.  was  really  standing  there.  I  felt  that  she  was
either  dead  or  dying,  and  said  to  Miss  C.  in  the  morning,  '  There  is  going
to  be  a  death  in  the  family,  I  am  sure.'  I  did  not  know  she  was  ill,  or
any  telegram  received  till  about  4  o'clock  on  April  27th."

(Signed)

[MARY  B.]

Mary  adds  that  she  is  a  "  very  sharp  dreamer,"  and  that  before  hearing
of  her  father's  death,  some  months  ago,  she  dreamt  that  he  came  here  to
the  house,  and  she  saw  him  distinctly  before  her.  The  news  of  his  death
came  about  a  fortnight  later.

[Miss  A.]

On  the  morning  of  April  27th,  Mary  B.  told  me  she  had  a  vivid  dream
in  the  night,  of  Mrs.  D.,  whom  she  saw  standing  at  the  sitting-room  door.
It  made  such  a  strong  impression  that  she  waked,  and  thought  some  one
was  actually  in  the  room.  Mary  B.  knew  nothing  of  the  receipt  of  the
telegrams  till  evening.

(Signed)

[Miss  C]

[second  telegram.]

April  27,  1888.
Prepare  your  mother  for  the  worst.


[third  telegram.]
Aunt  died  this  morning.     Tell  Miss .


April  27,  1888.


October  28,  1888.

Called  this  evening  at  Miss  A.'s.     She  was  away.     I  saw  Miss  C,  and

she  affirmed  that  Mary  B.  told  her  of  the  dream  immediately  on  her  arrival

downstairs  in  the  morning,  at  about  9  A.M.,  and  before  any  telegram

arrived.

R.  HODGSON.

Miss  A.'s.     October  30,  1888.
Miss  C.  says  that  she  usually  goes  downstairs  between  8  and  9,  and  as
soon  as  she  went  down  on  the  morning  in  question,   "  Mary  B.  told  me  of
her  dream,  and  seemed  much  impressed  by  it."     She  thinks  the  telegram
came  about  10  o'clock,  —  and  heard  about  it  at  the  time.

R.  HODGSON.

Miss  A.'s.     October  30,  1888.

About  half  an  hour  after  I  told  Miss  C.  about  it,  the  telegram  came.
Mrs.  D.  had  been  ill  through  the  winter,  but  was  better.  I  told  Miss  C.
somewhere  about  9.30  or  10  o'clock  in  the  morning.

[Mary  B.,  in  reply  to  my  questions.  —  R.  H  ]


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  421

October  30,  1888.
Mary  B.  appears  to  be  a  thoroughly  honest,  but  emotional  girl,  with
strong  faith  in  a  certain  class  of  dreams  perhaps  amounting  to  superstition ;
but  I   see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  main  facts  of  her  story,  which  she
repeated  to  me  substantially  as  previously  sent  by  Miss  A.

R.  HODGSON.

In  a  letter  of  November  14,  1888,  Miss  A.  writes  :  —

The  first  letter  I  wrote,  containing  the  account  of  the  experience,  was
previous  to  the  last  telegram  announcing  the  death.

November  16.
Mr.  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  ...  Mrs.  D.  was  Mrs.  E.'s  [Mary  B.'s  mistress]  sister,  and

a  circumstance  which  makes  the  case  more  curious,  is  that  all  through  Mrs.

D.'s  illness  she  had  been  very  anxious  to  see  her  sister,]but  her  physicians

were   opposed  to  her  making  the  journey.     Early  in  April  she  seemed

(Mrs.   D.)   rather  better,  and  the  desire  was  so  strong  to  come  to  New

York  that  the  doctors  consented,  and  all  preparations  made  and  the  day

set  for  starting ;  but  when  the  day  arrived  it  was  very  stormy,  and  the

journey  had  to  be  postponed.     Mrs.  D.  was  never  sufficiently  well  after

that  to  make  the  attempt  to  leave  home.     It  was  about  a  year  since  the

sisters  had  met,  and  they  were  the  two  survivors  of  a  very  large  family,

and  always  very  devoted  to  each  other.

(Signed)

[Miss  A.]

We  have  also  obtained  the  following  statements  concerning  the
dream  of  Mary  B.  mentioned  by  Miss  A.  in  her  letter  of  May  2,
1888.  No  record  was  made  as  to  the  date  of  the  dream  at  the
time.

[32]  October  30,  1888.

My  father  had  been  ailing,  but  was  better.  My  mother  was  dead.  I
dreamed  on  January  6th  that  my  father  came  and  called  me.  I  recognized
his  voice.  I  saw  my  mother's  grave  opened  right  up,  and  my  father  was
there,  and  I  thought  it  was  he  opened  it  up;  and  then  my  father  dis-
appeared in  the  grave  alongside  of  my  mother.  I  told  Miss  C.  in  the
morning,  and  said  I  should  hear  bad  news.  Father  died  the  same  night,
January  6,  1888.

I  have  had  other  dreams  much  the  same,  but  don't  remember  them  now
very  well.  The  dreams  are  different  from  ordinary  dreams.  They  al-
ways wake  me  up  in  a  fright,  and  leave  a  disturbing  impression  afterwards.
I  generally  wake  up  very  warm  when  I  have  a  dream  like  that.  The  ex-
periences are  always  dreams.

(Signed)

[MARY  B.]

1  It  should  be  remarked  that  this  statement  adds  decidedly  to  the  interest  and  to  the  possible
value  of  this  case.


422  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

October  30,  1888.
I  recollect  Mary  B.'s  telling  me  of  her  dream  the  next  morning,  and
saying  she  thought  bad  news  would  come.

(Signed)

[Miss  C]

I  close  this  series  of  cases  with  the  following  very  curious  incident,
which,  at  all  events,  will  supply  some  of  our  readers  with  an  excellent
story  for  use  in  late  evening  gatherings.  I  should  acid  that  the  nar-
rator is  known  to  us  as  a  man  of  general  good  sense  and  of  integrity.
Nevertheless,  whatever  be  the  explanation  of  the  tale,  your  commit-
tee feels  itself  unable  to  hope  that  it  will,  after  all,  very  seriously
revolutionize  any  one's  views  about  either  telepathy  or  immortality.

[33]  {From  Mr.  F.  G.)

Boston,  January  11,  1888.
Secretary  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Boston,  Mass.:  —

Sir,  —  Replying  to  the  recently  published  request  of  your  society  for
actual  occurrences  of  psychical  phenomena,  I  respectfully  submit  the  fol-
lowing remarkable  occurrence  to  the  consideration  of  your  distinguished
society,  with  the  assurance  that  the  event  made  a  more  powerful  impres-
sion on  my  mind  than  the  combined  incidents  of  my  whole  life.  I  have
never  mentioned  it  outside  of  my  family  and  a  few  intimate  friends,
knowing  well  that  few  would  believe  it,  or  else  ascribe  it  to  some  disor-
dered state  of  my  mind  at  the  time,  but  I  well  know  I  never  was  in  better
health  or  possessed  a  clearer  head  and  mind  than  at  the  time  it  occurred.

In  1867,  my  only  sister,  a  young  lady  of  eighteen  years,  died  suddenly
of  cholera,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  My  attachment  for  her  was  very  strong,  and
the  blow  a  severe  one  to  me.  A  year  or  so  after  her  death,  the  writer
became  a  commercial  traveller,  and  it  was  in  1876  while  on  one  of  my
Western  trips  that  the  event  occurred.

I  had  "  drummed"  the  city  of  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  and  had  gone  to  my
room  at  the  Pacific  House  to  send  in  my  orders,  which  were  unusually
large  ones,  so  that  I  was  in  a  very  happy  frame  of  mind  indeed.  My
thoughts,  of  course,  were  about  these  orders,  knowing  how  pleased  my
house  would  be  at  my  success.  I  had  not  been  thinking  of  my  late  sister,
or  in  any  manner  reflecting  on  the  past.  The  hour  was  high  noon,  and  the
sun  was  shining  cheerfully  into  my  room.  While  busily  smoking  a  cigar,
and  writing  out  my  orders,  I  suddenly  became  conscious  that  some  one
was  sitting  on  my  left,  with  one  arm  resting  on  the  table.  Quick  as  a
flash  I  turned  and  distinctly  saw  the  form  of  my  dead  sister,  and  for  a
brief  second  or  so  looked  her  squarely  in  the  face ;  and  so  Sure  was  I  that
it  was  she,  that  I  sprang  forward  in  delight,  calling  her  by  name,  and,  as  I
did  so,  the  apparition  instantly  vanished.  Naturally  I  was  startled  and
dumbfounded,  almost  doubting  my  senses ;  but  the  cigar  in  my  mouth,  and
pen  in  hand,  with  the  ink  still  moist  on  my  letter,  I  satisfied  myself  I
had  not  been  dreaming  and  was  wide  awake.  I  was  near  enough  to  touch
her,  had  it  been  a  physical  possibility,  and  noted  her  features,  expression,
and  details  of  dress,  etc.     She  appeared  as  if  alive.     Her   eyes   looked


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  423

kindly  and  perfectly  natural  into  mine.  Her  skin  was  so  life-like  that  I
could  see  the  glow  or  moisture  on  its  surface,  and,  on  the  whole,  there
was  no  change  in  her  appearance,  otherwise  than  when  alive.

Now  comes  the  most  remarkable  confirmation  of  my  statement,  which
cannot  be  doubted  by  those  who  know  what  I  state  actually  occurred.
This  visitation,  or  whatever  you  may  call  it,  so  impressed  me  that  I  took  the
next  train  home,  and  in  the  presence  of  my  parents  and  others  I  related
what  had  occurred.  My  father,  a  man  of  rare  good  sense  and  very  practi-
cal, was  inclined  to  ridicule  me,  as  he  saw  how  earnestly  I  believed  what
I  stated ;  but  he,  too,  was  amazed  when  later  on  I  told  them  of  a  bright
red  line  or  scratch  on  the  right-hand  side  of  my  sister's  face,  which  I  dis-
tinctly had  seen.  When  I  mentioned  this,  my  mother  rose  trembling  to
her  feet  and  nearly  fainted  away,  and  as  soon  as  she  sufficiently  recovered
her  self-possession,  with  tears  streaming  down  her  face,  she  exclaimed
that  I  had  indeed  seen  my  sister,  as  no  living  mortal  but  herself  was  aware
of  that  scratch,  which  she  had  accidentally  made  while  doing  some  little
act  of  kindness  after  my  sister's  death.  She  said  she  well  remembered
how  pained  she  was  to  think  she  should  have,  unintentionally,  marred  the
features  of  her  dead  daughter,  and  that  unknown  to  all,  how  she  had  care-
fully obliterated  all  traces  of  the  slight  scratch  with  the  aid  of  powder,
etc. ,  and  that  she  had  never  mentioned  it  to  a  human  being,  from  that
day  to  this.  In  proof,  neither  my  father  nor  any  of  our  family  had  de-
tected it,  and  positively  were  unaware  of  the  incident,  yet  I  saw  the  scratch
as  bright  as  if  just  made.  So  strangely  impressed  was  my  mother  that
even  after  she  had  retired  to  rest,  she  got  up  and  dressed,  came  to  me  and
told  me  she  knew  at  least  that  I  had  seen  my  sister.  A  few  weeks  later
my  mother  died,  happy  in  her  belief  she  would  rejoin  her  favorite
daughter  in  a  better  world.

I  submit  this  in  all  earnestness,  but  request  that  my  name  should  be
omitted,  should  it  become  public,  or  given  to  the  press,  which  you  are
at  liberty  to  do  if  you  should  so  desire.

Very  truly,
(Signed)  [F.  G.]

Could  any  one  ask  for  stronger  proof  of  supernatural  visitation  than
this?


Boston,  January  14,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  Secretary  A.S.P.R.,  Boston:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Thanks  for  your  favor  13th  and  circulars,  all  of  which
are  at  hand.

Will  follow  your  suggestion  and  write  my  father  and  others  who  were
present  when  I  explained  the  apparition,  and  on  receipt  of  their  replies
will  forward  same  to  you.

I  will  add  here  that  there  was  nothing  of  a  spiritual  or  ghostly  nature  in
either  the  form  or  dress  of  my  sister.  She  appearing  perfectly  natural,
and  dressed  in  clothing  that  she  usually  wore  in  life,  and  which  was
familiar  to  me.  From  her  position  at  the  table,  I  could  only  see  her  from
the  waist  up,  and  her  appearance  and  everything  she  wore  is  indelibly
photographed  in  my  mind.     I  even  had  time  to  notice  the  collar  and  little


424  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

breastpin  she  wore,  as  well  as  the  comb  in  her  hair,  after  the  style  then
worn  by  young  ladies.  The  dress  had  no  particular  association  for  me  or
my  mother,  no  more  so  than  others  she  was  in  the  habit  of  wearing;  but
to-day,  while  I  have  forgotten  all  her  other  dresses,  pins,  and  combs,  I  could
go  to  her  trunk  (which  we  have  just  as  she  left  it)  and  pick  out  the  very
dress  and  ornaments  she  wore  when  she  appeared  to  me,  so  well  do  I  re-
member it.

You  are  correct  in  understanding  that  I  returned  home  earlier  than  I
had  intended,  as  it  had  such  an  effect  on  me  that  I  could  hardly  think  of
any  other  matter ;  in  fact,  I  abandoned  a  trip  that  I  had  barely  commenced,
and,  ordinarily,  would  have  remained  on  the  road  a  month  longer.

I  will  also  add  that  about  ten  days  before  my  mother  died  she  in  all
seriousness  told  me  that  if  it  was  His  will,  or  in  her  power,  to  appear  to
me  after  her  death,  she  would  surely  do  so,  just  as  my  sister  had  done;
but  I  have  never  had  a  similar  experience.  But  I  can  swear  to  this  fact,
that  notwithstanding  my  life  of  constant  travel  in  Europe  and  America,
my  mind  has  so  frequently  been  full  of  thoughts  of  both  my  mother  and
sister,  andatf  such  odd  and  unusual  times,  as  to  half  convince  me  that  even
after  their  death  they  were  exerting  a  more  powerful  influence  over  me
than  when  they  were  on  earth,  through  some  subtle  unknown  agency.

The  members  of  our  family  are  all  strong-willed,  positive,  and  naturally
of  a  sceptical  mind,  with  an  inclination  to  go  into  "  cause  and  effect  "  and
investigate  before  believing;  and  none  of  us  are  in  the  least  superstitious,
believing  only  what  we  can  comprehend  or  what  seems  natural.  I  have
no  doubt  that  many  intelligent  people  have  had  a  similar  experience,  but
through  fear  of  ridicule,  or  being  considered  of  a  morbid  mind,  have  kept
it  secret.  It  seems  natural  for  us  to  make  light  of  these  alleged  visita-
tions, or  whatever  they  are ;  but  no  mortal  man  could  convince  me,  or  any
one  who  has  had  a  similar  experience,  that  we  did  not  see  just  what  we
know  we  saw,  and  still  not  be  superstitious,  merely  being  unable  to  account
for  it.  I  have  often  said  to  myself,  "  I  wonder  what  the  feelings  of  an-
other would  be,  if  he  had,  when  wide  awake  and  in  his  right  senses,  seen
what  I  saw  with  wide  open  eyes  in  broad  daylight?  "  If  it  was  a  common
occurrence,  I  am  sure  it  would  set  people  to  thinking.  I  never  expect  to
convince  others ;  in  fact,  I  don't  blame  them  for  doubting.  Had  it  occurred
to  another  instead  of  myself,  I  would  ascribe  it  to  some  freak  of  memory,
or  morbid  state  of  mind.  Had  it  occurred  at  night,  I  would  have  doubted
my  own  senses,  but  remember  this  was  at  noon,  in  broad  daylight,  when  I
was  smoking,  writing,  and  full  of  business.

We  all  know,  or  are  pretty  well  satisfied,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as
'•  thought-transference,"  and  if  the  soul  is  immortal  it  would  not  seem
unreasonable  to  think  such  a  connection  might  continue  after  death ;  but
the  learned  men  who  are  associated  with  you  are  better  able  to  solve  such
problems  than  the  writer,  if  such  a  thing  is  possible  to  do.

A  few  years  ago  I  read  the  account  of  an  eminent  Englishman  having
had  a  similar  experience,  but  cannot  recall  his  name.  In  his  case,  a
brother  professor  of  his  (an  intimate  associate  long  dead)  appeared  to
him  while  he  was  at  his  desk  writing,  and  he  published  the  facts .  Possi-
bly your  society  has  the  account  of  it.  His  experience  is  valuable,  from
the  fact  of  his  high  position  and  learning,  and  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  recall
his  name  and  profession.


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,  425

Am  afraid  I  have  written  too  much  in  the  matter,  but  was  anxious  to  give
you  all  the  points  I  could.

Very  truly,
(Signed)  [F.  G.]

Boston,  Jan.  23,  1883.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  Secy.  A.S.P.R.,   City:  —

Dear  Sir,  — Thanks  for  your  very  interesting  letter,  duly  received  last
week.  As  per  your  request,  I  enclose  a  letter  from  my  father  which  is
indorsed  by  my  brother,  confirming  the  statement  I  made  to  them  of  the
apparition  I  had  seen.  I  will  add  that  my  father  is  one  of  the  oldest  and
most  respected  citizens  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  a  retired  merchant,  whose  win-
ter residence  is  at ,  Ills.,  a  few  miles  out  by  rail.    He  is  now  seventy

years  of  age,  but  a  remarkably  well-preserved  gentleman  in  body  and  mind,
and  a  very  learned  man,  as  well.  As  I  informed  you,  he  is  slow  to  be-
lieve things  that  reasfon  cannot  explain.     My  brother,  who  indorses   the

statement,  has  resided  in  Boston  for  twelve  years,  doing  business  on

street,  as  per  letter-head  above,  and  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  take
stock  in  statements  without  good  proof.  The  others  who  were  present
(including  my  mother)  are  now  dead,  or  were  then  so  young  as  to  now
have  but  a  dim  remembrance  of  the  matter.

You  will  note  that  my  father  refers  to  the"  scratch,"  and  it  was  this  that
puzzled  all,  even  himself,  and  which  we  have  never  been  able  to  account
for,  further  than  that  in  some  mysterious  way  I  had  actually  seen  my
sister  nine  years  after  death,  and  had  particularly  noticed  and  described
to  my  parents  and  family  this  bright  red  scratch,  and  which,  beyond  all
doubt  in  our  minds,  was  unknown  to  a  soul  save  my  mother,  who  had
accidentally  caused  it.

When  I  made  my  statement,  all,  of  course,  listened  and  were  interested ;
but  the  matter  would  probably  have  passed  with  comments  that  it  was  a
freak  of  memory,  had  not  I  asked  about  the  scratch,  and  the  instant  I
mentioned  it,  my  mother  was  aroused  as  if  she  had  received  an  electric
shock,  as  she  had  kept  it  secret  from  all,  and  she  alone  was  able  to  explain
it.  My  mother  was  a  sincere  Christian  lady,  who  was  for  twenty-five
years  superintendent  of  a  large  infant  class  in  her  church,  the  Southern
Methodist,  and  a  directress  in  many  charitable  institutions,  and  was  highly
educated.  No  lady  at  the  time  stood  higher  in  the  city  of  St.  Louis,  and
she  was,  besides,  a  woman  of  rare  good  sense.

I  mention  these  points  to  give  you  an  insight  into  the  character  and
standing  of  those  whose  testimony,  in  such  a  case,  is  necessary.

Very  truly,
(Signed)  [F.  G.]

(From  Mr.  H.   £.)

,  Ills.,  January  20,  1888.

Dear  F. ,  — Yours  of  16th  inst.  is  received.  In  reply  to  your  questions
relating  to  your  having  seen  our  Annie,  while  at  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  I  will
state  that  I  well  remember  the  statement  you  made  to  family  on  your  re-
turn home.  I  remember  of  your  stating  how  she  looked  in  ordinary  home
dress,  and  particularly  about  the  scratch  (or  red  spot)  on  her  face,  which


426  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.

you  could  not  account  for,  but  which  was  fully  explained  by  your  mother.
The  spot  was  made  while  adjusting  something  about  her  head  while  in  the
casket,  and  covered  with  powder.  All  who  heard  you  relate  the  phenom-
enal sight  thought  it  was  true.  You  well  know  how  sceptical  I  am  about
things  which  reason  cannot  explain.

The  transference  of  thought  may  be  a  possibility ;  I  will  think  of  it.  As
to  soul  or  spirit  leaving  the  body  while  living  and  visiting  departed  and
living  persons,  I  cannot  believe.  If  the  breath  of  life  gives  us  a  soul  and
keeps  us  in  existence,  how  can  the  body  exist  while  the  spirit  is  absent
from  the  body?

Apparitions,  dreams,  ghosts,  and  such  are  unknowable.  I  am  a  know-
nothing.

Very  cold ;  all  well ;  no  news.

Affectionately,

(Signed)  [H.  G.   (father).]

I  was  present  at  the  time  and  indorse  the  above.

(Signed)  [K.  G.   (brother).]


In  closing  this  hasty  account  of  the  work  of  your  committee,  I  feel
called  upon  to  say  something  in  general  as  to  the  worth  of  the  under-
takings of  the  society,  in  so  far  as  we  have  had  anything  to  do  with
them.  I  need  not  remind  you  that  miue  is  the  most  expensive  of
your  committees.  Nearly  the  whole  work  of  collecting  our  facts,  and
of  corresponding  with  our  friends  and  with  our  other  informants,  has
fallen  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  one  paid  officer  of  the  society,  our
able  and  devoted  secretary,  Mr.  Hodgson,  and  our  committee  alone
has  employed  nearly  all  of  his  time,  as  well  as  the  time  of  his  clerical
aid.  If  our  results  are  meagre,  however,  you  must  blame  us  for  the
fact,  for  he  has  done  all  that  he  could.  In  giving  my  own  account
of  my  stewardship,  I  confess  that  I  stand  before  you  much  in  the
position  of  the  unjust  steward,  after  all;  for  even  now,  at  the  close
of  this  stage  of  our  work,  when,  perhaps,  one  who  has  so  little  to
show  you  may  be  easily  accused  of  having  wasted  your  substance,
I  do  even  worse  than  that,  and,  as  you  see,  when  people  come  to  me
saying  that  they  have  accounts  of  telepathy,  I  say  to  more  than  one
of  them,  "  Take  thy  bill,  and  write  '  pseudo-pi-esentiment.'  "  That  is
sad,  I  confess  ;  but  I  did  not  make  these  results,  they  have  been
brought  upon  me  by  fate  ;  and  I  hope  that  the  truth  has  had  its  own
share  in  their  production.

Yet,  after  all,  what  you  want  to  know  is  whether  this  work  looks
to  me  worth  continuing ;  and  I  say,  yes,  by  all  means  it  ought  to  go
on.  We  have  shown,  by  our  study  of  the  pseudo-presentiments,
that  results,  even    if  they  are  not   always    startling,   can   really  be


Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.  427

obtained.  We  have  shown  that  the  collecting  of  stories  is  not  idle
play,  that  a  true  comparative  method  can  be  applied  to  them,  and  that
this  our  research  must,  if  continued,  throw  light  on  the  dark  things
of  mental  life.  Light,  the  light  of  truth,  is  what  you  want  to  have
thrown.     Is  it  not  well  worth  while  to  continue  our  efforts?

As  for  telepathy,  you  see  how  near  it  often  seems  to  us  in  our  in-
quiry, and  yet  how  skilfully  it  again  and  again  eludes  our  pursuit.
It  may  be  a  fact.  If  so,  it  simply  cannot  resist  a  careful  and  patient
search,  pursued  by  varied  methods  such  as  this  society  has  tried  to  use.
It  may  be  a  delusion.  If  so,  however,  some  of  the  classes  of  the  facts
which  we  now  have  in  hand  need,  most  crjingly  need,  a  rigid  expla-
nation by  some  other  means  than  we  yet  have  invented.  May  not
that  means  be  discoverable  a  little  further  on  ?  Ought  we  not  to  look
then  this  little  further?  A  cruel  mistress  telepathy  indeed  is,  if,  after
all,  she  does  somehow  exist.


Room  after  room

I  hunt  the  house  through

We  inhabit  together,

Heart,  fear  nothing,  for  heart,  thou  shalt  find  her,

Next  time,  herself!  —  not  the  trouble  behind  her.


Yet  the  day  wears

And  door  succeeds  door;

I  try  the  fresh  fortune  —

Range  the  whole  house  from  the  wing  to  the  centre.

Still  the  same  chance !  she  goes  out  as  I  enter.

Spend  my  whole  day  in  the  quest  —  who  cares  ?

But  'tis  twilight  you  see,  —  with  such  suites  to  explore,

Such  closets  to  search,  such  alcoves  to  importune !

In  short,  to  cease  this  profaning  of  Browning,  and  to  turn  else-
where for  figures,  "  Phillida  flouts  me."  Perhaps,  however,  the
society  may  find  in  this  report  internal  evidence  that  it  is  the  chairman
of  your  committee  who  is  the  unfaithful  one.  Be  it  so  !  In  the  slightly
adapted  words  of  an  old  song,  "  If  of  herself  she  will  not  exist,
nothing  can  make  her"  —  }Tou  remember  the  rest  of  the  rhyme.
1  confess  it  does  often  seem  to  me,  on  second  thoughts,  that  the
world  without  telepathy  would  be  after  all  a  very  tolerable  kind  of
place  to  live  in,  in  view  of  all  the  other  psychological  curiosities  that
there  are  in  it.  Shall  we  not  then  agree  upon  so  much,  and  pursue
our  labors  with  J037?

But  seriously,  my  genuine  interest  in  this  research,  and,  as  I  have
no  doubt,  your  interest  too,  is  to  search  out  God's  truth  in  these


428  Report  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments,

obscurer  realms.  We  need  not  fancy  the  truth  to  be  initself  obscure,
because  the  realms  are  still  so.  We  need  not  add  mysteries  to  things
to  make  them  more  charming.  The  spiritual  existence  of  this  world,
full  of  God's  thoughts  and  ideals,  is  not  more  spiritual  because  we
cannot  read  some  of  the  thoughts,  nor  as  yet  glow  with  the  realiza-
tion of  all  the  ideals.  What  we  all  want  is  more  knowledge,  and
more  enthusiasm.  If  this  society  offers  to  any  of  us  a  means  whereby
we  can  get  either,  for  Heaven's  sake  let  us  not  miss  the  opportunity !
The  world  needs  not  our  romances  to  make  it  romantic ;  it  is  too
full  already  of  horror  and  of  joy,  of  humor  and  of  sacredness,  for
anything  of  that  sort.  When  we  know  it  best  we  shall  find  it  most
awful  —  and  most  charming.  We  come  back,  then,  from  all  emotional
tests  of  the  worth  of  a  work  of  this  kind  once  more  to  the  simple,
matter-of-fact  test :  Is  this  thing  likely  to  throw  any  light  on  human
life  ?  I  have  tried  to  give  you  a  mere  fragment  of  the  work,  whereby
you  may  somehow  judge  it.  If  we  think  that  it  does  promise  to
throw  any  light  on  human  life,  let  us  not  only  be  unwilling,  but  deeply
afraid,  to  withhold  from  it  our  proper  encouragement.

JOSIAH   ROYCE.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  429


APPENDIX

TO  THE

REPORT  ON   PHANTASMS   AND   PRESENTIMENTS.

The  following  cases  are  quoted  as  additional  specimens  of  the  ma-
terial supplied  to  the  Committee  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.
Comments  upon  most  of  these  cases  will  be  found  on  pp.  516-526.

[34]  1.

Our  attention  was  first  drawn  to  this  case  by  the  following  account,  which
appeared  in  the  Oil  City  "  Derrick  "  (Oil  City,  Pa.),  Dec.  12,  1887  :  —

A  STRANGE   CASE.

GEORGE    FRY    HAS    A    PRESENTIMENT    OF    HIS    BROTHER'S    DEATH

IN    MICHIGAN.

Depot-master  George  Fry,  whose  brother  Gideon  died  at  Big  Rapids,
Mich.,  Sunday  night,  December  4,  had  a  strange  presentiment  of  his  death.
On  Monday  morning,  Mr.  Fry  received  a  telegram,  announcing  the  death
of  his  brother,  but  giving  no  further  information ;  and  in  the  afternoon,  in
conversation  with  a  *'  Derrick  "  reporter,  said,  "I  wrote  a  letter  to  Gid
last  night,  and  just  as  I  had  finished  it  I  glanced  up  and  noticed  the  clock
had  stopped.  I  got  up  and  wound  the  clock,  and  pulled  out  my  watch  to
set  it  by.  It  was  15  minutes  to  10  ;  I  set  the  clock,  and  just  as  I  started  it,
I  heard  the  words,  ■  I'm  gone !  Pm  gone ! '  It  was  Gid's  voice,  and  it
Seemed  to  come  out  of  the  clock.  I  heard  it  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  heard
anything  in  my  life.  It  startled  me,  and  I  related  the  occurrence  to  my
family.  I  am  no  Spiritualist,  but  I  believe  that  must  have  been  the  time,
and  those  the  last  words  of  brother  Gid."  Yesterday,  Mr.  Fry  showed  the
"  Derrick"  a  letter  from  Big  Rapids,  giving  an  account  of  his  brother's  last
moments.  The  letter  stated  that  Gideon  died  at  15  minutes  of  10  Sunday
night,  December  4,  and  his  last  words  were,  *'  I'm  gone  !  I'm  gone  !  "  the
identical  time  and  words  as  related  to  the  reporter  Monday  last.  "  Please
explain  it  to  me,  will  you  ?  "  said  Mr.  Fry.

In  a  later  account  Mr.  Fry  is  described  as  saying :  —

"  I  do  not  pretend  to  account  for  this  extraordinary  circumstance,  but  I
relate  the  facts  exactly  as  they  occurred.  I  am  not  a  Spiritualist,  and  never
had  any  such  experience  before.  The  clock  that  stopped  belonged  to
brother  Gid.  He  left  it  at  his  boarding-house  when  he  left  Oil  City,  and
afterwards  wrote  me  to  get  it  for  him."

In  reply  to  our  inquiries,  Mr.  Fry  wrote  as  follows :  —


430  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

2.

106  Sycamore  st.,

Oil  City,  Pa.,  July  9,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  The  account  of  my  experience  in  regard  to  my  brother's
death  is  true ;  that  is,  the  way  the  Oil  City  or  Pittsburgh  papers  had  it.

I  have  not  received  any  circulars  concerning  your  society  as  yet.  Hoping
this  will  be  satisfactory,  I  remain,

Yours  respectfully,

GEO.  W.  FRY.

Recently  we  have  received  the  following  evidence  in  relation  to  the
case,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  kind  courtesy  of  Mr.  R.  W.
Criswell,  Editor  of  the  Oil  City  "  Derrick, "  who  adds,  in  a  letter  of  Jan.
13,  1889,  "  I  enclose  you  the  result  of  investigation  of  the  Fry  case.  The
witnesses  are  all  reliable."

3.
{From  R.  W.  Criswell,  Editor  of  Oil  City  "  Derrick".)

Oil  City,  Pa.,  Jan.  15.

The  American  Society  of  Psychical  Research,  Boston,  has  been  much
interested  in  the  "  Fry  Case,  at  Oil  City,"  and  under  the  direction  of  Rich-
ard Hodgson,  secretary  of  the  society,  the  writer  has  investigated  the
remarkable  case  for  publication  in  their  Proceedings,  now  going  through
the  press.  The  case  has  previously  been  reported  in  the  newspapers  ;  but
in  the  hurried  manner  in  which  the  facts  were  obtained,  some  essential
points  were  omitted,  giving  the  sceptical  a  chance  to  quibble.  As  given
complete  below,  the  case  probably  presents  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
psychical  phenomena  of  which  there  is  authentic  record.

The  case  summarized  is  this :  George  Fry,  of  Oil  City,  says  he  heard,
while  at  his  home,  what  seemed  to  him  to  be  the  voice  of  his  brother
Gideon  issue  from  a  clock,  saying,  "Fm  gone!  I'm  gone!"  at  precisely
the  same  time  that  his  brother  did  utter  these  words  on  his  death-bed,  at
Big  Rapids,  Mich.,  Sunday  evening,  December  4,  1887.

Hunting  the  Proof.

George  Fry,  who  relates  this  incident  of  a  presentiment  of  his  brother's
death,  has  been  a  resident  of  Oil  City  for  twenty-five  years.  He  is  now
about  thirty-nine  years  of  age,  a  member  in  good  standing  of  the  Second
Presbyterian  Church,  and  a  man  who  is  regarded  as  a  good  citizen  in  every
respect.  At  the  time  of  the  above  occurrence  he  was  depot-master,  em-
ployed by  the  Allegheny  Valley  and  New  York  &  Western  Pennsylvania
Railroads.  With  a  view  to  the  fuller  investigation  of  the  case,  Mr.  Fry  was
seen  on  Sunday  last,  and  asked  to  restate  the  incident  as  he  remembered  it,
for  permanent  record  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psy-
chical Research.     This  is  Mr.  Fry's  statement :  —

"  My  brother  Gideon  and  I  had  been  much  together,  and  were  more  inti-
mate in  our  associations  than  other  members  of  the  family.     I  was  much


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc  431

attached  to  him.  On  Friday,  December  2,  I  received  a  telegram  from  his
physician,  at  Big  Rapids,  that  he  was  ill,  and  could  not  live  over  twenty-four
hours.  I  had  known  of  his  illness,  but  he  had  not  been  regarded  in  a  danger-
ous condition.  I  could  not  leave  my  business  to  go  to  him,  and  I  was  greatly
troubled  on  this  account.  I  was  thinking  of  him  almost  constantly.  In
church,  Sunday,  he  was  the  chief  subject  of  my  prayers.  Sunday  evening,
after  church,  I  sat  down  to  write  him  a  letter,  and  while  writing  it  I
observed  that  the  clock  in  the  room  — his  clock,  by  the  way  —  had  stopped.
I  got  up  to  start  it,  and  looking  at  my  watch  saw  that  it  had  been  stopped
but  a  few  minutes.  I  started  to  wind  it  up,  and  found  that  it  had  not  run
down.  As  I  moved  the  hands  around  a  strange  light  flooded  the  face  of
the  clock,  and  the  words  issued  from  it  in  the  voice  of  brother  Gid,  '  I'm
gone!  I'm  gone!1  The  words  were  distinctly  uttered.  I  was  so  im-
pressed that  brother  Gid  had  died  at  that  moment,  and  that  these  were  his
last  words,  that  I  hastily  sealed  the  letter,  laid  it  away  and  did  not  mail  it.
I  noted  the  time  as  9.45.  I  did  not  mention  this  to  my  family  that  evening,
for  the  reason  that  my  sister,  who  was  in  the  house,  was  much  prostrated  by
the  telegram  of  Friday.  Next  morning,  early,  before  going  to  work,  I  told
my  wife  of  the  incident.  At  about  11.30  that  forenoon  I  wa3  handed  a
telegram  that  had  been  received  by  my  brother,  Daniel  P.  Fry,  in  these
words  only,  *  Gid  is  dead.  Come  to  Montague.'  This  was  signed  by  my
sister  Lizzie,  who  was  at  Big  Rapids.  That  afternoon  I  told  S.  W.  Turner,
a  newspaper  reporter,  of  the  death  of  my  brother;  and  also  told  him,  but
not  to  use  in  the  paper,  of  the  strange  presentiment  of  the  evening  before.
1  had  received  no  word  of  my  brother's  death,  except  the  message  given
above,  nor  did  I  receive  any  more  intelligence  regarding  it  until  some  days
later,  when  a  letter  came  from  my  sister,  giving  particulars.  This  letter
added  that  Gideon  had  died  at  8.45  Sunday  evening,  December  4,  and
his  last  words  were  'I'm  gone!  I'm  gone!1  It  was  at  9.45  that  I  had
heard  the  voice  in  the  clock ;  but  the  difference  in  time  between  Big
Rapids  and  Oil  City  is  just  enough  to  cover  this  discrepancy.  My  sister,
who  was  with  Gideon  when  he  died,  is  now  at  home,  in  Oil  City,  and  she
tells  me  that  for  some  time  before  he  died  he  was  unconscious,  and  im-
agined that  I  was  with  him.  When  any  one  would  leave  the  bedside  he
would  say,  '  George,  don't  leave  me.1 "
Mr.  Fry  stated  a  willingness  to  make  affidavit  to  the  foregoing.

Confirming  Mr.  Fry's  Statement.

An  important  point  in  the  above  is,  "  Did  Mr.  Fry  mention  the  incident
of  the  clock  to  his  wife  Monday  morning  before  going  to  work?11  After
seeing  Mr.  Fry,  his  wife  was  seen,  and  the  following  statement  obtained
from  her  :  —

"Oil  City,  Jan.  13,  1889.

11  In  regard  to  the  presentiment  of  Gideon  P.  Fry^  death,  Dec.  4,  1887,
my  husband  told  me,  early  Monday  morning,  Dec.  5,  1887,  of  the  voice  in
the  clock  which  he  had  heard  the  preceding  evening.

"Mrs.   KATE  J.  FRY."


432  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

S.  W.  Turner,  to  whom  Mr.  Fry  had  related  the  incident  of  the  clock
Monday  afternoon,  was  next  seen,  and  his  statement  obtained  as  follows  :  —

"  Oil  City,  Jan.  13,  1889.
"  George  Fry  told  me  about  1.30,  Monday  afternoon,  Dec.  5,  1887,  of  the
telegram  announcing  his  brother's  death,  and  at  the  same  time  told  me  of
the  voice  in  the  clock  which  he  said  he  had  heard  the  evening:  before.
He  remarked  that  he  would  not  b"e  surprised  to  hear  that  these  words,  '  I'm
gone  !  I'm  gone  ! '  were  his  brother  Gid's  last  words  on  earth.  On  the  Sun-
day following,  Dec.  11,  Mr.  Fry  reminded  me  of  the  conversation  on  the
5th,  and  showed  me  a  letter,  dated  Big  Rapids,  and  signed  by  his  sister,  giv-
ing details  of  his  brother's  death,  and  this  letter  stated  that  Gideon's  last
words  were  '  I'm  gone  !  I'm  gone  !  '  I  wish  further  to  state  that  on  the
following  Wednesday,  December  14,  by  permission  of  Mr.  Fry,  and  with
the  assistance  of  Thomas  Judge,  an  attache  of  the  Western  Union  Tele-
graph Office  here,  I  examined  the  files  of  their  message,  to  learn  what
telegrams  had  been  received  regarding  the  death  of  Gideon  Fry.  The
following  was  the  only  message  received  by  the  Western  Union,  relating
to  it :  —

"  '  Big  Rapids,  Mich.,  Dec.  5.

11 '  Daniel  P.  Fry,  —  Gid  is  dead ;  come  to  Montague.

"  '  (Signed)  LIZZIE    THOMPSON.1

"I  also  investigated  the  files  at  the  Postal  Telegraph  Office,  and  found
nothing.     The  Western  Union  message  had  been  received  at  9.40  A.M.

"  S.  W.  TURNER."

Mrs.  W.  F.  Wood  was  seen  and  said,  "Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fry  are  members
of  my  husband's  church,  and  both  are  earnest  and  consistent  Christians."

4.

Oil  City,  Jan.  18,  1889.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  have  your  favor  of  the  15th,  regarding  original  signatures
in  the  Fry  case.

I  reproduce  Mr.  Turner's  statement,  and  send  it  herewith.     Mr.  Turner

has  been  much  interested  in  the  case,  and  wrote  it  originally  for   the

"  Derrick."     Afterwards  I  investigated  the  case  personally  and  wrote  it  up

more  in  detail.    I  can't  send  you  clippings,  because  we  have  the  articles  only

in  our  files,  which  we  can't  mutilate.   They  do  not  differ  from  what  I  have  sent

you,  except  in  the  point  regarding  the  unsent  letter,  which  we  did  not  have

before.     We  had  the  fact  that  he  wrote  the  letter.     If  this  letter  is  still  in

existence  I  will  get  it,  I  think.     Have  not  been  able  to  see  Mr.  Fry  yet.

I  had  Mrs.  Fry's  statement,  as  forwarded  to  you  in  my  article,  but  I  have

mislaid  it.     What  I  sent  was  a  true  copy  of  what  she  herself  wrote  and

signed.

Very  respectfully,

R.  W.  CRISWELL.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  433

5.

Oil  City,  Pa.,  Jan.  18,  1889.

I  prepared  a  statement  for  Mr.  R.  W.  Criswell  of  the  Oil  City  "  Derrick,"
detailing  my  interviews  with  George  Fry  regarding  the  presentiment  of
his  brother's  death  in  December,  1887,  the  substance  of  which  statement  1
repeat  herein :  —

On  the  afternoon  of  December  5,  1887,  between  1  and  2  o'clock,  I  met
George  Fry  at  the  depot.  He  told  me  of  the  death  the  night  previous  of
his  brother  Gideon,  at  Big  Rapids,  Michigan,  and  at  the  same  time  told  me
of  hearing  the  strange  voice  in  the  clock  about  half-past  nine  Sunday  night.
He  said  the  clock  had  stopped  while  he  was  writing  a  letter  to  his  brother,
and  when  he  got  up  to  wind  it,  the  words  seemed  to  issue  from  it,  "I'm
gone  !  I'm  gone  !  "  He  said  it  was  the  voice  of  his  brother  Gideon.  He
said  the  exact  time  was  9.45.

On  the  following  Sunday,  the  11th,  Mr.  Fry  reminded  me  of  our  conver-
sation on  the  5th,  and  showed  me  a  letter  from  his  sister,  Lizzie  Thompson,
dated  Big  Rapids,  giving  particulars  of  the  death  of  Gideon.  This  letter,
which  I  read,  said  that  Gideon  had  died  at  8.45  P.M.,  Sunday,  Dec.  4,  1887,
and  his  last  words  were,  "  I'm  gone  !  I'm  gone ! "

With  the  permission  of  Mr.  Fry,  I  went  to  the  telegraph  offices  here
Wednesday,  Dec.  14,  and  with  the  help  of  Tom  Judge,  of  the  Western
Union,  searched  their  tiles  for  copies  of  any  messages  relating  to  the  death
of  Gideon  Fry.   Below  is  a  copy  of  the  only  message  bearing  on  the  case : —

"Big  Rapids,  Mich.,  Dec.  5.
"  Daniel  P.  Fry,  Oil  City,  Pa.,  — Gid  is  dead  ;  come  to  Montague.

"LIZZIE  K.  THOMPSON."

This  message  was  received  in  Oil  City  at  9.40  Monday  morning,  Dec.  5.
No  message  was  received  at  the  postal  telegraph  office.
I  have  read  the  foregoing  statement  and  pronounce  it  correct.

S.  W.  TURNER.


[35]  1.

{From  Miss  M.  0.  A.)

Wednesday.
Dear  Mr.  James,  —  I  send  you  an  account  of  my  dream,  as  you  re-
quested, relating  simply  facts,  without  giving  any  dates  or  names,  think-
ing they  would  not  be  desired.     If  you  can  make  any  use  of  this  account,
I  shall  be  very  glad.  Yours  very  truly,

M.  o.  a.

Feb.  8,  '88.

A  Dream.

A  strange  and  curious  dream  came  to  me  one  night  last  autumn,  which,
from  the  events  that  followed,  made  a  deep  impression  upon  me.
I  dreamed  that  my  mother's  brother  died,   and  I  went  to  Brooklyn  to


434  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

attend  the  funeral,  but  was  intensely  annoyed  at  arriving  too  late,  as  the
service  was  over,  and  the  body  being  carried  out  of  the  house.  I  saw  my
aunt  and  cousins,  but  could  not  speak  to  them.  In  the  midst  of  this  dis-
tressing scefce  I  awoke,  hearing  a  loud  crash,  as  of  something  falling.
This  was  a  decided  reality,  but  I  could  discover  nothing  in  my  room  that
had  been  disturbed.

In  the  morning  I  related  my  dream,  and  felt  as  though  I  should  hear  some
news  that  day.

The  noise  I  heard  was  accounted  for  by  the  falling  of  a  weight  in  a  tall

clock  which  stood  in  the  hall.     Two  days  passed,  and  on  the  morning  of

the  third  day  the  paper  contained  a  notice  of  my  uncle's  death  (my  father's

brother),  stating  that  he  died  on  the  night  I  had  my  dream.     It  was  then

too  late  for  me  to  go  to  the  funeral ;  for  some  unknown  reason  I  had  not

been  notified  by  the  family,  although  my  dream  had  informed  me,  perhaps,

of  the  very  hour  that  he  died.

M.  O.  A.

2.

February  25,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  the  sheet  with  the  questions  you  sent  me  in  refer-
ence to  my  dream.  I  can  only  state  the  facts  that  you  already  know,
adding  the  date.  Our  family  names  I  do  not  wish  published,  though  I  have
no  objection  to  my  name  being  used  by  the  committee.

Yours  very  truly,

M.  O.  A.

Feb.  25, 1888.

1.  Date  of  dream  as  nearly  as  possible?    Sept.  2,  1887.

2.  Name  of  mother's  brother  ?     W .

3.  Name  of  father's  brother?     A .

4.  Can  you  kindly  obtain  the  statements  of  any  persons  to  whom  you
related  your  dream  in  the  morning,  before  any  news  came  of  the  death  of
your  father's  brother?    Yes,  of  two  ladies.

5.  Can  you  also  kindly  obtain  the  statements  of  any  persons  concerning
the  falling  of  the  weight  in  the  clock,  on  the  night  of  your  dream,  also  the
night  of  your  uncle's  death  ?     Yes.

3.

Philadelphia.

My  sister's  dream  of  our  uncle's  death,  as  related  by  her,  occurred  at  the
time  she  mentions.  I  was  visiting  her  at  the  time,  and  distinctly  remem-
ber being  told  the  dream,  and  being  asked  if  I  had  heard  a  peculiar
sound  in  the  night.  The  sound  I  did  not  hear,  but  was  present  when  it
was  discovered  that  the  weight  of  the  hall  clock  had  fallen  down.

My  uncle's  death  occurred  at  that  time,  and  the  news  of  it  was  so  late  in

reaching:  us  that  we  were  unable  to  attend  the  funeral.

ISABELLA  A.

March  4,  1838.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  435

4.

Miss  A.  related  to  me  the  dream  which  she  had  relative  to  her  uncle's
death  the  morning  afterward,  and  I  also  heard  the  noise  made  by  the  fall
of  the  clock  weight  the  same  night.


ELIZABETH  B.   H.


March,  1888.


[36]  1.

{From  Dr.  William  Noyes.)

New  York,  April  5,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston:  —

My  dear  Sir,  — I  enclose  with  this  the  letters  from  my  cousin,  Mr.  Will-
iam S.  H.,  of ,  Florida,  in  which  he  mentions  his  dream  at  the  time

of  my  mother's  death.  As  I  know  you  would  prefer  the  original  letters,
I  send  these  rather  than  a  copy,  and  will  ask  you  to  return  them  after
keeping  them  as  long  as  you  may  find  desirable.  I  enclose  also  a  copy  of
the  letter  I  sent  him  asking  for  his  recollection  of  the  dream.

Yours  truly,

WILLIAM  NOYES.

2.
(Original  statement  by  W.  S.  27.)

Florida,  July  24,  1887.
Dear  Uncle  and  Cousin,  —  The  papers  sent  me  came  duly  to  hand,  but
not  looking  for  anything  of  the  kind  I  did  not  see  the  notice  of  aunt's  death
until  late  last  evening.  I  have  dreamed  of  her  several  times  of  late,  and
the  night  of  the  18th  I  dreamt  that  I  was  there,  and  saw  her  in  her  coffin.
Remembering  it  in  the  morning,  I  did  not  imagine  for  a  moment  that  the
dream  was  true.  There  are  but  few  people  in  this  world  whose  death  I
shall  feel  more  keenly  than  hers.     .     .     .

Your  true  friend,

W.  S.  H.

3.
(Letter  sent  to  W.  S.  H.)

New  York,  March  6,  1888.
Do  you  remember  that  shortly  after  mother's  death  you  wrote  to  father
stating  that  you  had  had  a  dream  about  her  ?  I  am  quite  interested  at
present  in  the  matter  of  these  dreams  at  such  times,  and  I  would  be  glad
to  have  you  send  me  as  full  an  account  of  your  recollections  of  the  dream
or  dreams  as  you  can,  giving  dates,  if  possible,  number  of  dreams,  and
their  nature.  The  matter  is  being  investigated  scientifically,  and  I  should
like  to  know  what  your  remembrance  of  the  matter  is.


436


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms.


4.

[The  following  letter  is  the  reply  of  Mr.  W.  S.  H.  to  the  enquiry
of  which  document  3  is  a  copy.  No  other  intimation  was  given  to
Mr.  H.  of  the  contents  of  his  letter  of  July  24,  1887,  document  2.]

Florida,  March  18,  1888.
Dear  Will,  —     ...    During  the  night  of  July  17  or  18,  I  cannot
tell  which  now,  I  dreamt  of  being  in  Boston,  and  of  visiting  some  rooms
arranged  as  follows  :  —


44-


44-


-M-


WINDOW.
— t-t


COT


44-


COT


-H-


COT


44-


COT


4-+


cor


TABLE


H

DOOR.


In  each  room  was  a  cot,  or  something  of  the  kind,  and  on  some  of  the  cots
were  dead  bodies  laid  cut.  In  the  largest  room  I  found  your  mother  laid
out,  after  having  hunted  up  the  undertaker  to  get  the  key.  He  went  with
me  to  the  room,  and  told  me  that  the  bodies  were  there  to  be  prepared  for
burial,  or  to  be  sent  away,  and  that  Mrs.  Noyes  was  to  be  prepared  for
removal.  Two  days  later  I  received  notice  of  her  death,  and  later  saw  by
the  Kearsarge  "  Independent"  that  she  was  taken  to  Bradford,  then  got  a
letter  giving  particulars.

I  knew  that  she  was  sick,  and  dangerously  so,  but  supposed  she  would
live  for  weeks  and  perhaps  for  months.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  intention  to
take  her  to  N.  H.  This  is  about  all  that  I  can  give  you,  except  that  I  told
the  folks  here  of  my  dream  in  the  morning.

You  ask  for  no  theory  from  me,  but  I  will  say  that  in  my  opinion  a
hearty  supper  or  a  little  extra  pressure  of  blood  in  some  part  of  the  brain
would  be  sufficient  to  explain  the  matter  satisfactorily  to  me.     .     .     .

Yours  truly,

W.  S.  H.

5.

New  York,  May  9,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  It  occurs  to  me  that  I  have  not  answered  your  letter  inquir-
ing the   date   of  my  mother's  death.     The  letter  was    put    among    the


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  437

answered  letters,  and  I  regret  to  have  delayed  so  long.  Her  death  occurred
on  Saturday,  July  16,  1887.  For  the  two  or  three  weeks  preceding  her
death  she  was  delirious,  and  I  am  sure  never  made  any  mention  of  Mr.  H.
So  far  as  I  know,  Mr.  H.  made  no  mention  of  his  dream,  but  I  will  write
to  him  on  this  point.

Yours  truly,

WILLIAM  NOYES.

6.

New  York,  May  19,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

My  dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  a  letter  that  I  have  just  received  from  my
cousin,  Mr.  H.  If  you  would  like  any  statement  from  the  people  he  men-
tions, I  shall  be  glad  to  get  it  for  you,  although,  apparently,  they  remember
but  little  of  the  circumstances.

Yours  truly,

WILLIAM  NOYES.

7.

May  14,  1888.
Dear  Will,  —  Yours  of  May  9th  just  to  hand.  In  reply  to  your  ques-
tion about  my  dream,  I  will  say :  I  mentioned  it  to  the  C.'s  while  at  break-
fast the  morning  after,  and  gave  them  quite  a  full  account  of  my  imaginary
visit  to  Boston.  I  just  now  asked  them  if  they  "remember  about  my
dreaming  of  Mrs.  Noyes'  death,  and  seeing  her  body  in  Boston,  a  few  days
before  I  got  news  by  letter  of  the  fact,"  and  they  remember  about  my
speaking  of  it,  but  the  particulars  have  partly  faded  from  their  memories.
I  did  not  restate  them,  as,  if  desired,  I  thought  I  would  see  how  much  they
could  remember  of  it.     .     .     .

W.  S.  H.

8.

New  York,  Jan.  9,  1889.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sik,  —  I  have  written  to  Mr.  H.,  and  will  send  you  his  answer1  as
soon  as  I  receive  it.     I  have  no  objection  to  your  using  my  name.
My  mother's  remains  were  removed  to  New  Hampshire  (Bradford,  Mr.

H 's  home) ,  on  the  Tuesday  morning  after  her  death.

Yours  sincerely,

WILLIAM  NOYES.


[37]  1.

{Account  of  Miss  Befriend  of  Miss  F.  M.)

March,  1888.
In  1870  Miss  F.  M.,  a  lady  about  thirty-five,  sailed  for  Glasgow  in
the  Anchor  Line  steamer  "Cambria."  She  was  sick  during  the  entire
passage,  and  was  shown  a  great  deal  of  attention  by  the  captain,  George
Carnigan.  Naturally  she  would  wish  to  return  by  the  same  steamer,  but
found  that  the  time  of  sailing  did  not  suit  her  own,  so  she  chose  another,

1  This  came  too  late  for  insertion  here.    See  Comments.


488  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

but  always  had  a  feeling  of  regret  that  she  could  not  have  come  back  with
the  captain  who  had  been  so  kind  to  her.  She  never  saw  him  when  in  port
here,  but  on  the  night  of  Oct.  19th  of  the  same  year,  while  sleeping,  she
called  out,  "  The  ship  has  gone  down!1'  A  person  sleeping  in  the  same
room  awakened  her  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  She  was  cryino-,  and
said,  "The  ship  in  which  I  went  to  England  is  lost.  I  saw  it  go  down
with  all  on  board."  In  relating  the  incident  to  me  last  week,  she  said,  "  I
can  see  just  how  the  ship  dived  down  into  the  water,  and  the  waves  closed
over  her,  and  I  felt  Captain  Carnigan  was  lost.11

As  is  well  known,  the  "  Cambria  "  sailed  from  New  York  on,  I  think,  the
8th  October,  1870,  and  was  wrecked  off  Donegal  Bay  in  a  storm,  October
19 ;  so  her  dream  took  place  before  the  news  could  reach  New  York,  and
was  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  only  one  person  was  saved.

2.

New  York  City,  June  10,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  At  last  I  have  accidentally  met  the  lady  who  was  sleeping
in  the  room  with  Miss  M.  at  the  time  she  had  the  remarkable  dream  con-
cerning the  shipwreck.  She  remembered  the  circumstance,  and  was  will-
ing that  I  should  give  you  her  name  and  address.     .     .     .

F.  E.  B.

3.

New  York,  Oct.  17,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  have  just  received  your  letter  and  will  answer  at  once.  I
have  been  away  from  New  York  nearly  all  summer,  and  have  only  just  re-
turned to  the  city,  and  I  must  confess  I  had  nearly  forgotten  about  you.

I  will  relate  the  circumstances  as  near  as  I  can  remember  them  after  the
lapse  of  so  many  years,  although  at  the  time  it  made  a  strong  impression
upon  my  mind.

I  was  a  young  girl,  and  occupying  the  same  room  with  Miss  M.  at  the
time,  and  was  awakened  from  a  sound  sleep  one  night  by  cries  of  distress
from  Miss  M.  I  immediately  awoke  her,  and  then  she  told  me  of  her  ter-
rible dream,  how  she  had  seen  the  "  Cambria11  go  down  with  all  on  board.
The  dream  seemed  to  trouble  her  greatly,  and  she  told  me  she  could  think
of  nothing  else,  the  whole  scene  had  been  so  vivid  and  real ;  but  the
strangest  part  of  the  affair  was  when  the  news  came  a  few  days  afterward
of  the  shipwreck  of  the  "Cambria,11  on  the  very  night  of  Miss  M.'s  dreadful
dream.  All  this  I  remember  as  well  as  though  it  had  happened  yesterday,
but  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  give  you  the  exact  date,  and  as  Miss  M.  is  now
living  in  the  West,  I  could  not  refer  to  her.  As  near  as  I  can  recollect,  it
happened  about  the  20th  or  21st  of  October,  1872.  I  may  be  mistaken
about  the  date,  but  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  the  affair ;  the  whole
thing  happened  just  as  I  have  related  it  to  you.

Yours  respectfully,

A.  L.  S.,

New  York.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  439

4.

New  York,  Oct.  24,  1888.

Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Yours  of  the  20th  received.  In  reply  I  would  say  that  Miss
M.  and  I  were  living  at  the  time  at  the  Ladies1  Christian  Union,  27  North
Washington  Square,  New  York  City,  and  if  my  memory  serves  me  right  I
first  heard  of  the  loss  of  the  "Cambria"  through  the  newspaper,  but  am
sorry  to  say  I  have  no  copy  in  my  possession.  I  made  no  memorandum  at
the  time,  though  I  think  Miss  M.  did  so  ;  but  I  think  the  news  of  the  wreck
was  received  within  a  week  after  Miss  M.'s  wonderful  dream ;  and  we  then
made  the  discovery  that  the  "  Cambria"  was  lost  on  the  very  night  of  her
dream.

Yours  respectfully,

A.  L.  S.

5.

October  29,  1888.
Miss  S.,  with  whom  I  have  had  an  interview  to-day,  is  a  first-rate  wit-
ness :   has  never  had  any  psychical  experience  herself,  but  was  much  im-
pressed by  the  unusual  distress  of  Miss   M.  on  the  night  of  the  latter  s
experience.     Her  evidence  is  of  great  importance  in  this  case.

R.  HODGSON.
6.

[The  steamship  "  Cambria,"  Captain  Carnaghan,  was  wrecked  off  the
coast  of  Donegal,  Ireland,  on  Oct.  19,  1870,  and  only  one  person,  a  sailor,
was  saved.  —  R.  H.]


[38]  1.

(From  Robert  Boram.)

P.  O.  Box  153,
Bunker  Hill,  Macoupin  Co.,  III.,  Dec.  16,  1887.
Gentlemen, — In  reply  to  your  article  in  the  St.  Louis  "Globe  Demo-
crat," headed  "  An  Investigation  of  Dreams,"  would  say  I  have  had  fore-
warnings  by  dreams  of  the  death  of  two  of  my  children,  which  came  to
pass,  also  of  the  death  of  an  uncle  in  England.  As  I  have  undeniable  proof
of  the  latter,  I  enclose  you  an  account,  and  give  you  full  privilege  to  use
it  and  my  name  at  any  time.  I  have  always  been  rather  sceptical  on  such
matters  until  I  had  such  positive  proof  brought  to  my  notice.

Upon  receipt  of  some  of  your  circulars  I  will  have  pleasure  in  collecting
some  evidence  for  you  from  my  friends,  etc.

Respectfully,

R.  BORAM.

Bunker  Hill,  Macoupin  Co.,  III.
In  the  year  1873  I  was  in  good  bodily  health,  and  on  one  Saturday  night
had  a  dream ;  thought  I  had  returned  to  England,  and  visited  the  scenes  of


440  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

my  boyhood;  and,  in  passing  a  row  of  brick  dwelling-houses,  I  was
prompted  to  enter  one  of  them  (which  I  did  without  knocking) ,  and  upon  a
sofa  I  noticed  a  man  lying  down  ;  he  appeared  very  sick  and  much  emaciated.
I  had  entered  the  house  under  the  impression  that  my  father  and  mother
lived  there ;  but  as  I  stood  looking  at  the  sick  man  I  thought,  It  cannot  be
my  father,  for  this  man  looks  older  and  his  cheek-bones  are  higher ;  but
with  these  exceptions,  I  detected  a  strong  family  likeness.  Feeling  some-
what embarrassed,  I  approached  the  couch  and  extended  my  hand  to  the
sick  man,  and  asked  him  how  he  was.  His  only  reply  was  a  mournful
shake  of  the  head  and  feeble  grasp  of  the  hand.  Turning  to  the  man's
attendant,  who  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  couch  (I  noticed  she  was  shorter
than  my  mother) ,  I  asked  her  how  long  the  patient  had  been  sick ;  she
replied,  "Some  time,  sir;"  and  I  awoke.  This  dream  produced  a  deep
impression  on  my  mind,  and  I  told  my  wife  about  it,  and  made  a  note  of  it,
and  told  two  neighbors  about  it  the  next  day.

Three  weeks  after,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  father  in  England,  telling
me  that  his  brother  had  died  a  week  before,  after  a  short  but  painful  illness.
I  then  for  the  first  time  recognized  the  man  in  my  dream.  He  was  older
than  my  father,  and  I  had  not  seen  him  since  I  was  about  nine  years  old.
The  dates  corresponded  with  those  of  my  dream.  I  was  not  in  the  habit
of  thinking  of  this  man.

Elihu  Flanery  and  James  Houston,  Staunton,  111.,  are  the  men  to
whom  I  told  my  dream.

ROBERT  BORAM.

2.
Bunker  Hill,  Macoupin  County,  III.,  Dec.  26,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  valued  favor  of  the  22d  inst.  to  hand,  also  the  cir-
culars, for  which  accept  my  thanks.  Re  the  dream  I  had  of  which  I
wrote  you,  you  ask,  "Did  you  distinguish  any  difference  between  this
dream  and  any  ordinary  dreams  which  you  may  have  ? "  Arts.  Most
decidedly.  The  impression  left  was  very  vivid,  and  I  seemed  under  the
influence  of  the  thought,  best  part  of  the  day,  and  I  felt  sure  something
was  wrong  at  home.  Also,  I  remember  that  the  couch  the  man  was  lying
on  was  a  black  horsehair  covering,  and  the  surroundings  were  natural  as
life.

Mr.  James  Houston,  of  Staunton  (to  whom  I  told  it  next  day),  turned  as
white  as  death  and  trembled  from  head  to  foot,  as  I  told  him  about  it ;  but
as  he  is  somewhat  of  a  believer  in  such  things,  that  did  not  impress  me
much  at  the  time.  However,  when  I  got  the  letter  from  my  father  in
England,  I  felt  certain  that  there  was  more  "truth  than  poetry"  in  my
dream.

2.  My  wife  is  dead,  and  therefore  I  cannot  get  any  statement  from  her.

3.  As  regards  the  memorandum,  I  believe  I  took  it  with  me  to  England
four  years  ago  this  month ;  it  was  in  my  diary,  which  I  thought  would
prove  interesting  reading ;  and  my  father's  letter,  narrating  an  account  of
the  death  of  his  brother,  has  got  lost.    However,  I  got  that  letter  on  a


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  441

Saturday,  and  on  the  following  Monday,  when  I  passed  by  Mr.  Flanery's,
I  called  in,  and  told  them  of  the  letter,  and  reminded  them  of  my  strange
dream.

You  ask  for  other  forewarnings :  here  is  one  that  I  had.  When  in
England  four  years  ago,  on  a  visit  to  my  father,  whose  name  is  A.  W.
Boram,  8  St.  George's  Road,  Kilburn,  N.  W.  London,  I  was  lying  in
bed  one  morning  about  8  o'clock,  with  my  eyes  closed  and  half  asleep.  I
distinctly  felt  some  one  touch  my  arm  and  then  kiss  me,  and  I  heard  my
daughter  Jessie's  voice  say,  "  Wild  goose,  ship,  tar."  I  sprang  up  in  bed,
but  saw  no  one,  and  my  door  was  locked.  This  dream  or  vision  bothered
me  very  much,  but  I  could  not  solve  the  mystery  of  those  apparently
foolish  words.  Two  weeks  after  I  got  a  letter  from  Staunton,  111.,  and
in  it  my  wife  told  me  that  Jessie,  my  eldest  child,  was  about  half  dead
with  lung  fever.  It  takes  fourteen  days  to  get  a  letter,  and  again  I  felt
sure  there  was  truth  in  this  dream.

I  enclose  you  a  statement  from  my  daughter  Florence,  written  in  her
own  hand,  of  a  vision  she  had.     It  is  truthful  in  every  particular.

ROBERT    BORAM,

Bunker  Hill,  111.
Box  153.

{From  Florence  Boram.)

On  or  about  the  8th  of  March,  1887,  I  had  a  peculiar  vision.  I  was
sitting  holding  my  little  brother  who  was  suffering  from  the  effects  of
swallowing  a  grain  of  corn  which  had  lodged  in  his  windpipe.  There
was  no  one  in  the  room  but  my  brother  and  I,  when  I  happened  to  look
up  and  saw  a  beautiful  band  of  angels  just  over  the  door.  One  of  them
seemed  to  be  leader,  and  held  in  his  hand  a  wreath  of  flowers.  They
were  all  looking  down  upon  us ;  they  looked  as  though  they  were  in  a
silver  cloud  ;  such  a  beautiful  sight !  In  a  moment  they  vanished.  I  was
not  at  all  frightened.     In  two  days  more  Freddie  (that  was  his  name)  died.

I  was  living  at  the  time  in  Frederick  Town,  Madison  Co.,  Mo.,  but
I  now  reside  in  Bunker  Hill,  111.

FLORENCE  BORAM.

3.

{Statement  of  Elihu  Flanery.)
Staunton,  Macoupin  County,  III.,  Jan.  1,  1888.

Dear  Sir,  —  I  received  yours  on  yesterday,  the  31st  of  Dec.  The
dream,  as  well  as  I  can  remember  after  four  or  five  years,  is  about  as
follows :  —

Mr.  Boram  said  he  thought  that  he  was  in  England,  and  went  into  a
strange  house.  In  one  corner  of  a  room  was  a  bed  on  which  was  a  man
lying  very  sick ;  he  thought  it  looked  like  his  father,  but  seemed  satisfied
it  wasn't  his  father.  He  asked  him  if  he  was  very  sick.  He  said,  "  Yes."
He  then  asked  the  old  lady  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  how  long  he  had  been
sick.     She  said,  "About  two  weeks."


442  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

Mr.  Boram  seemed  very  uneasy  till  he  got  a  letter  from  home  stating
the  death  of  an  uncle  of  his ;  the  death  occurring  about  the  time  of  the
dream.

Yours  with  respect,

ELIHU  FLANERY.

4.

Bunker  Hill,  III.,  Jan.  17,  1888.
R.  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  In  reply  to  your  valued  favor  of  December  29th,  would  say,
though  deeply  interested  in  the  furtherance  of  your  desires,  am  sorry  I  can-
not aid  you  as  I  would  like  to  do,  as  I  am  in  bed  four-fifths  of  my  time  with
a  cough  that  is  fast  dragging  me  to  that  world  that  we  mortals  are  so
anxious  to  get  a  peep  at  while  living.

Mr.  Houston,  whose  address  I  gave  you  in  Staunton,  is  working  some-
where in  Missouri,  and  he  may  not  have  received  your  letter,  as  his  wife,
like  my  own,  is  much  averse  to  investigations  pertaining  to  the  spirit  world,
and  believes  all  visions  and  materialized  apparitions  to  be  the  work  of  (what
she  terms)  the  devil,  "  a  black  old  fellow  with  hoofs,  horns,  along  tail,  and
the  boss  of  the  fire- work  department  below."  So,  nowyou  can  see  how  it  is
I  cannot  get  her  testimony  to  the  fact  that  baby  Fred  came  to  her  while  she
was  awake  and  patted  her  cheeks,  spoke  to  her  and  disappeared,  after  say-
ing, "Don't  cry,  dear  mamma.  Naughty  Rene,  naughty  May;"  referring
to  the  two  children  who  had  been  quarrelling,  and  were  the  cause  of  her
mental  anxiety.  When  I  tried  to  get  her  to  put  it  down,  she  replied,  "  No,
it  will  only  aid  a  lot  of  Spiritualists,  whose  work  is  connected  with  the  devil,
and  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it."


o


Florence  Boram  did  not  remember  if  she  mentioned  her  vision  to  any  one
before  the  death  of  her  brother,  except  to  us  in  the  family,  but  she  and
Mrs.  B.  spoke  of  it  to  T.  J.  Sellards  and  Sarah  Sellards  and  others  at
Fredericktown,  Mo.,  after  his  death.

Trusting  to  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you  from  time  to  time,
and  wishing  your  society  the  success  that  it  so  justly  merits,  I  am,  dear  sir,

Yours  very  truly,

ROBERT  BORAM.


[39]  1.

(From  Mr.  Ira  Sayles,  511  F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  B.C.)

Sunday  Evening,  April  18,  1885.
To  Morton  Prince,  M.D. :  —

Dear  Sir,  —I  notice  in  "  Science,"  for  April  16th  inst.,  an  invitation  ex-
tended to  any  and  all  knowing  of  any  facts  relative  to  haunted  houses,  ap-
paritions, etc.,  to  communicate  such  facts  to  the  committee  through  some
of  its  individual  members ;  I  therefore  direct  my  communication  to  you,
as  secretary  of  the  committee.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  443

From  1852  to  1858  I  was  principal  in  an  academy  located  at  Rushford,
Alleghany  Co.,  New  York.  My  neighbor  —  about  twenty  feet  between  our
houses  —  was  a  lawyer  by  profession.  His  wife  was  a  bright,  intelligent
lady,  considerably  above  the  ordinary  run  of  women,  still  not  a  highly
educated  one ;  American  born,  bred,  and  educated.

They  had  one  son,  only  child,  a  fairly  bright  boy.  While  at  another
institution  I  had  had  the  boy  under  my  charge,  though  not  there  his  teacher.

In  the  year  1856,  after  having  completed  a  fair  course  of  study,  this  son,
now  a  young  man,  joined  another  and  went  to  Kansas.  They  stopped  in
Lawrence.  As  you  will  recollect,  the  whole  country  was  then  in  a  state  of
belligerent  excitement  over  the  status  of  the  incipient  State  on  the  Slavery
and  Free-soil  issue.  As  the  years  rolled  by  the  excitement  became  more
and  more  turbulent.

Of  course,  this  mother,  whose  very  life  seemed  wrapped  up  in  the  welfare
of  her  boy,  grew  more  and  more  anxious  about  him,  in  consequence  of  the
political  agitation  then  in  progress.  The  young  man  wrote  frequently,  and
always  with  the  sanguine  declarations  born  in  young  inexperience.

In  the  spring  of  1857,  one  night  not  far  from  midnight,  she  woke  her
husband  with  a  scream.  He  always  addressed  her  as  mother.  "  Mother,
what  is  the  matter?1'  said  he.  "  Why !  don't  you  see  Johnny  there1}  He
says  to  me,  '  Mother,  they've  shot  me.  The  bullet  entered  right  here,''  and  he
pointed  to  a  hole  right  over  his  right  eye."  Mr.  Stewart  (the  man's  name)
replied,  "  I  don't  see  anything,  mother.  You've  been  dreaming."  —  "  No,  I
have  not  been  dreaming.  I  was  as  wide  awake  as  I  am  now."  He  tried  to
calm  her,  but  she  wept  all  the  rest  of  the  niglit.  The  next  morning  he
called  me  in,  and  they  both  told  me  of  her  experiences,  she  still  maintaining
that  she  was  wide  awake.  They  always  slept  with  a  lamp  partially  turned
down  in  their  room.  She  maintained  that  she  both  saw  her  son  (Johnny)
and  heard  his  voice.  She  became  more  calm,  however,  after  a  few  days,
and,  quite  likely,  nursed  a  hope  that  she  had  been  the  subject  of  a  hallucina-
tion.

Two  weeks  afterward,  however,  the  young  man  that  went  with  young
Stewart  to  Kansas  returned.  The  first  thing  he  did  was  to  visit  Mr.  Stewart
at  his  law  office,  and  to  narrate  to  him  there,  that  on  a  certain  day,  at  four
o'clock  P.M.,  a  Missourian  shot  Johnny,  the  ball  entering  his  head  just  above
his  right  eye.  Moreover,  the  day  of  the  shooting  proved  to  be  the  very  day
on  which  Mrs.  Stewart  had  her  vision,  at  night,  about  six  hours  after  the
shooting!

I  was  their  nearest,  most  familiar,  and  most  trusted  neighbor.  I  never
knew  that  before  this  she  entertained  any  of  the  superstitions  of  the  low.
I  think  not.  From  that  experience,  however,  she  became  a  stanch  believer
in  Spiritualism.  I  had  myself,  in  1856,  lost  a  little  daughter,  nine  years  of
age,  and  after  her  son's  death  she  told  me  that  Johnny  came  to  her  window
one  night,  tapped  on  it,  and  she  asked,  "  Who's  there  ?  "  The  reply  was,
"  Johnny.     I  have  found  Florett.^    That  was  my  daughter's  name.

Besides  these  two  instances,  I  do  not  recall  any  other  times  when  she
professed  to  hear  or  see  the  dead.    I  have  learned  that  she  died  in  1871.

Mr.  Stewart  was  an  inebriate,  and  though  a  pretty  shrewd  country  lawyer,


444  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

always  squandered  money  as  fast  as  he  earned  it.  The  last  I  heard  of  him
he  was  still  living  in  that  village,  an  object  of  charity.  Whether  or  not  he
still  retains  his  mental  faculties,  I  know  not.

His  address  was :  W.  A.  Stewart,  Rushford,  Alleghany  Co.,  N.Y.

I  have  given  the  facts  of  the  case  as  they  occurred.  Mrs.  Stewart  at  the
time  was  about  forty  years  old.  Excepting  her  mental  perturbation  in  conse-
quence of  the  Kansas  imbroglio,  she  was  in  good  health,  mentally  and
physically.  She  was,  after  the  shock  had  passed  away,  as  she  had  always
been,  unless,  perhaps,  under  a  slight  cloud  of  sadness.  Still,  though  never
gay,  she  was  cheerful  and  composed.

Very  respectfully,

IRA  SAYLES,

Geologist  U.S.  Geological  Survey.

Note.  — I  sign  thus  that  you  may  have  as  much  evidence  as  I  can  offer
for  the  trustworthiness  of  my  statements.

2.
(From  Mr.  Ira  Sayles,  National  Museum,  Washington,  D.G.)

Friday  Evening,  Feb.  17,  1888.
To  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Sir,  —  Yours  of  the  13th  inst.  reached  my  work-table  this  morning.  In
reference  to  your  questions  relative  to  Mrs.  Stewart's  vision  of  her  son,  I
have  simply  to  say  I  was  the  first  person,  except  her  husband,  to  whom
Mrs.  Stewart  told  her  vision.  She  told  it  to  me  personally  early  the  next
morning  about  sunrise.  At  the  time  I  made  no  written  record;  but  the
event  is  as  fresh  in  mind  as  it  could  be  were  it  but  yesterday.  I  know
whereof  I  speak.

Your  second  question  asks  how  long  I  knew  it  before  its  corroboration  to
Mrs.  Stewart.  The  exact  number  of  days  I  cannot  give ;  but  it  was  between
two  and  three  weeks.  I  myself  was  the  person  chosen  by  Mr.  Stewart  to
break  the  sad  news  to  his  wife.  Neither  he  nor  his  law  partner  had  the
nerve  to  do  it.  I  am  therefore  better  acquainted  with  all  the  facts  in  the
case  than  any  other  person,  except  only  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stewart  themselves,
both  of  whom  are  dead.  The  fact  of  locating  the  wound  in  the  forehead,
just  above  the  right  eye,  and  that  it  was  a  wound  made  by  a  bullet,  are  the
strangest  parts  of  that  strange  vision.  The  vision  or  apparition  said,
"  Mother,  they've  shot  me.  The  ball  went  in  here ;  "  and  he  (it)  put  his
finger  over  his  right  eye,  and  she  saw  the  wound.

All  this  she  told  me  that  morning  after  the  apparition.

Very  resj>ectf ully  yours,

IRA  SAYLES.


[40]    <  1.

Boston,  June  25,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — In  answer  to  your  note  of  the  23d  I  would  state  that  the
name  of  the  prisoner  alluded  to  has  passed  from  my  recollection.    He


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  445

belonged  in  East  Boston,  and  was  sentenced  for  life  for  an  assault  upon  a
woman.  I  think  he  was  pardoned  some  years  ago,  but  am  not  certain  about
it.  He  had  but  one  child,  a  boy  about  five  years  old,  who  always  came
with  his  wife  to  visit  him.  He  seemed  very  fond  of  the  child,  always  held
him  in  his  arms  during  the  visit,  and  showed  a  good  deal  of  feeling  at
parting.

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  affair  made  at  the  time :  —

The  following  very  singular  incident  I  can  vouch  for  as  having  actually
occurred.  I  refer  to  it,  not  to  illustrate  a  supernatural  or  any  other  unusual
agency,  as  I  am  a  sceptic  in  such  matters,  but  as  a  remarkable  instance  of
hallucination  or  presentiment.

I  received  a  message  from  the  wife  of  one  of  our  convicts,  in  prison  for
life,  that  their  only  child,  a  bright  little  boy  five  years  old,  was  dead,  he
having  accidentally  fallen  into  the  water  and  been  drowned.  I  was
requested  to  communicate  to  the  father  the  death  of  the  child,  but  not  the
cause,  as  the  wife  preferred  to  tell  him  herself  when  she  should  visit  him  a
week  or  two  later.

I  sent  for  him  to  the  guard-room,  and  after  a  few  questions  in  regard  to
himself,  I  said  I  had  some  sad  news  for  him.  He  quickly  replied,  "  I  know
what  it  is,  Mr.  Warden ;  my  boy  is  dead  ! "  —  "  How  did  you  hear  of  it  ?  "  I
asked.  —  "  Oh,  I  knew  it  was  so  ;  he  was  drowned,  was  he  not,  Mr.  War-
den ?  "  —  **  But  who  informed  you  of  it  ?  "  I  again  asked.  —  '•  No  one,"  he  re-
plied.—  "  How,  then,  did  you  know  he  was  dead,  and  what  makes  you  think
he  was  drowned?  " —  "  Last  Sunday,"  he  said,  "  your  little  boy  was  in  the
chapel ;  he  fell  asleep,  and  you  took  him  up  and  held  him.  As  I  looked  up
and  caught  sight  of  him  lying  in  your  arms,  instantly  the  thought  occurred
to  me  that  my  boy  was  dead  —  drowned.  In  vain  T  fried  to  banish  it  from
my  mind,  to  think  of  something  else,  but  could  not ;  the  tears  came  into
my  eyes,  and  it  has  been  ringing  in  my  ears  ever  since ;  and  when  you  sent
for  me,  my  heart  sunk  within  me,  for  I  felt  sure  my  fears  were  to  be  con-
firmed."

What  made  it  more  remarkable  was  the  fact  that  the  child  was  missed
during  the  forenoon  of  that  Sunday,  but  the  body  was  not  found  for  some
days  after.

The  foregoing  is  copied  from  my  journal,  the  entry  made  on  the
day  of  the  interview,  and  I  can  assure  you  is  strictly  correct  in  every
particular.

Very  respectfully,

GIDEON  HAYNES.

2.

Boston,  June  29,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  your  note  of  yesterday  I  would  state  that  I
shall  go  over  to  the  prison  in  a  few  days,  and  will  obtain  the  name,  and  all
the  information  in  regard  to  the  pardon  and  present  abode  of  the  convict  in
question,  which  the  authorities  of  the  prison  may  be  in  possession  of.


Very  respectfully,

G.  HAYNES.


446  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

3.

Boston,  July  6,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — I  was  at  the  State  Prison  yesterday,  but,  unfortunately,  both
the  warden  and  clerk  were  absent,  and  I  was  unable  to  obtain  the  date  of
the  pardon  of  the  convict  in  question.

His  name  was  Timothy  Cronan.  He  was  pardoned  in  1873  or  1874.  Mr.
Darling,  the  officer  in  the  guard-room  to-day,  occupied  the  same  position
when  I  had  the  interview  with  Cronan.  He  was  present  and  remembers
distinctly  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  which  were  discussed  by  us  at
the  time.  Cronan  served  some  ten  or  twelve  years,  and  Mr.  Darling  has
the  impression  that  he  was  pardoned  with  the  understanding  that  he  should
go  to  California,  where  he  had  a  sister  in  very  good  circumstances.  He  has
not  been  heard  from  at  the  prison  since  his  discharge.

Very  respectfully,

GIDEON  HAYNES.


[41]  1.

{From  Mrs.  E.  M.  P.)

Mrs.  Crans'  young  married  daughter  passed  away  with  consumption  five
years  ago,  and  her  husband,  almost  frenzied  with  grief,  went  out  of  busi-
ness in  New  York,  where  they  had  spent  one  brief  year  of  married  life,  to
found  a  new  home  in  the  West.  Not  long  after,  Mrs.  Crans  had  the  fol-
lowing dream,  which  I  have  written  out  in  nearly  her  own  words,  though
the  manuscript  is  in  New  York :  —

"  I  thought  I  saw  Charley  asleep  in  his  room  in  Dubuque,  and  watched
his  regular  breathing.  Everything  was  perfectly  distinct ;  every  piece  of
furniture,  toilet,  curtains,  broken  window-pane,  etc.  While  looking  at  him,
suddenly  Allie  floated  into  the  room,  a  beautiful,  radiant  spirit.  She
looked  at  Charley  with  eyes  beaming  with  affection,  approached  the  bed,
threw  her  arm  over  him,  and  kissed  him  upon  the  forehead.  Jt  was  all  as
real  as  anything  in  life,  and  produced  so  much  emotion  that  I  awoke  and
arose,  too  much  affected  to  sleep.  The  dream  so  impressed  me  that  I  wrote
to  Charley  the  next  day  telling  him  what  I  had  seen.

"In  due  time  I  received  a  letter  from  Charley,  crossing  the  one  sent  to
him.  In  it  he  says,  *  Mother  Crans,  I  had  the  most  life-like  dream  last
night,  almost  like  a  vision.  Ella  came  to  me  in  my  sleep,  a  lovely,  angelic
form,  with  the  same  old-time  affection.  She  threw  her  arm  over  my  neck
and  kissed  me  on  the  forehead.  I  started  up,  and  she  was  gone.'  "  (This
was  written  on  the  same  morning  with  Mrs.  Crans'  letter.)

Again  Mrs.  Crans  wrote  to  Charley,  describing  minutely  every  article  of
furniture,  the  position  of  the  bed,  etc.,  and  found  her  dream  to  be  in  every
respect  perfectly  accurate.


Appendix  to  the  Heport  on  Phantasms,  etc.  447

2.

345  West  34th  Street,  New  York,  July  14,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  In  compliance  with  your  request  I  write  you  again  '  the
experience  which  I  had  in  1880 ;  I  think  it  was  April  30,  Friday  night.
We  had  just  moved  here  that  day  from  18  West  21st  street,  and  the  second
day  of  December  previous  my  daughter,  Mrs.  Allie  Kernochan,  had  passed
away  to  spirit  life.  Her  husband,  who  was  so  nearly  crushed  from  her
death,  left  us  the  following  February,  I  think,  and  went  to  live  in  Central
City,  Dak.  The  night  of  April  30  I  was  very  tired  out  from  moving.  No
beds  being  up,  I  slept  on  the  floor  in  the  back-parlor  of  347  West  34th
street.  I  have  two  houses,  345  and  347.  Mrs.  B.,  a  widow  then,  that  I
have  since  lost  track  of,  but  who  lives  somewhere,  I  think,  in  Texas,  slept
with  me,  also  my  daughter,  a  young  girl.  After  lying  down  to  rest,  I
remember  of  feeling  a  drifting  sensation,  of  seeming  almost  as  if  I  was
going  out  of  the  body.  My  eyes  were  closed ;  soon  I  realized  that  I  was,  or
seemed  to  be,  going  fast  somewhere.  All  seemed  dark  to  me  ;  suddenly  I
realized  that  I  was  in  a  room,  then  I  saw  Charley  lying  in  a  bed  asleep;
then  I  took  a  look  at  the  furniture  of  the  room,  and  distinctly  saw  every
article  of  furniture  in  the  room,  even  to  a  chair  at  the  head  of  the  bed,
which  had  one  of  the  pieces  broken  in  the  back ;  and  Charley's  clothes  lay
on  that  chair,  across  the  bottom  of  chair.  In  a  moment  the  door  opened
and  my  spirit  daughter  Allie  came  into  the  room  and  stepped  up  to  the  bed
and  stooped  down  and  kissed  Charley.  He  seemed  to  at  once  realize  her
presence,  and  tried  to  hold  her,  but  she  passed  right  out  of  the  room  about
like  a  feather  blown  by  the  wind ;  and  then,  after  a  moment,  she  came
back  again,  when  Charley  seemed  to  realize  that  he  must  keep  quiet  if  he
would  see  her,  so  he  lay  still,  and  she  went  up  to  the  bed  and  kissed  him
a^ain  :  then  she  sat  down  on  the  side  of  the  bed  and  unbuttoned  his  niffht-
shirt  collar.  I  saw  that  had  a  ruffle  around  it.  She  laid  the  collar  back,
and  laid  her  head  on  his  breast.  Then  Charley  softly  put  his  arms  up
around  her,  and  I  looked  on  the  picture  for  a  while,  then  I  thought  I  would
open  my  eyes,  and  with  difficulty  I  got  my  eyes  open.  They  seemed  so
heavy  to  me,  but  when  I  succeeded  in  opening  them,  I  received  a  sudden
shock  such  as  if  I  had  fallen  from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor.  It  frightened
and  woke  up  both  Mrs.  B.  and  my  daughter,  who  asked  what  was  the  matter.
Of  course  I  told  them  my  experience,  and  the  following  Sunday  1  wrote,
as  was  always  my  custom,  to  my  son-in-law,  Charley,  telling  him  of  all  of
my  experience,  describing  the  room  as  I  saw  it  furnished.  It  took  a  letter
six  days  to  go  from  here  to  Dakota,  and  the  same  length  of  time,  of  course,
to  come  from  there  here ;  and  at  the  end  of  six  days  judge  of  my  surprise
to  receive,  a  letter  from  Charley  telling  me  thus  :  "  O  my  darling  mamma
Crans!  My  God!  I  dreamed  I  saw  Allie  last  Friday  night."  He  then
described  just  as  I  saw  her ;  how  she  came  into  the  room,  and  he  cried,
and  tried  to  hold  her,  but  she  vanished ;  how  he  had  prayed  for  her  to
return,  and   that  she  did  so,  and  then  he  lay  still,  and   how  she  kissed

1  The  first  account  seat  by  Mrs.  C.  was  accidentally  lost.  —  R.  H.


448  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

him,  then  how  she  unbuttoned  his  nightshirt,  laid  back  the  collar,  and  laid
her  head  on  his  breast;  how  he  had  clasped  his  arms  around  her,  but
awoke  to  find  her  not  there.  Then,  at  the  end  of  the  six  days,  when  my
letter  reached  him,  and  he  read  of  my  similar  experience,  he  at  once  wrote
me  that  all  I  had  seen  was  correct,  even  to  every  article  of  furniture  in  the
room,  also  as  his  dream  had  appeared  to  him.

I  hope  you  can  read  this,  I  have  written  it  so  hurriedly.  My  cares  are
many,  and  I  wrote  under  difficulty.    Hoping  it  may  prove  of  use  to  you,

Sincerely  yours  for  the  truth,

Mrs.  N.  J.  CRANS.

3.

345  W.  34th  Street,  New  York,  July  5,  '88.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — I  found  my  son-in-law  yesterday,  and  he  regrets  that  my
letter  to  him  is  among  the  lost;  but  enclosed  please  find  a  letter  from  him,
which  he  was  quite  willing  to  give  you.  He  lives  out  of  the  city  now,  and
only  comes  to  see  us  occasionally,  and  visited  us  yesterday.

Mrs.  N.  J.  CRANS.

4.

New  York,  July  4,  '88.
Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  The  facts  written  you  this  day  by  Mrs.  N.  J.  Crans  in  re-
gard to  a  letter  written  to  me  one  Sunday  morning  in  the  year  1880,  and
one  written  by  me  on  the  same  date  to  her,  are  correct  in  every  particular.
I  was  then  living  in  Central  City,  Dakota,  boarding  at  the  American  House
It  is  impossible  to  give  the  exact  date,  as  I  have  destroyed  the  letter,  for
which  I  regret.  I  think  it  was  about  the  last  of  April,  1880.
Trusting  this  will  meet  your  approval,

I  remain,  sir,

Very  respt.  yours,

C.  A.  KERNOCHAN,
345  W.  34th  St.,

New  York  CiTr.


[42]  1.

{From  Mrs.  P.  J.)

Twelve  or  thirteen  years  ago  I  was  spending  the  summer  at  Cape  Por-
poise, Maine.  One  evening,  returning  from  the  water's  edge,  just  as  the
sun  was  setting,  I  saw  a  remarkable  figure,  under  the  following  circum-
stances :  —

My  son,  about  three  years  old,  was  walking  by  my  side,  and  my  husband
was  a  few  paces  in  front  of  us.     The  way  to  the  house,  on  our  return,  lay


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  449

across  a  strip  of  grass-covered  land,  then  across  a  road,  then  across  another
strip  of  grass  to  the  garden  gate  of  the  house  where  we  were  lodging.
The  path  from  the  gate  to  the  door  of  the  house,  some  eighteen  or  twenty-
feet,  was  covered  with  cobble-stones.  As  we  neared  the  house,  after  hav-
ing crossed  the  road,  I  saw  that  the  door  of  the  house  was  open,  and  a
woman,  apparently,  was  stepping  down  the  steps.  My  husband  and  the
figure  passed  each  other  just  inside  the  gate,  and  he  turned  slightly  to  look
after  it  as  it  passed  him.

The  figure  was  exceedingly  tall,  and  appeared  to  be  that  of  an  old  woman
wearing  a  peculiar  shawl  and  bonnet,  and  an  old-fashioned  dress,  gathered
in  at  the  waist.  I  turned  to  look  after  the  figure  as  it  passed  me,  and  the
figure  turned,  also,  as  though  to  look  at  me.  But  I  saw  no  face  inside  the
bonnet.  The  figure  went  on,  and  I  hurried  inside  and  asked  my  husband
if  he  had  seen  the  figure.  He  said,  "Yes."  —  "  What  was  it?  " —  "  That
was  my  grandmother."  I  had  never  seen  his  grandmother,  who  had  died
many  years  previously.  My  husband  had  not  seen  any  face,  and  identified
the  figure  by  the  peculiar  appearance  of  the  clothes  which  she  had  been  in
the  habit  of  wearing ;  also  by  her  figure  and  general  bearing.

I  inquired  at  once  of  Mrs.  G.,  our  landlady,  since  dead,  who  it  was  who
came  out  of  the  house.  She  replied  that  she  had  been  alone  in  the  house,
and  that  no  person  could  have  come  out  of  the  house  without  her  seeing,  as
she  was  sitting  in  a  window  on  the  first  floor,  commanding  a  view  of  the
garden  walk.  She  had  seen  and  heard  no  one  but  ourselves.  We  sent  a
message  to  another  woman,  who  lived  higher  up  the  road  along  which  the
figure  had  gone,  but  this  woman,  also,  had  seen  no  person,  although,  as
she  declared,  she  was  sitting  in  a  position  commanding  a  view  of  the  road.
To  my  further  surprise,  I  found  that  my  child  had  seen  no  person,  notwith-
standing the  fact  that  the  figure  had  passed  close  beside  us,  and  I  had
turned  to  look  after  it.

My  husband  and  myself  were  both  in  good  health  at  the  time.  I  have
never  had  any  other  experience  of  the  kind.

Mrs.  P.  J.

Junk  18, 1887.

2.

The  above  narration  is  substantially  correct,  and  as  I  should  have  related
it,  with  exception  that  I  had  forgotten  that  my  little  son  was  with  us.  I
have  no  doubt,  however,  that  Mrs.  J.  is  correct  concerning  the  fact.

LEWIS  E.  J.

June  21, 1887.

3.

I  was  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  related  above ;
had  lingered  behind  at  the  water's  edge,  and  distinctly  remember  the  pres-
ence of  the  little  boy,  and  of  his  being  questioned,  as  stated  by  Mrs.  J.

CHARLOTTE  P.  H.


450  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

[43]  1.

Account  of  a  Singular  Appearance  at  P.

Toward  the  year  of  1873  we  received  frequent  visits  from  the  family  of
Mr.  J.  X.,  of  P.,  especially  from  the  daughters,  bright  young  girls,  with
a  taste  for  art  and  books.

These  maidens  told  us  much  of  their  friend,  Frank  Y.,  a  young  captain
in  the  regular  army.  His  clever  sketches,  his  witty  notes,  often  came  to
light  between  the  leaves  of  the  books  which  they  were  reading ;  his  photo-
graph was  placed  in  the  frame  of  their  mirror ;  his  name  and  his  face  were
thus  familiar  to  us.

We  heard  of  Captain  Y.'s  recall  to  the  Western  frontier,  where  he  had
been  stationed ;  and  afterwards  of  his  receiving  a  bullet  in  his  lungs,  in

some   Indian    skirmish,    and  returning   to   P on   a  furlough,  to    be

nursed.  At  this  city  he  stayed  with  a  relative,  who  lived  directly  opposite
Mr.  X.     The  two  families  were  very  intimate,  almost  like  one  family.

During  this  state  of  affairs,  as  nearly  as  I  can  gather,  in  August  of  1875,
Mr.  G.  and  myself  went  to  P.  for  a  short  visit  at  the  house  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
X.  It  was  one  of  the  fine  old  seaport  houses,  of  brick,  with  stone  steps
and  foundations,  with  wide  halls,  high  ceilings,  and  spacious  rooms  ;  a  gar-
den like  an  orchard,  and  in  front  embowering  elms ;  it  still  stands  at  the
corner  of  C  and  D  streets.

Here  we  arrived  (it  was  still  broad  daylight)  late  on  a  hot  midsummer
afternoon,  and  had  not  greeted  half  the  household  when  the  bell  rang  for
dinner.  The  room  assigned  to  us  was  in  the  third  story.  Covered  with
dust  from  our  travels,  we  hastened  thither  to  make  ourselves  presentable
for  the  table;  and  so  engrossed  were  we  in  this  effort  as  not  to  exchange
an  unnecessary  word  with  each  other.

At  evening,  for  the  sake  of  air,  we  sat  in  the  lower  hall,  the  younger
people  on  the  steps ;  friends  and  neighbors  dropped  in  for  a  chat,  and  to
these,  in  the  twilight,  we  were  introduced.

The  evening  over,  and  once  more  alone  with  Mr.  G.,  I  asked,  "Did  you
observe  that  when  we  first  arrived  here  we  met  a  young  officer  on  the
stairs  ?  "

His  quick  reply  was,  "  Certainly,  I  remember ;  we  both  moved  to  let  him
pass.  It  was  Captain  Y.,  as  any  one  might  know  who  had  seen  his  photo-
graph."

This  had  been  my  own  impression,  and  had  led  me  to  take  more  careful
note  of  the  young  man's  appearance :  his  handsome  face,  his  bright,  clear
eyes ;  his  military  bearing  and  fatigue  dress ;  he  lifted  his  cap  in  passing,
or  touched  it ;  his  air  of  being  at  home,  —  all  led  me  to  look  for  his  reap-
pearance.

On  comparing  notes  with  my  husband,  we  found  that  this  expectation
had  been  mutual,  had  haunted  us  equally  during  the  evening,  as  each  new
stranger  arrived.

The  next  morning  at  breakfast  I  asked  of  one  of  the  family,  "  What  has
become  of  Captain  Y.  ?  We  hoped  to  meet  him  here ;  thought,  indeed,  that
we  did  meet  him  yesterday  as  we  entered  your  house."


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  451

The  remark  made  a  surprising  sensation.  Knives  and  forks  were
dropped,  pale  cheeks  flushed.

M  Where  ?  how  ?  when  did  you  meet  Captain  Y.  ?  He  was  buried  three
days  ago ! "

So  we  told  our  simple  impression  of  the  stairway ;  and  after  breakfast,  all
repairing  to  the  hall,  we  took  the  same  positions',  each  of  the  family  re-
maining where  he  or  she  had  stood  as  we  went  upstairs  the  preceding
day.  Each  room  above  and  below  had  been  occupied  by  some  person  who
was  near  its  door  and  listening  for  the  guests.  No  stranger  could  have
passed  without  observation.  We  questioned,  Was  it  not  the  driver's  assist-
ant, who  had  our  trunks  in  charge  ?  No,  that  point  was  satisfactorily  in-
vestigated.

Was  the  appearance  really  like  Captain  Frank  Y.?  Did  he  have  such
eyes,  hair,  dress,  bearing,  expression  of  countenance  ?

Yes,  to  the  last  particular.

This  is  all.  Nothing  came  of  the  vision,  nothing  went  from  it,  in  the
twelve  years  during  which  we  have  often  told  it  in  each  other's  presence.

Only  we  were  sorry  to  learn  that  the  fine  old  house  brought  a  lower
price  when  sold,  because  of  our  gentle  ghost.

C.  S.  G.

July  8, 1887.

[Mr.  G.  is  not  living.]

2.

January  9,  1888.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  ...  Ever  since  last  summer  I  have  been
holding  in  leash  a  few  ghosts  for  you,  but  they  are  elusive  creatures,  and
sometimes  perish  in  their  chains.

It  is  natural  that  you  should  wish  some  confirmation  of  my  strange  story,
and  I  tried  to  obtain  one  before  writing  Mr.  Savage,  if  only  to  steady  my
own  recollections.  I  have  looked  in  vain  for  Mrs.  X.'s  reply  to  my  request,
and  must  have  destroyed  it.  It  was  short  and  curt,  as  if  the  family  feared
notoriety  from  the  circumstance,  although  I  had  promised  the  contrary.
She  wrote  that  it  was  "  impossible  for  her  to  recall  the  date  when  we  saw
what  appeared  to  be  Captain  Y.  "  at  her  house ;  that  they  always  spoke  of
him  as  Frank  Y.,  but  as  to  other  details,  she  could  not  give  them.

I  will  write  to  the  cousin  at  whose  house  Captain  Y.  died,  and  keep  the
reply  until  you  come.

Sincerely  yours,

C.  S.  G.

P.S.  —  With  this  I  shall  mail  the  letter  which  I  have  written  to  Miss  Q.,
the  cousin  of  Captain  Y.

C.  S.  G.

3.

January  13,  1888.
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  So  far  from  objecting  to  your  writing  Mr.  X.,  I
shall  be  much  interested  to  find  how  well  his  recollections  tally  with  my


452  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

own.  Yet  as  Miss  Q.,  to  whom  I  have  just  written,  is  in  daily  communica-
tion with  his  family,  I  think  it  might  be  well  to  delay  your  communication
until  I  hear  from  her.  They  are  both  peculiar  persons,  and  such  a  coin-
cidence might  make  them  fly  off  on  a  tangent,  never  to  return.

The  little  story  was  talked  over  last  summer  on  hotel  piazzas,  to  the  dis-
may of  some  of  our  friends,  to  whom  the  last  year  had  made  one  name
sacred.

But  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  we  are  not  responsible  for  the
exaggerations  of  our  neighbors.

Sincerely  yours,

C.  S.  G.

4.

January  24,  1888.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  I  am  both  baffled  and  entertained  with  the  diffi-
culty of  tracking  my  P.  ghost.

Here  are  two  letters  which  tell  nothing.  One,  so  little  that  it  is  not
worth  troubling  you  with.  The  note  of  Miss  Q.  I  send  you.  The  latter,  at
least,  gave  a  clue  which  may  be  useful.

I  turned  to  my  diary  of  the  year  1872,  and  found  this  hasty  mention  of
the  circumstance.  We  were  returning  from  a  journey  to  the  White
Mountains.  I  copy  the  page  literally  and  entirely.  The  record  begins  at
North  Conway.

(Printed.)  Friday,  August  23,  1872.
"  Morning :  Called  on  the  P/s  :  saw  Mrs.  W.  and  L. ;  took  P.'s  to  drive  in
great  wagon;  invited  the  Echo  House  party,  but  only  Mrs.  C.'s  boy  could
go,  a  bright  little  fellow ;  saw  Mr.  C,  suffering,  but  amusing ;  took  glorious
drive ;  home  to  dine  ;  pack  ;  start  for  P.,  —  two  and  a  half  hours,  —  found
family  on  doorstep,  just  out  from  tea.  As  we  entered,  encountered  the
ghost  of  Frank  Y.,  who  died  less  than  a  week  ago,  and  had  haunted  the
house  in  life.     Warm,  cordial  welcome,  to  us,  not  the  ghost.''''

The  next  page  begins :  —

Saturday,  August  24,  1872.

"  Bright,  cool  day ;  took  lovely  sail  in  harbor,  Mrs.  X.,  Annie,  Nellie  Q.,
J.  (Mr.  G.),  andl."

You  will  observe  that  Miss  Nellie  Q.  spent  the  next  morning  with  us  in  a
boat.  She  must  then  be  mistaken  in  writing  that  she  did  not  hear  us  speak
of  the  ghost.  I  distinctly  remember  the  younger  people  would  not  let  the
subject  rest.  Mrs.  X.  remarked  of  her  two  daughters  and  Nellie  :  "  These
children  had  taken  it  in  their  heads  that  they  believed  in  nothing,  not  even
their  own  souls,  but  1  notice  they  devoutly  believe  in  Captain  Y.'s  ghost."

But  sixteen  years  give  room  for  much  forgetting,  and  from  a  later  record
in  the  same  diary  I  discover  that,  not  long  after,  the  father  of  Miss  Nellie
Q.  suddenly  died ;  the  second  death  in  her  home  during  that  year,  and  the
death  of  friends,  as  you  may  know,  makes  dreadful  havoc  with  our  memory.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  453

I  wrote  to  another  P.  friend  asking  if  she  could  not  gather  up  some
floating  tradition  of  the  story.  Her  reply  is  full  of  a  recent  bereavement  of
her  own,  and  only  thus  alludes  to  my  request:  "I  remember  hearing  of
the  ghost  story,  but  can't  tell  you  how.     I  will,  if  you  wish,  ask  Mrs.  X."

This  friend  has  had  some  remarkable  psychical  experiences,  which  I  will
make  her  tell  you  when  she  visits  me.

There  seems  now  nothing  to  prevent  your  writing  Mrs.  X.,  and  I  shall  be
glad  if  you  do  so.

Veiy  sincerely  yours,

C.  S.  G.

I  have  written  still  another  letter  to  one  who  was  a  guest  that  year,  '72 ;
it  is  not  time  for  a  reply.

C.  S.  G.

5.

P ,  January  19.

My  dear  Mrs.  G.,  — I  fear  you  have  been  thinking  me  very  neglectful
of  your  note.     Owing  to  misdirection  it  only  reached  me  a  few  days  ago.

I  will  try  and  answer  your  questions,  but  cannot  do  it  to  much  purpose,
I  think,  as  I  have  very  few  facts.

Captain  Y.  died  in  the  summer  of  72,  but  I  do  not  know  the  date.  He
was  young,  but  neither  handsome  nor  accomplished;  as  to  popularity,  I
don't  think  it  was  marked  either  way.

I  recollect  that  you  and  Mr.  G.  visited  Mr.  X.  after  Captain  Y.'s  death,
but  whether  days  or  weeks  after  I  do  not  recollect.  I  remember  hearing
talk  about  the  occurrence  you  mention  about  that  time,  but  only  indirectly,
as  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  did  not  hear  either  you  or  Mr.  G.  speak  of  it.

I  am  sorry  to  have  kept  you  waiting  so  long  for  an  answer.

Mother  joins  me  in  kind  regards.

Believe  me  yours  very  truly,

(Signed)  [Miss  Q.]


6.


Jan.  30,  '88.


To  R.  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

My  dear  Sir,  — Your  note  of  the  26th  reached  me  Saturday  evening.

In  regard  to  your  request,  I  do  not  think  I  could  add  anything  to  what
Mrs.  G.  has  probably  told  you,  as,  in  answer  to  a  letter  from  Mrs.  G.  this
summer,  I  recalled  at  her  desire,  as  far  as  possible,  my  recollections  of  the
curious  circumstance.  It  was  long  ago,  and  the  memory  of  it  is  compara-
tively dim.

I  should  much  prefer  not  to  have  our  name  mentioned  publicly  in  con-
nection with  the  very  singular  incident.

Very  respectfully  yours,

(Signed)  [Mrs.  X.]


454  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

[44]

1.

Cambridge,  Oct.  10.

My  dear  Professor,  — The  following  tale  is  in  your  line,  and  can  be
easil}T  investigated,  as  all  the  persons  live  about  here.

The  WVs,  who  live  in  an  old  house  facing  the  Common,  just  beyond  Mr.
G.,  were  at  Petersham,  —  or  somewhere  in  that  vicinity,  —  summering.
One  evening  they  described  to  those  with  whom  they  were  conversing  the
quaint  character  of  their  home  and  some  of  its  belongings.

The  next  morning  at  breakfast  a  Mrs.  J.,  of  Cambridgeport,  said  to  the
W.'S :  —

11 1  dreamed  of  your  house  last  night.  I  saw  the  inside,  and  everything
was  in  confusion.  Things  were  strewn  around  the  floor,  and  in  one  of  the
beds  were  two  boys.  I  saw  their  faces  so  plainly  that  I  believe  if  I  were  to
meet  them  I  could  identify  them,"  or  words  to  that  effect.

That  day,  at  mid-day,  the  W.'s  heard  that  their  house  had  been  entered.
A  bed  in  the  house  was  apparently  slept  in  by  two  persons.

This  is  the  story  as  I  heard  it  told.  Whether  it  has  grown  or  not  since  it
begun  its  travels  I  cannot  say.

Mrs.  H.,  corner  of  M and  P place,  can  tell  you  about  it.

Yours,  etc.

A.  M.  D.
i

2.

M Street,  Cambridge.

Mr.  Royce  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  In  reply  to  your  letter  asking  for  information   about  a

dream,  I  send  you  the  name  of  the  lady  that  had  it,  Mrs.  F.  H.  J.,

Street,  Cambridgeport,  and  the   Misses   W.,  street,  to  whom  the

dream  was  told  in  the  morning,  before  they  received  the  letter  telling  them
their  house  had  been  entered.

I  think  they  would  be  very  willing  to  give  you  all  the  details  you  wish,
and  it  will  be  more  satisfactory  to  you  to  communicate  directly  with  them.

Very  truly  yours,

E.  B.  H.

3.

Cambridge,  Nov.  30,  1886.
Professor  Royce  :  —

Deah  Sir,  — The  dream  I  will  endeavor  to  relate  as  clearly  as  possible.

It  occurred  during  the  month  of  August,  last  summer,  while  we  were
boarding  with  Mrs.  H.,  in  Lunenburg,  where  I  first  met  the  Misses  W.  I
am  a  perfectly  healthy  woman,  and  have  always  been  sceptical  as  to  hallu-
cinations in  any  one,  always  before  having  felt  the  cause  of  the  experience
might  be  traced.

In  my  dream  I  arrived  unexpectedly  at  the  house  of  the  Misses  W.  in
Cambridge,  where  I  found  everything  in  confusion,  drawers  emptied  and


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  455

their  contents  scattered  about  the  floor,  bundles  unrolled,  and  dresses  taken
down  from  the  closets.  Then,  as  I  stepped  into  one  room,  I  saw  some  boys
in  bed,  —  three  or  four,  I  cannot  distinctly  remember.  I  saw  their  faces
distinctly,  as  they  sat  up  in  bed  at  my  approach,  but  the  recollection  of  their
faces  has  faded  from  me  now.  I  could  not  reach  the  boys,  for  they  disap-
peared suddenly,  and  I  could  not  find  them ;  but  I  thought,  These  cannot  be
the  people  whom  the  Misses  W.  trusted  to  care  for  their  house  in  their  ab-
sence, and  I  was  troubled  to  know  whether  it  was  best  to  tell  them  when  I
should  return  to  Lunenburg.     This  is  all  there  was  in  the  dream.

Thinking  only  to  amuse  them,  I  related  my  dream  at  the  breakfast  table
the  following  morning,  and  I  regretted  doing  so  immediately,  for  anxiety
showed  itself  in  their  faces,  and  the  elder  Miss  W.  remarked  that  she  hoped
my  dream  was  not  a  forerunner  of  bad  tidings  from  home.  I  laughed  at
the  idea,  but  that  morning  a  mail  brought  the  letter  telling  them  that  their
house  had  been  entered,  and  when  they  went  down  they  found  almost  the
same  confusion  of  which  I  had  been  a  witness  the  night  before  —  with
everything  strewn  about  the  floor.     It  was  a  singular  coincidence,  surely.

Yours  truly,

E.J.

My  age,  if  desired,  is  twenty-nine,  and  my  nationality  is  American.

E.J.


4.

7 Street,  Dec.  4.

Professor  Josiah  Royce  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  the  incident  to  which  you
allude  in  your  note  is  worthy  your  attention  or  not,  but  I  will  give  you  the
facts,  that  you  may  judge  for  yourself  of  its  value.

The  burglary,  we  suppose,  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  17th  or  18th  of
August,  I  being  at  the  time,  for  the  summer,  in  the  town  of  Lunenburg,
Mass.

Coming  down  to  breakfast  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  a  lady  said  to  me
that  she  had  had  a  strange  dream.  She  thought  she  went  to  our  house,  find-
ing it  in  the  greatest  confusion,  everything  turned  upside  down.  As  she  en-
tered one  of  the  sleeping-rooms  she  saw  two  boys  lying  in  the  bed  ;  but  she
could  not  see  their  faces,  for  as  soon  as  they  saw  her  they  jumped  up  and
ran  off.  I  said,  "  I  hope  that  does  not  mean  that  we  have  been  visited  by
burglars."

I  thought  no  more  about  it,  till  the  eleven  o'clock  mail  brought  a  note
from  the  woman  in  charge  of  the  house  saying  that  it  had  been  entered,  —
that  everything  was  in  great  confusion,  many  things  carried  off,  and  she
wished  we  would  come  home  at  once.  The  policeman  who  went  over  the
house  with  her  said  he  had  never  seen  a  house  more  thoroughly  ran-
sacked.

We  found  that  in  the  upper  attic  room  the  bed  had  evidently  been  used,
and  there  was,  perhaps,  more  confusion  in  this  room  than  in  any  other.

The  lady  who  had  the  dream  was  Mrs.  F.  J.,  of  Cambridgeport.     I  was


456  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

told  that  she  had  been  suffering  for  about  a  year  from  nervous  prostration,
and  she  was  evidently  in  a  condition  of  great  nervous  excitement.

I  forbore  to  speak  to  her  of  the  occurrence,  as  one  of  the  ladies  in  the
house  told  me  that  it  had  made  an  unpleasant  impression  on  her  mind.

The  whole  thing  seems  rather  curious  to  me,  but  I  do  not  know  that  you
will  find  it  of  any  value  in  your  investigations.

Very  respectfully  yours,

L.  L.  W.


[45]  1.

{From  E.  B.  C.)

It  was  in  1876,  when  living  in  Chicago,  that  myself  and  wife  went  to
the  Centennial,  arriving  there  on  the  morning  of  July  4th.  After  spending
a  week,  returned  home  via  New  vork  and  Niagara  Falls.  My  wife's  friends
lived  near  the  Falls.  We  visited  them,  and  while  there  I  had  the  following
dream :  —

I  thought  I  saw  a  mad  dog  coming  up  Randolph  street,  and  saw  him
attack  my  little  eight-year-old  boy,  seizing  him  on  the  upper  arm,  near  the
shoulder.  Such  was  the  impression  made  that  I  soon  awoke,  and  called  to
my  wife  and  told  her  of  my  dream.  "  Oh,"  she  replied,  "  it  is  only  one  of
your  dreams !  "  I  told  her  I  never,  in  all  my  dreams,  had  had  such  a  vivid
dream.  I  could  not  sleep  any  more  that  night,  and  could  not  shake  it  off.
Next  day  we  left  for  home,  arriving  the  day  following,  and  were  soon  at
my  house.  I  was  exceedingly  glad  to  see  my  boy,  but  the  first  news  I  was
told  he  had  been  bitten  by  a  mad  dog,  a  few  days  before,  but  the  police
had  killed  the  dog,  and  the  doctor  thought  there  was  no  danger,  as  his
clothing  prevented  the  virus  coming  in  contact  with  the  wound;  and  what
is  most  or  equally  remarkable,  the  dog  seized  him  at  the  place  on  his  arm
that  I  saw  so  vividly  in  my  dream,  and  it  occurred  the  afternoon  of  the  day
before  my  dream.

R.  B.  C,
Evanston,  111.

Dec.  12,  1887.

2.

Evanston,  III.,  Jan.  16,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Yours  of  20th  ult.  came  duly  to  hand.  Owing  to  sickness
have  been  unable  to  reply.

My  wife  will  herewith  enclose  recollection  of  dream  referred  to.  The  only
peculiarity  in  regard  to  it  was  that  I  was  so  impressed  that  I  woke  her  out
of  a  sound  sleep,  something  I  had  never  done  before ;  and  it  preyed  on  my
mind  until  I  reached  home.  Can't  say  that  there  was  any  mention  made  in
the  newspapers,  but  presume  there  was.  Don't  remember  whether  I  was
in  habit  of  repeating  my  dreams  to  her  before  this  incident,  but  have  since.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  457

My  attention  was  called  to  your  society  by  a  little  article  in  the  paper  a
month  or  more  ago,  headed,  "  Trot  out  your  Dreams."  Never  having
before  told  my  dream  outside  the  family,  thought  it  would  do  no  harm  to
give  you  my  experience.

I  have  not  given  your  other  circular  the  attention  you  ask,  from  the  fact
I  have  been  confined  to  my  room  for  the  past  month.

Yours  truly,

R.  B.  C.

My  recollection  at  this  late  date  is  that  my  son  was  bitten  the  evening
before  the  dream,  but  my  wife  says  he  was  bitten  about  9  A.M.  of  the
same  morning  of  the  dream.  She  is  doubtless  correct,  as  she  seems  to
have  a  more  distinct  recollection.

R.  B.  C.

3.

[Jan.  16,  1888.]
My  recollection  of  Mr.  C.  relating  this  dream  to  me  is  very  distinct,  and
that  he  appeared  much  more  impressed  by  it  than  I  had  ever  before  seen
him  by  a  dream.  I  am  not  positive  that  it  was  on  the  same  morning  that
the  boy  was  bitten,  but  my  impression  is  that  it  was  about  5  A.M.,  and  he
was  bitten  about  9  A.M.  of  the  same  morning.

Mrs.  A.  B.  C.


[46]  1.

Heuvelton,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  New  York,  Jan.  19,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  In  answer  to  an  article  which  I  clipped  from  the  "  Sun,"
which  please  find  enclosed,  I  will  say  that  although  I  cannot  at  the  present
time  fully  comply  with  the  request  therein  contained,  yet  it  is  not  uncom-
mon with  me  to  have  very  vivid  impressions  in  regard  to  friends  who  are
at  a  distance,  and  those  impressions  usually  prove  to  be  correct,  one  of
which  I  will  here  briefly  mention.

Some  three  years  ago  a  lady  friend  of  ours  was  in  Florida,  her  husband
living  at  the  same  time  in  New  Mexico.  Well,  an  impression  came  over
me  that  she  was  in  deep  trouble,  and  thinking  this  would  be  a  good  time
to  test  the  question  of  mind  acting  upon  mind,  although  the  parties  may  be
thousands  of  miles  apart,  I  wrote  at  once  to  her  stating  the  facts,  and  in
due  time  I  received  her  answer,  stating  that  at  the  time  indicated  she  was
indeed  in  deep  trouble,  stating  the  cause,  which  I  need  not  here  mention ;
but  the  lady  to  whom  I  refer  is  a  lady  whose  truth  is  beyond  question.

I  have  no  belief  in  the  supernatural,  but  I  believe  that  mind  truly  acts
upon  mind  through  the  operation  of  nature's  laws  or  through  the  laws  of
God  as  revealed  in  the  operations  of  nature,  and  when  we  shall  have
become  fully  acquainted  with  nature's  laws,  we  shall  understand  clearly
how  it  is  that  mind  acts  upon  mind,  through  the  operation  of  that  law  in
nature  which  causes  particles  of  like  affinity  to  be  mutually  attracted.


458  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

As  it  regards  dreams,  will  state  that  I  had  an  experience  in  that  line  in
the  summer  of  1813  (I  write  from  memory),  in  relation  to  some  business
affairs,  which  was  quite  unlooked  for,  and  was  at  the  time  quite  a  surprise
to  me,  involving  the  receipt  of  a  letter  with  certain  proposals,  altogether
unlooked  for  by  me.  Now,  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  I  received  the
letter  from  the  man  indicated  in  my  dream,  enclosing  all  the  propositions
indicated  in  my  dream,  to  the  mosttminute  detail.  I  was  then  seventeen
years  of  age ;  but  whether  this  dream  had  any  particular  significance  or
not,  I  cannot  say,  although  in  answer  to  the  letter  which  I  received,  I
changed  my  plans,  whether  it  was  for  the  better  or  worse,  I  cannot  say,  but
of  the  fact  that  mind  acts  upon  mind,  under  certain  conditions,  I  am  quite
well  convinced  ;  but  in  order  to  comprehend  these  things  clearly,  we  must
understand  nature's  laws,  in  so  far,  at  least,  as  to  enable  us  to  see  that
strict  justice  and  truth  is  enstamped  upon  all  the  works  of  God,  as  revealed
in  nature's  book ;  but  in  conclusion  I  will  say  that  if  the  foregoing  inter-
ests you  to  the  extent  that  you  wish  for  details  or  a  more  comprehensive
statement  of  these  phenomena  and  their  relation  to  the  spiritual  nature  of
man,  I  am  free  to  give  my  views  upon  the  subjects  involved  in  these  prob-
lems in  nature's  book,  which  meets  us  at  every  turn ;  but  as  I  am  as  an  atom
in  that  grand  structure  which  constitutes  all  the  works  of  God,  a  unit  or
one,  it  is  plain  that  that  point  to  which  we  have  arrived  to-day  is  as  a
stepping-stone  to  raise  up  higher  as  the  mind  unfolds  to  the  light  of  truth.

Yours  truly,

ROBERT  F.,
Heuvelton,  N.Y.,  St.  Lawrence  Co.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,

5  Boylston  place,  Boston,  Mass.

2.

February  22,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  have  at  hand  a  letter  from  you  forwarded  me  by  Mr.
Robert  F.,  of  Heuvelton,  N.Y.,  in  which  you  express  a  wish  for  my  state-
ment of  a  circumstance  which  I  understand  he  has  communicated  to  you.

So  far  as  I  know,  it  is  simply  this :  On  the  9th  of  January,  1884,  while
at  Daytona,  Florida,  I  received  news  which  caused  me  much  mental  suffer-
ing. A  week,  perhaps  ten  days,  thereafter,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.
F.,  in  which  he  informed  me  that  during  the  evening  of  January  9,  he
had  been  impressed  with  a  sense  of  my  presence,  and  was  conscious  of  my
suffering  at  that  time.

The  news  which  caused  my  trouble  came  to  me  by  letter  from  Arizona ;
concerned  me  alone;  and  I  had  not  confided  in  any  person.  Mr.  F.  then
resided,  as  he  now  does,  in  Northern  New  York.  I  am  not  in  possession  of
the  letter  which  I  received  from  Mr.  F.  at  that  time ;  but  remember  it  quite
well,  and  shall  be  glad  to  answer  any  questions  in  regard  to  the  circum-
stances that  you  see  fit  to  ask.

Very  respectfully,

Mrs.  G.  T.  S.,
Manitou  Springs,  Col.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  459


Manitou  Springs,  March  24,  1888.
Mr.  R.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  letter  was  duly  received,  and  in  answer  would  say-
that  I  do  not  recollect  whether  I  told  any  of  my  friends  of  the  case  or  not.
The  fact  is,  I  did  not  give  it  much  thought.  It  seemed  quite  natural  that
Mr.  F.  should  know  of  my  suffering,  and  at  the  same  time  I  was  among
strangers,  so  probably  I  did  not  speak  of  it  at  all.

If  there  is  anything  further  that  you  wish  to  ask,  I  shall  be  very  glad  to
answer  at  my  earliest  convenience.

I  remain,

"Very  respectfully,

Mrs.  Gk  T.  S.,
Manitou  Springs,  Col.


[47]  1.

{From  Dr.  B.  E.)

Brooklyn,  April  2,  1886.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D. :  —

My  dear  Sir,  —  In  the  New  York  "  Sun  "  of  yesterday  is  an  article  copied
from  the  Boston  "  Globe,"  giving  an  account  of  the  work  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  with  which  you  are  connected.  Some  instances  given
of  the  transference  of  impressions  remind  me  of  a  case  that  came  within  my
own  personal  knowledge.

About  ten  years  ago  my  wife,  who  is  a  woman  of  remarkably  strong
will,  and  is  prominently  identified  with  several  organized  charities,  woke
me  one  night  by  her  loud  crying  and  wailing.  It  was  with  great  difficulty
that  she  could  be  pacified.  She  had  been  roused  from  her  sleep  by  an  im-
pression that  something  was  wrong  —  that  some  one  was  in  distress  at  her
childhood's  home,  some  two  hundred  miles  distant;  nor  could  she  be  con-
vinced that  such  was  not  the  case.  In  due  time  we  received  intelligence
that  a  few  hours  before  this  "  impression,1'  her  adopted  brother —  cousin,
in  fact  —  had  caught  his  hand  in  a  mill,  and  the  arm  had  been  crushed  from
the  wrist  to  the  shoulder.  There  were  ten  fractures  of  the  bones,  corre-
sponding to  the  number  of  cogs  in  the  wheel  that  did  the  mischief.  Phy-
sicians were  sent  for,  but  it  was  fourteen  hours  before  any  one  arrived.  In
the  meantime  they  had  corded  the  arm  at  the  shoulder  as  well  as  they
could,  and  to  sustain  the  boy  and  counteract  the  depression  from  shock,
and  pain,  and  hemorrhage,  they  gave  brandy  freely.

From  the  best  computation  we  could  make,  it  was  about  this  hour  in  the
night  that  the  distress  of  my  wife's  father  and  mother  was  the  greatest,  as
they  discovered  that  the  supply  of  stimulant,  on  which  they  thought  the
boy's  life  depended,  was  nearly  exhausted.  How  she  felt  their  distress  I
have  never  tried  to  explain ;  but  the  fads  of  the  case  there  is  no  disputing.
Was  it  a  coincidence  ?  If  so,  it  was  a  singular  one.  We  have  lived
together  eighteen  years,  and  never  before  nor  since  has  she  had  such  an
"impression."  This  was  not  a  dream,  nor  a  nightmare.  In  the  simple
language  of  childhood,  I  can  only  say,  "  It  just  only  was."


460  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  e\c.

In  this  connection,  I  may  mention  a  faculty,  or  innate  perception,  or  what-
ever you  may  term  it,  that  my  wife  possesses  to  a  remarkable  degree.  In
the  practice  of  my  profession  I  am  necessarily  brought  into  contact  with
"all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men"  and  women,  many  of  them  having  a
goodly  outside,  but  secretly  bad.  When  my  wife  meets  a  person  apparently
most  respectable,  in  society  or  elsewhere,  she  at  once  feels  that  the  person
is  either  good  or  bad,  as  the  case  may  be.  Many  times  she  has  pronounced
her  judgment  on  persons  at  the  first  meeting,  with  no  clue  or  guide  except
that  "feeling"  of  hers,  and  I  have  never  known  her  to  judge  amiss  —  I
say  "  judge,11  but  she  reaches  her  conclusion  by  no  process  of  reasoning,  not
even  herself  being  aware  of  the  process  by  which  she  reaches  the  inevitable
conclusion.

I  am  a  member  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Anthropology,  and  have
given  some  attention  to  mesmerism,  hypnotism,  and  the  various  psychical
unexplained  mysteries,  the  subject  of  investigation.

Very  respectfully  yours,

B.  E.,  M.D.

2.

Brooklyn,  Jan.  26,  1889.
Richard  Hodgson,  Sec.  A.  S.  P.  B.:  —

Dear  Sir,  — Yours  duly  received.  As  nearly  as  I  can  now  remember,  I
gave  you  a  brief  outline  of  the  impressions  that  my  wife  had  at  the  time  of
the  injury  to  her  brother.  The  facts  were  precisely  as  stated,  but  the  minor
incidents  and  minute  details  cannot  now  be  accurately  recalled,  nor  would
they  materially  affect  the  value  of  the  narrative  of  the  case.  My  wife  is
rather  averse  to  having  her  name  appear  publicly  in  such  connection,
still  I  may  say  that  she  does  not  strenuously  object  to  it.

Very  respectfully  yours,

B.  E.,  M.D.

3.

The  account  above  [Doc.  1]  is  a  true  statement  of  my  experience.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  B.  E.]


[48]  1.

(From  Mrs.  Millet.)

May,  1887.

One  evening,  in  the  winter  of  1884-85, 1  was  sitting  in  the  library  of  our
house,  No.  131  Charles  street,  reading  some  book  that  made  me  a  little  ner-
vous. (I  do  not  remember  what  it  was.)  There  was  no  other  person  in
the  house,  and  I  had  only  our  dog  for  company.  Suddenly  the  door-bell
rang,  startling  me  very  much  and  increasing  my  nervousness.  I  glanced
at  the  clock  and  noticed  that  it  was  quarter-past  nine.  Too  late,  I  thought,
for  a  social  call,  and  I  decided  not  to  go  to  the  door.  The  dog  went  to  the
head  of  the  stairs  and  barked  a  moment,  and  then  came  back  and  lay  down,
only  to  get  up  again  and  go  out  to  the  stairs  and  bark  more.  The  bell
rang  once  more  only,  but  the  dog  kept  up  his  barking,  at  intervals,  for  a


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  461

long  time,  and  as  he  never  barked  at  nothing,  he  gave  me  the  impression
that  the  man  who  rang  the  bell  was  looking  about.  I  became  very  much
frightened  —  much  more  so  than  the  occasion  warranted — and  longed  for
Mr.  Millet's  return.  He  came  in  earlier  than  I  expected  him,  evidently  in
a  hurry,  and  immediately  said,  "  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  (I  do  not  remem-
ber his  exact  words  ;  perhaps  they  were,  "  Has  anything  happened  ?"  but  I
know  that  his  very  first  remark  gave  me  the  impression  that  he  knew  some-
thing unusual  had  taken  place.)  I  told  him  of  my  alarm,  and  then  he  said
that  as  he  was  sitting  quietly  in  Huntington  Hall,  listening  to  Mr.  Ropes1
lecture  on  Napoleon,  it  suddenly  flashed  into  his  mind  that  I  was  frightened
about  something.  He  turned  and  looked  at  the  clock  and  saw  it  was  quar-
ter-past nine,  and  knowing  that  the  lecture  would  be  over  in  quarter  of  an
hour,  he  thought  he  would  stay  until  the  end,  as  he  was  not  sure  that  any-
thing was  the  matter.  However,  he  felt  very  uneasy  all  the  rest  of  the  time,
and  hurried  out  immediately  on  the  conclusion  of  the  lecture,  took  the  first
car  that  passed  the  door,  which  carried  him  to  the  end  of  Charles  street,
and  ran  the  rest  of  the  way  home.  He  found  a  man,  whom  he  knew,  and
who  wanted  to  see  him  on  a  matter  of  business,  waiting  for  him  at  our  door
(where  I  had  inhospitably  kept  him),  thus  accounting  for  the  dog's
behavior.  As  we  told  each  other  our  experiences,  it  was  Mr.  Millet  who
first  mentioned  the  time,  but  I  can  distinctly  recall  at  this  moment  just  how
the  clock  looked  as  I  glanced  up  at  it.

It  was  very  unusual  for  me  to  be  left  all  alone,  but  I  am  not  naturally
timid,  and  I  had  not  the  least  fear  of  being  left  alone  when  Mr.  Millet  went
out  that  evening.

E.  A.  MILLET.

2.

(From  Mr.  Millet.)

[Received  June  13,  1887.].
On  Thursday  evening,  March  12,  19,  or  20,  1885  (as  near  as  the  date  can
now  be  fixed),  I  was  attending  a  lecture  by  John  C.  Ropes,  Esq.,  at  Hunting-
ton Hall,  Boston.  The  course  was  one  in  which  I  was  much  interested,  and
on  that  particular  evening  the  subject  held  my  attention  very  closely.  Sud-
denly I  became  aware  of  a  feeling  that  my  wife,  who  was  at  home,  was  in
danger  or  frightened.  Up  to  that  moment  I  had  not  been  thinking  of  her.
The  feeling  was  so  strong  that  I  determined  to  go  home  (131  Charles
Street),  and  I  looked  at  the  clock  in  the  hall  and  also  at  my  watch  to  see
how  soon  the  lecture  would  be  over.  It  was  then  quarter-past  nine.
Knowing  that  only  a  few  minutes  of  the  lecture  remained,  and  hesitating  to
disturb  the  audience  and  annoy  the  lecturer  by  leaving,  I  waited  with  con-
siderable anxiety  and  impatience  until  the  audience  was  dismissed,  and  then,
with  the  feeling  strong  upon  me,  I  hurried  home  as  fast  as  possible.
There  I  found  my  wife  had  been  very  much  alarmed,  and  that  when  first
frightened,  she  had  looked  at  the  clock  to  see  how  soon  I  would  return,  and
saw  that  it  was  quarter-past  nine.  The  details  of  her  alarm  are  told  in  her
own  account.

J.  B.  MILLET.


462  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

3.

Sharon,  August  24,  1887.

My  dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  ...  I  had  a  little  experience  the  other
day  which  may  interest  you.  Mr.  Millet  was  in  New  York  and  I  was  think-
ing of  his  expected  arrival  in  Sharon  on  the  next  daj^,  when  it  suddenly
occurred  to  me  that  I  would  walk  over  as  far  as  the  hotel  the  next  afternoon
and  meet  him.  I  had  never  done  this  at  any  of  his  previous  (half-dozen)
visits,  and  it  had  never  even  occurred  to  me  to  do  so.  The  hotel  is  about  a
third  of  the  way  to  the  station  from  where  I  am  staying,  and  is  quite  a  walk.
The  next  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Millet,  written  just  about  the
time  I  was  thinking  of  him,  and  he  says  in  it,  the  very  last  thing  of  all,
"  Why  do  you  not  walk  over  to  the  hotel  to-morrow  and  meet  me  ?  "    .     .     .

Very  cordially  yours,

EMILY  MILLET.


[49]  1.

{From  Professor  E.  W.  C,  June,  1886.)

Mr.  J.  T.,  already  mentioned,  was  employed  in  travelling  for  a  large
wholesale  firm  in  Montreal.  He  left  home  in  February,  1880,  his  mother
and  another  sister  remaining  behind.  His  route  lay  through  the  Eastern
Townships,  but  as  he  did  not  know  where  he  would  be  from  day  to  day,  he
gave  them  no  address,  but  told  them  to  telegraph  to  him  through  the  firm
in  case  his  presence  was  necessary.

Late  in  February  his  mother  was  taken  ill  with  pneumonia.  Miss  T.  was
of  course  very  anxious,  but  in  the  hurry  of  nursing  she  did  not  telegraph  to
her  brother.  No  useful  purpose  would  be  served  by  recalling  him.  Mrs.
T.  became  worse,  and  Miss  T.'s  responsibility  was  heavy,  she  being  the
only  member  of  the  family  at  home  at  the  time.

One  evening,  tired  out,  she  fell  asleep,  and  slept  soundly  all  night.  On
coming  downstairs  next  morning,  J.  T.  drove  up  to  the  door,  and  before
there  was  time  to  say  a  word  he  cried  out,  "A.,  what  is  the  matter?  You
have  been  calling  me,  '  John,  John,'  all  night,  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  get
up  and  take  the  train  home."

It  is  right  to  add  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  him  in  this  way  if  he
was  wanted  suddenly  in  the  night.


E.  W.  C.


June,  1886.

2.


Professor  C.  writes,  May,  1887  :  —

As  to  the  third  query,  the  account  I  sent  of  Mr.  J.  T.'s  sudden  return  at
the  time  of  his  mother's  illness  was  written  by  Miss  A.  T.,  and  consequently
I  could  get  no  more  from  her.  I  doubt  if  I  can  get  anything  from
Mr.  J.  T.,  as  he  is  much  engaged  in  business,  and  very  slow  to  answer
letters  of  this  kind.  But  I  will  try.  Could  I  see  him,  there  would  be  little
trouble.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  463

The  following  is  a  more  detailed  account,  written  in  May,  1887,  by  Miss
A.M.  T.  :  —

"  My  brother  John's  return  home  in  answer  to  hearing  me  call  him  one
night.

"  My  sister  was  frequently  taken  sick  at  night,  and  would  need  ice  or
something  from  the  lower  flat.  My  brother,  a  very  sound  sleeper,  made  me
promise  to  call  him  on  any  such  occasion.

"  I  laughed  at  him,  saying  that  it  was  far  easier  for  me  to  go  myself  than
to  wake  him  (he  slept  on  the  next  story  above).  '  Try  me,1  said  he ;  *  I  shall
hear  you  call  always.'  I  tried,  and  at  my  '  John,  John,1  he  instantly  awoke,
and  I  never  found  it  any  trouble  thus  to  arouse  him,  though  any  one  else
might  have  called  him  all  night  and  banged  at  his  door  fruitlessly.

"  He  went  into  the  East  Townships  to  travel  for  his  firm.  We  were  all
well  when  he  started,  and  he  said  that  he  should  be  moving  about  so  much
that  he  would  not  give  me  any  address ;  if  I  wanted  him  I  might  let  the
firm  know  and  they  would  telegraph  him.  My  mother  was  taken  sick  with
pneumonia;  her  life  was  despaired  of,  and  one  morning  when  she  was  at
her  worst,  my  brother  suddenly  appeared  at  7  A.M.  I  called  over  the
baluster,  'Why,  John,  what  has  brought  you  home?1  He  replied,  'You
called  me  in  the  night.  I  heard  you  say  '  John,  John,  John.1  I  am  come
to  see  what  is  the  matter.  I  have  left  all  my  samples,  and  I  took  the  train
early  this  morning,  for  I  could  not  bear  to  wait,  I  have  been  so  anxious.1
I  then  told  him  mother  was  dangerously  ill.  Thinking  over  the  matter,  I
cannot  recollect  that  I  once  consciously  desired  to  recall  my  brother,  never
thought  of  writing  or  telegraphing  him.  I  was  wholly  absorbed  in  taking
care  of  my  mother.  His  appearance  was  a  great  surprise  to  me.  He  is  a
rosy-cheeked,  ruddy,  healthy-looking  man,  with  no  morbid  strain  which
would  make  one  imagine  him  a  dreamer,  yet  he  is  the  one  who  dreamed  of
seeing  Mr.  E/s  home  in  Ottawa  the  night  he  died,  and  that  Mr.  E.  was  not
there  (having  died  away  from  home).  All  this  was  true,  but  news  of  it
did  not  reach  my  brother  for  a  long  time,  as  he  was  snowed  up  in  the  Lower
Provinces  and  could  not  get  his  mail.

A.  M.  T.

I  may  add  that  this  is  all  my  own  recollection,  without  communication
with  any  one  else  concerned.     Your  letter  was  given  to  me  to  read.


[50]  1.

(Sent  by  Professor  E.  W.  C.)

[1887.]

Dream  of  John's  Baby  [in]  September,  1884.

My  mother  and  sister  were  visiting  us  at  Akron,  in  September,  1884,  and
we  were  expecting  that  towards  the  end  of  October  we  should  hear  that
John's  wife,  Minette,  had  a  baby.  One  morning,  at  the  end  of  September,
mother  told  me  that  she  had  dreamed  that  my  sister  had  gone  into  her  room


464  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

and  said,  "  Minette  has  a  fine  boy."  When  Mr.  C.  came  back  from  the  col-
lege in  the  afternoon,  he  handed  my  sister  a  telegram  for  mother.  My
sister  opened  it,  as  she  went  into  mother's  room,  and  read,  "  Minette  has  a
fine  boy."  The  telegram  had  been  sent  off,  either  the  evening  before  or
very  early  in  the  morning  of  the  day  we  received  it.  It  would  be  easy  to
get  the  exact  date  of  the  birth  of  the  child.  I  forget  to  a  day,  but  it  was
somewhere  about  the  twentieth  of  September.

KATHARINE  B.  C.
[Wife  of  Prof.  E.  W.  C.]

2.

27:  12:  1887.
R.  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

My  dear  Sir,  —  ...  I  enclose  you  also  a  statement  from  Mrs.  C.'s
mother,  relating  to  the  dream  she  had  when  here,  of  the  birth  of  the  baby
in  Montreal,  and  to  the  telegram  announcing  it.  1  have  tried  to  get  a  copy
of  the  latter,  but  the  W.  U.  only  keep  their  copies  for  six  months ;  it  was,
therefore,  too  late.

Truly  yours,

E.  W.  C.

3.

About  that  dream  I  had.  Minctte's  baby  was  timed  to  arrive  a  month
from  the  time  of  its  actual  appearance.  I  dreamed  one  night  that  John
told  me  he  had  a  fine  boy,  and  I  told  you  at  breakfast  of  it.  The  baby
was  born  that  day  or  night.     John  sent  a  telegram  the  very  day.

I  am  your  very  loving  mother,

BENEDICTA.


[51]  I.

{From  Mrs.  L.  Z.)

June  6,  1887.

(a.)  About  the  end  of  March,  1881,  after  recovering  from  severe  illness,
while  I  was  yet  confined  to  my  bed,  I  had  the  following  experience.  I
was  staying  at  the  time  at  172  Benefit  street,  Providence,  R.I.

I  had  been  asleep  and  suddenly  became,  as  it  were,  half  awake,  being
conscious  of  some  of  the  objects  in  the  room.  I  then  heard  a  voice  as  if
from  the  room  adjoining,  and  made  an  effort  to  see  the  speaker,  but  I  found
myself  unable  to  move.  Then  appeared,  as  though  in  a  mist,  an  ordinary
sofa,  and  behind  it  the  vague  outline  of  a  woman's  figure.  I  did  not  rec-
ognize the  figure,  but  I  recognized  the  voice  which  I  heard :  it  was  the
voice  of  my  hostess,  Mrs.  B.,  who  was  at  that  time  not  in  the  house.  She
was  saying,  "  I  am  ill  and  all  worn  out.  Mrs.  Z.  has  been  so  nervous,  and
in  such  a  peculiar  mental  state,  that  it  has  quite  affected  my  health"  (or
words  to  that  effect),  "but  I  wouldn't  for  the  world  have  her  know  it."
I  then  made  a  stronger   effort  to  distinguish  the   figure,  and  woke  com-


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  465

pletely  to  find  myself  in  my  room  with  my  nurse.  I  inquired  of  the
nurse  who  was  in  the  other  room,  which  was  used  as  a  sleeping-room  by
my  child  and  her  nurse.  She  said  that  no  one  was  there ;  but  I  was  so  con-
vinced that  the  voice  had  come  from  there  that  I  insisted  upon  her  going
and  looking.  She  went,  but  found  no  one  there,  and  the  door  into  the
hall  was  latched.  I  then  looked  at  the  clock,  which  was  opposite  my  bed.
It  was  about  5  P.M.  In  the  evening,  about  8  P.M.,  Mrs.  B.  came  up  to
see  me,  and  I  asked  her  where  she  had  been  that  afternoon  at  5  o'clock.
She  said  that  she  had  been  at  Mrs.  G.'s  (about  two  miles  off) .  I  said, ' '  You
were  talking  about  me."  She  said,  "Yes,  I  was,'1  looking  very  much  sur-
prised. I  repeated  to  her  what  I  had  seemed  to  hear  her  say,  word  for
word.  She  was  much  astonished,  and  was  very  curious  as  to  what  else  I  had
heard  or  seen.  I  told  her  that  it  was  all  very  vague,  except  the  appear-
ance of  the  sofa,  which  I  described  in  detail  as  being  covered  with  a
peculiar  striped  linen  cloth,  green  stripes  about  two  inches  wide,  alter-
nating with  pale-drab  stripes,  somewhat  wider,  which  appeared  to  be  the
natural  color  of  the  unbleached  linen.  She  said  that  she  had  spoken
the  words  which  I  had  heard,  and  that  she  was  at  the  time  reclining  on  a
sofa,  but  she  said  that  the  sofa  was  covered  with  green  velvet.

Next  day  Mrs.  G.  paid  me  a  visit,  and  after  hearing  my  story  she  ex-
claimed, "  You're  right.  The  sofa  had  at  the  time  the  covering  which  you
describe;  it  had  just  been  put  on.  There  is  green  velvet  under  the  cov-
ering.   I  suppose  Mrs.  B.  didn't  notice  the  cover."

(Signed)  [Mrs.  L.  Z.]


2.

June  10,  1887.

(b.)  In  March  or  April,  1881,  when  I  was  staying  at  172  Benefit  street,
Providence,  R.I.,  I  tried  an  experiment  in  connection  with  my  hostess,
Mrs.  B.,  who  did  not,  however,  know  anything  about  my  experiment  till
afterwards.  She  had  gone  to  New  York  to  visit  her  sister,  Mrs.  S.,  and
one  evening,  remembering  my  former  strange  experience  with  Mrs.  B.,  I
thought  it  possible  that  by  giving  my  attention  to  her,  something  of  a
similar  sort  might  happen.  With  this  thought  in  my  mind  I  gradually
went  to  sleep.     In  the  morning  I  recollected  that  I  had  dreamt  as  follows :

My  first  sensation  was  that  of  dancing  at  a  party.  I  seemed  to  be
dressed  for  the  occasion,  and  in  the  course  of  my  delightful  swaying
motion  I  forgot  everything  else  until  I  found  myself  alone  and  gliding  into
a  dark  room.  I  felt  at  once  I  had  entered  a  sick-room,  and  saw  a  sufferin«:
woman  lying  on  a  lounge  with  her  hand  over  her  eyes.  I  also  saw  an
elderly  man,  and  one  or  two  other  persons  whom  I  could  not  clearly
recollect.  These  persons  all  appeared  depressed,  except  one,  a  young
man,  who  was  talking  and  laughing,  and  displaying,  I  remember  thinking,
exceptionally  fine  teeth.  I  felt  that  I  was  intruding,  and  left  the  room  as
quietly  as  possible.  Returning  to  the  dancing-room  I  found  everything
quiet.  The  dancing  had  ceased,  and  conversation  was  going  on.  There
was  a  small  group  of  persons  at  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  and  I  over-


466  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

heard  some   remarks   about  small-pox.     The  rest  of  my  dream  was  too
vague  for  me  to  recall.

Some  days  later  Mrs.  B.  returned  from  New  York,  and  I  told  her  of  my
dream.  That  very  evening,  it  appeared  from  her  account,  there  had
been  a  dancing-party  on  the  same  floor  as  that  occupied  by  Mrs.  S.
Mrs.  S.  herself  was  suffering  from  an  inflammation  of  the  eye,  and  was
unable  herself  to  leave  her  apartments.  The  other  members  of  her
family  were  at  the  party,  but  frequently  returned  to  Mrs.  S.'s  room  to
chat  for  a  short  time  with  her.  I  gave  a  description  of  the  young  man
whom  I  had  seen  laughing,  saying  that  he  had  very  handsome  teeth,  and
looked  wonderfully  like  Mrs.  B.'s  son.  She  recognized  him  at  once.
Said  that  he  had  been  at  the  party.  Was  an  intimate  friend  of  Mrs.  S.,
and  had  been  in  her  room  during  the  evening.  Mrs.  B.  also  told  me  that
she  and  a  few  others  had  been  only  that  day  informed  that  a  young  man
who  occupied  an  upper  floor  of  the  house  was  reported  by  his  medical
attendant  to  be  suffering  from  small-pox,  and  she  remembered  their
talking  about  it.

I  had  never  been  to  Mrs.  S.'s  apartments,  and  knew  nothing  about
their  style  of  living.  The  whole  occurrence  impressed  me  as  quite  inex-
plicable.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  L.  Z.]


3.

(a.  and  b.)  In  the  year  1881,  while  livingin  Providence,  on  Benefit  street,
No.  272,  Mrs.  Z  was  with  me,  and  during  the  winter  of  1880  and  the  spring
of  1881  she  was  in  a  peculiar  mental  state,  and  on  two  occasions  read  my
thoughts  and  heard  my  voice.  I  remember  that  while  I  was  away  from  the
house,  visiting  a  friend,  she  repeated  to  me  on  my  return  part  of  the
conversation  that  passed  between  us.  Once,  also,  on  my  return  from  a  visit
in  New  York,  she  described  to  me  the  house  in  which  I  had  been  visiting,
and  told  me  of  a  party  I  had  been  to,  giving  me  all  the  details  and  even
repeating  part  o*f  a  conversation  that  had  been  going  on  in  the  parlor.  I
remember  distinctly  on  one  occasion,  when  I  returned  from  a  visit  to  a
friend,  Mrs.  Z.  repeated  the  conversation  that  had  passed  between  my  friend
and  myself,  and  spoke  of  my  lying  on  a  lounge  that  had  a  striped  covering.
I  said,  *'  No,  it  was  a  green  plush,"  but  found  afterwards  she  was  right,  as
the  summer  covering  had  been  put  on.

ELIZABETH  L.  B.

Bkookltn,  N.Y.,  June,  1887.

4.

Providence,  July  12,  1887.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — When  I  received  your  note  I  could  not  at  all  recall  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  vision  you  referred  to,  but  afterwards  Mrs.  B.  refreshed
my  memory  upon  the  subject,  and  I  distinctly  recalled  it.     It  was  as  Mrs.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  467

Z.  related  it  to  you.     At  the  time  it  occurred,  I  remember,  I  thought  it  quite
marvellous.

Sickness  has  prevented  my  writing  you  these  few  lines  before.

Respectfully,

C.  B.  Y.  G.

1.

June  17,  1887.
(c.)  When  I  was  about  ten  years  of  age  I  was  sleeping  with  my  mother
one  night  and  woke  with  a  start,  having  dreamt  that  two  pins  were  in  my
mouth,  one  of  which  I  had  taken  out  and  the  other  of  which  I  concluded  I
must  have  swallowed.  "  O  God,11  I  cried,  "  Pve  swallowed  a  pin !  "  Sitting
up  in  bed,  and  turning,  I  saw  that  mother  was  sitting  up  in  bed  also.  She
said,  "  What's  the  matter ? "  —  "I  dreamt  I  swallowed  a  pin.11  —  "  Tell  me
your  dream.11  I  told  her  part  of  my  dream  and  she  gave  the  rest  of  the  de-
tails, saying  that  she  had  had  the  same  dream  precisely,  and  was  awakened
by  the  same  thought,  that  she  must  have  swallowed  one  of  the  pins.  My
mother  is  now  dead.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  L.  Z.]

2.

June  25,  1887.
(c.)  I  went  into  my  wife^  room  one  morning  about  twelve  years  ago
and  she  said,  "  I  was  very  much  surprised  this  morning.  I  woke  up  and
thought  I  had  pins  in  my  mouth,  and  I  put  my  hand  Up  to  my  mouth  to  con-
vince myself  that  the  pins  were  not  there.  L.  (Mrs.  Z.)  woke  up  shortly
after  and  thought  she  also  had  pins  in  her  mouth,  and  she  went  through
the  same  action  of  putting  her  hand  to  her  mouth,  and  was  much  frightened,
thinking  she  had  swallowed  some  pins."

(Signed)  [D.  Z.]

(Father  of  Mrs.  L.  Z.)


[52]  [Written  in  latter  part  of  1887.]

1.
(Statement  of  Mrs.  M.  L.  M.)

I  had  written  to  Mr.  H.  July  18,  1887,  asking  him  to  call  and  see  me  in
reference  to  the  matter  of  my  dream  of  "the  closet  in  Hotel  Vine.11  I
hoped  to  see  him  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  but  could  have  no  certainty
of  that,  as  he  was  at  times  called  away  from  the  city  on  business.

On  the  19th  I  was  called  out  of  the  office,  and,  before  going  out,  I  put
on  the  door  a  card  having  these  words  on  it,  "  Will  return  soon.11  I  told
the  elevator  boy,  if  any  one  called,  to  say  I  was  out,  but  would  be  back
shortly.  I  was  absent  about  an  hour.  On  my  return  I  came  upstairs,  but
did  not  ask  the  boy  (through  forgetfulness)  if  any  one  had  called ;  nor  did
he  tell  me  anyone  had  done  so.  As  I  came  within  a  short  distance  of  the  door
I  saw  some  characters  written  upon  the  card  I  had  left,  and  just  below  the


468  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

printed  words,  "  Will  return  soon,"  I  stooped  down  and  read,  "  Mr.  H.  has
been  here,  and  will  return.11  As  I  looked,  the  words  faded  away.  I  en-
tered the  office,  and  in  a  very  short  time  Mr.  H.  came  in.  I  turned  to  him
and  said  immediately,  "  You  have  been  here  before  this  morning  ?  a  short
time  ago?  "  He  replied  that  he  had,  and  said  he  left  no  name  or  message
with  the  elevator  boy,  simply  saying  to  him  that  he  would  call  again.

He  then  told  me  that  he  had  impressed  my  face  upon  his  mind  very
strongly,  so  he  could  see  every  feature  of  it  before  him,  with  the  intention
of  seeing  if  I  would  be  in  any  way  affected  by  it,  or  conscious  of  his  ap-
proach, or  would  say  anything  to  him  about  his  visit  when  I  saw  him.

It  may  be  said  that  as  I  was  naturally  expecting  him,  there  was  nothing
strange  in  this  occurrence,  but  I  was  not  expecting  him  at  that  time  espe-
cially, and  had  no  idea  that  he  had  called  until  I  saw  the  words  (in  pencil)
upon  the  card  upon  the  door,  the  elevator  boy  not  having  mentioned  the
fact  that  any  one  had  called.

M.  L.  M.

2.
{Statement  of  Mr.  H.)

I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  M.,  dated  July  18,  asking  me  to  call  upon
her.  While  on  my  way  to  call  upon  her,  July  19,  I  impressed  on  my  mind
very  vividly  the  lineaments  of  her  face,  with  the  intention  of  learning  if
she  would  be  in  any  way  affected  thereby,  and  if  she  would  mention  any-
thing that  would  show  that  she  had  any  knowledge  of  my  visit  before  I  saw
her.  WThen  I  reached  the  building  in  which  she  has  her  office,  I  asked  the
elevator  boy  where  I  should  find  Mrs.  M. ;  he  said,  "  She  is  out,  but  will
return  soon."  I  left  no  name,  simply  saying  I  would  call  again.  On  my
return,  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour,  she  was  at  the  office,  and  turning,
said,  "You  have  been  here  before,  this  morning."  I  said  that  I  had.  She
replied,  "  I  saw  it  upon  a  card  I  left  outside."  I  told  her  I  did  not  come
upstairs,  but  she  persisted  that,  whether  I  came  up  or  not,  my  name  was
on  the  card  as  having  called,  and  would  return.

I  have  been  acquainted  with  Mrs.  M.  since  1879,  and  am  well  aware  that
she  is  endowed  with  the  power  of  seeing  persons  and  things,  and  of  a  con-
sciousness of  what  is  occurring  at  a  distance,  to  a  high  degree.  I  very
cheerfully  bear  witness  to  the  facts  to  which  my  name  is  appended,  as  of  my

own  personal  knowledge.

J.  H.


[53]  [Written  in  latter  part  of  1887.]

1.

{Statement  of  Mrs.  M.  L.  M.)

Some  months  ago  I  had  a  very  strong  impression  that  Mr.  H.,  who  is  an
old  and  valued  friend,  was  coming  to  my  office.  I  was  glad  of  it,  because
I  had  not  seen  him  for  some  time,  and  wished  to  see  him.  I  looked  toward
the  door  several  times,  and  could  not  understand  why  he  did  not  appear,


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  469

feeling  sure  he  had  had  time  to  do  so,  from  the  time  that  had  elapsed  since
I  felt  that  he  was  en  route  for  the  office.

To  my  great  surprise  he  did  not  come  at  all,  and  while  thinking  of  him
again  the  next  day,  he  entered  the  office.  This  was  between  eleven  and
twelve.

"  You  did  not  expect  to  see  me,'1  he  said.  **  No,"  I  replied,  "  but  I  did
expect  you  yesterday.'1''  Then  I  told  him  how  strongly  I  had  been  impressed
with  the  idea  that  he  was  on  the  way  to  see  me,  and  how  surprised  I  was
that  he  did  not  appear.

He  laughed,  and  said,  "  Well,  I  was  on  my  way,  but  turned  back  when
half-way  here."    I  asked  immediately  at  what  time.     He   said,    "  In  the

forenoon,  before  twelve."

M.  L.  M.
2.

{Statement  of  Mr.  H.)

I  started  to  call  upon  Mrs.  M one  day   this  last  spring,  not  having

seen  her  for  some  little  time,  but  finding  it  very  muddy  and  disagreeable
out,  a  light  rain  falling  at  the  time,  I  turned  back  when  about  half-way
there.

The  next  day  I  called,  and  said  to  her,  "  You  did  not  expect  to  see  me
to-day?  "  —  "  No, "  was  her  reply,  "  but  I  did  expect  you  yesterday.  I  was
so  sure  you  were  coming  that  I  could  not  understand  why  you  did  not  ap-
pear." I  asked  her  what  time,  and  she  said  in  the  forenoon,  between
eleven  and  twelve  o'clock,  which  was  the  time  I  had  started,  turning  back
when  about  half-way  there.  J.  H.


[54]  1.

{From  Mrs.  F.  A.  B.  D.)

Wisconsin,  June  3,  1888.

.  .  .  When  in  Baltimore,  some  years  since,  one  evening,  just
after  retiring  in  the  dark,  and  with  closed  eyes,  I  "  saw  "  suddenly  the
face  of  a  friend,  a  young  man,  who  had  been  a  playmate  in  childhood,
who  said  in  the  most  natural  manner,  "  I  am  dead."  These  vivid  impres-
sions always  seemed  bearers  of  truth  in  some  sense  to  me,  and  this  quite
oppressed  me,  as  his  wife  was  a  friend  also.     I  had  not  long  to  wait,  for

the  next  day  a  letter  came  to  me,  saying  that  Fred was  very  ill,  not

expected  to  live ;  and  following  this  was  another,  giving  the  news  of  his
death  on  the  very  evening  when  he  told  me.     .     .     .

F.  A.  B.  D.

I  would  add  here  that  I  recalled  the  fact  of  writing  my  singular  impres-
sion to  my  mother,  as  she  said,  "  at  once,"  and  I  am  sure  that  there  is  no
doubt  of  it.

2.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  would  say  that  while

writing  to  inform  my  daughter  of  the  death  of  the  young  man  —  1863  —


470  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

referred  to,  we  received  a  letter  from  her  saying  she  dreamed  he  had  died
the  night  previous  to  her  writing,  and  have  frequently  heard  her  refer  to
similar  cases,  which  I  think  is  a  peculiar  trait  of  knowing  things  before
or  when  they  happen,  which  seems  to  be  natural  to  her.

Respectfully  yours,

Mrs.  A.  B.
(Mother  of  Mrs.  F.  A.  B.  D.)

My  mother  has  but  recently  partially  recovered  from  a  severe  illness  and
her  writing  is  brief.  Upon  mentioning  the  subject  to  her,  she  remembered
the  incident  as  above.


[55]  {From  Mr,  H.  D.  L.)

S ,  Me.,  Oct.  22,  1888.

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  letter  of  October  2,  has  reached  me  here.  The
"  vision  "  about  which  you  inquire  was  not  exactly  what  your  question
implies.  Such  variations  between  the  fact  and  the  report  you  are,  no  doubt,
by  this  time  quite  used  to.  The  experience  was,  however,  an  interesting
one,  and  I  will  gladly  tell  you  about  it.  At  my  wife's  request  I  do  not
mention  the  friend's  name.

This  friend  was  a  lady  to  whom  my  wife  was  bound  by  a  peculiar  affec-
tion. She  was  known  to  us  to  be  ill  of  a  mortal  disease  by  which  she  had
been  confined  to  her  bed  for  months.  She  was  in  New  York  ;  we  were  in
Chicago.     At  the  time  of  this  "vision  "  my  wife  was  confined  to  her  room

by  the  birth  of  a  child.     The  Rev.  Dr. ,  my  wife's  friend's  husband,

wrote  me  that  his  wife  was  very  much  worse,  and  likely  to  die  at  any  time ;
that  she,  knowing  Mrs.  L.'s  condition,  and  wishing  to  save  her  from  any
shock,  had  directed  him  to  write  me,  begging  me  to  conceal  the  danger
from  my  wife,  and  preparing  me  to  receive  the  news  of  her  death,  which
the  dying  woman  especially  adjured  me  not  to  let  Mrs.  L.  hear  of  until  she
was,  herself,  perfectly  well.

Several  days  after  the  receipt  of  the  Rev.  Dr 's  letter,  Mrs.  L.  awoke

one  morning  in  great  agitation  and  in  tears.  She  had  seen  her  friend  in  a
dream  with  a  wonderful  light  shining  upon  her.     They  had  had  in  the

dream  a  tender  talk.     Mrs.  Dr. said,  *■  Tell  me  again  how  happy  you

are,"  and  at  the  close  said,  "  Be  as  good  and  great  as  you  are  happy,"  and
the  dream  closed.

That  morning  I  received  a  telegram  from  the  Rev.  Dr. that  his

wife  had  died  during  the  night.  Mrs.  L.  knew  nothing  of  the  danger  nor
the  death  until  more  than  a  week  later.

Whether  the  dream  was  a  mere  coincidence,  —  a  chance  shot,  —  or
whether  Mrs.  L.,  as  Bayard  Taylor  believed,  really  met  her  friend  in  the  still
watches  of  the  night,  who  can  tell  ?  It  was  certainly  not  a  vision  of  fore-
telling ;  nor  was  Mrs.  L.  aware  during  the  vision  nor  in  relating  it  that
her  friend  was  dying.  But  it  illustrates  how  easily  error  creeps  into  tales
of  this  sort,  that,  until  corrected  by  my  wife  the  other  day,  I  have  told  the


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  471

story  as  one  of  a  death-bed  scene  in  a  vision,  in  which  my  wife  dreamed
that  her  friend  was  dying  and  gave  and  received  farewells,  —  none  of
which  was  in  the  dream,  but  which  I  honestly  put  into  my  account  for

years,  because  I  knew  that  Mrs.  Dr. had  died  the  same  night.

Truly  yours,


[Signed  later  by  Mrs.  L.]

In  a  letter  of  Nov.  12,  1888,  Mr.  L.  adds:  —

1.  The  date  was  about  March  1,  1875.

2.  Mrs.  L.  will  confirm  the  account  by  her  signature.


H.  D.  L.
J.  B.  L.


[56]  {From  Dr.  S.  F.  Deane.)

Box  142,
Charleton,  Thayer  Co.,  Neb.,  Nov.  12,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  — Yours  of  the  7th  inst.  received,  and  to  your  questions  will
reply  that  I  cannot  give  exact  date,  i.e.,  day  of  month,  as  I  made  no  record
of  the  occurrence  referred  to  in  your  letter  of  above  date.  I  was  washed
out  in  1876,  and  all  my  correspondence,  consisting  of  business  and  episto-
lary letters,  as  well  as  copies  of  many  letters  sent,  and  a  considerable
amount  of  MS.  of  a  miscellaneous  character,  was  utterly  ruined,  lost;  and,
among  the  rest,  the  letter  from  my  son,  referred  to  by  Mr.  Tuttle.1  I  have
nothing  to  refer  to  by  which  to  substantiate  my  statement,  and  must  rely
for  credence  on  its  internal  evidence  mainly  to  obtain  a  moment's  consider-
ation. Mr.  Tuttle  abridged  the  statement  made  in  the  article  published
some  months  before  in  the  "  R.  P.  Journal,"  so  that  it  seems  necessary,  for
a  full  understanding  of  the  matter,  that  I  again  write  out  an  account  of  the
occurrence,  as  follows  :  —

1  Our  attention  was  drawn  to  Dr.  Deane's  experience  by  the  following  account,  given  in  an
article  by  Mr.  Hudson  Tuttle  in  the  "  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,"  May  12,  1888  :  —

S.  F.  Deane,  M.D.,  of  Carleton,  Neb.,  had  a  remarkable  experience,  which  he  relates  as  fol-
lows :  —

"  After  my  arrival  in  Nebraska,  I  made  my  home  with  my  daughters.  At  the  time  I  left  Wis-
consin my  wife  was  not  well,  and  I  hesitated  to  leave  her.  After  I  had  been  absent  about  three
weeks,  I  had  retired  to  my  room,  which  had  a  door  opening  into  the  street.  About  2  o'clock
in  the  morning,  while  awake,  with  sufficient  light  from  a  partially  obscured  moon  to  see  distinctly
any  person  in  the  room,  and  fully  conscious  of  all  my  surroundings,  and  with  my  face  toward
the  door,  I  saw  it  open  and  a  person  step  into  the  room,  which  I  at  once  recognized  as  the  exact
image  of  my  wife.  She  came  direct  across  the  room,  knelt  at  my  bedside,  put  her  arms  about
my  neck,  kissed  me,  and  said  slie  had  been  very  sick,  but  was  better  now.  Then  she  said  she
must  go  and  see  Adelaide,  and  arose  and  passed  across  the  room  to  the  door  to  our  daughter's
room.  She  was  gone  a  few  minutes,  when  she  again  came  through  the  open  bedroom  door  into
my  room,  looked  at  me,  as  much  as  to  say  good-by,  passed  out  at  the  door,  and  was  gone.

"  While  she  was  present  a  peculiar  calmness  came  over  me,  but  when  she  was  gone  a  great
anxiety  took  possession  of  me,  and,  could  I  have  taken  a  train,  I  should  have  at  once  started  for
home.  But  I  at  last  resolved  to  await  a  letter,  which  came  in  due  time  from  my  son.  He  wrote  :
*  Mother  is  quite  sick,  though  better  than  night  before  last,  when,  about  2.30  or  3  o'clock  in  the
morning,  we  thought  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  that  she  was  dead.  She  lay  insensible,  pul-
sation  ceased,  or  only  fluttered  at  intervals,  and  respiration  seemed  suspended  ;  but  she  rallied,
and  is  now  in  a  fair  way  to  recover.'    She  did  recover,  and  enjoyed  a  fair  degree  of  health."


472


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.


I  left  Darlington,  Wis.,  March  14,  1871,  for  Nebraska.  At  the  time  of
leaving,  my  wife  was  in  poor  health,  but,  as  she  never  enjoyed  good  health,
and  seemed  to  be  as  well  as  usual  at  that  date,  I  left  her  without  feeling
any  unusual  concern  for  her.  I  arrived  in  Lincoln,  Neb.,  the  16th,  and
made  my  home  with  my  daughter  and  her  husband,  while  looking  about
me  to  become  acquainted  with  the  State  and  to  find  business.  This  kept
me  travelling  most  of  the  time,  so  that  I  was  at  their  house  only  as  a  tem-
porary stopping-place.  At  the  time  of  my  return  from  one  of  these  trips,
performed  on  foot,  I  was  sleeping  in  one  of  the  rooms,  in  which  my  loca-
tion, relative  to  other  parts  of  the  house,  can  be  better  learned  from  the
accompanying  diagram,  drawn  without  regard  to  any  proportion,  though


NORTH    SIDE.


DIAGRAM  OF  HOUSE


BED


BED  ROOM


DOOR


STREET  DOOR.


WINDOW.


locations  are  correct.  Soon  after  my  arrival  in  Nebraska,  I  received  a
letter  from  Wisconsin,  stating  that  "mother11  was  quite  sick,  but  no  inti-
mation that  she  was  in  a  dangerous  condition,  and  I  felt  no  unusual  anxiety
on  her  account.  The  first  intimation  I  had  of  danger  to  her  was  one  night
while  lying  on  the  lounge  at  the  N.W.  corner  of  the  room,  head  to  the
north.  It  was,  probably,  about  2  o'clock  A.M.  The  moon  was  obscured
by  a  veil  of  clouds,  but  not  so  heavily  that  any  object  in  the  room  could  be
distinctly  seen.  I  was  fully  awake,  and  in  no  wise  disturbed  mentally.  I
saw  and  recognized  the  various  articles  of  furniture  in  the  room,  and  noted
their  positions  as  clearly  as  I  would  have  done  in  full  daylight.  Owing  to
the  location  of  lounge,  and  its  relative  position  to  the  door,  I  readily,  and,
in  fact,  naturally,  would  notice  that  as  readily  as  any  portion  of  the  room
and  its  contents.  While  looking  at  the  door  I  saw  it  open,  and  the  exact
form  and  movement  of  my  wife  entered  from  the  street.  Her  features
were  clearly  seen  and  recognized.     She   closed  the   door  after  her,  and


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  473

walked  across  the  room  directly  from  the  door  to  the  lounge,  where  she
knelt  down,  looked  me  steadily  in  the  face,  —  it  seemed  to  me  two  or  three
minutes,  —  put  her  arm  about  my  neck,  kissed  me,  and  arose  to  her  feet,  say-
ing, as  she  rose,  "I  must  go  and  see  Adelaide,"  our  daughter.  She  then
turned  from  me,  walked  across  the  room  to  the  bedroom,  opened  that  door,
and  walked  in.  She  was  in  the  bedroom  a  few  minutes  when  she  came
out,  closed  that  door,  opened  the  outside  door,  passed  out,  closed  it,  and  was
gone.  During  this  time  I  felt  as  calm  and  as  free  from  excitement  as  I
ever  did  under  any  circumstances.  In  fact,  everything  appeared  too  real
to  be  other  than  a  real  occurrence  in  every-day  life,  until  she  passed  into  the
street.  Then  the  idea  flashed  upon  me,  she  is  dead  ;  and  had  I  had  wings
I  should  have  left  for  Wisconsin  at  once.  I  had  read  of  many  such  occur-
rences where  the  spirit,  or  what  was  thought  to  be  such,  had  appeared  to
friends  at  a  distance ;  so  that  there  seemed  to  be  some  reason  to  believe  she
was  dead.  I  feel  quite  sure  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen  the  night  before
to  my  daughter  and  her  husband.  Of  this  I  am  certain.  I  had  proposed  to
go  on  another  look  for  business  the  night  before,  and  had  so  declared  my
intention  ;  but  the  feeling  that  all  was  not  right  at  home  was  so  strong  that,
had  there  been  a  train  going  East  that  morning,  I  should  certainly  have
started  for  Wisconsin ;  but  as  there  was  not,  I  resolved  to  wait  until  the
next  day,  when  I  might  reasonably  look  for  a  letter  from  Wisconsin.  The
expected  letter  came,  and  from  that  I  learned  that  "Mother  is  very  sick.
Last  night  we  thought  she  was  dead.  She  sank  away ;  breathing  and  pul-
sation ceased.  She  lay  in  this  condition  some  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,
but  by  rubbing  and  bathing  with  stimulants  she  finally  rallied,  and  seems
better  to-day  than  at  any  time  since  she  was  taken  sick."  Now,  the  time
mentioned  in  another  letter  corresponded  with  the  time  she  apparently  vis-
ited me  in  Nebraska,  as  I  made  subsequent  inquiry  of  the  time  when  she
lay  unconscious,  and  found  the  correspondence  sufficiently  near  to  warrant
the  conclusion  that  the  time  was  identical,  although  neither  of  us  noted  the
exact  minute.

I  have  given  you  a  true  and  faithful  account  of  the  occurrence  as  it  has
dwelt  in  memory  since,  and  will  probably  be  among  the  last  occurrences
that  fade  away  from  distinct  recollection.  It  is  a  matter  of  regret  that  the
documentary  evidence  has  been  destroyed,  as  I  would  most  cheerfully  have
enclosed  it  with  this  letter,  to  show,  as  far  as  possible,  that  I  am  not  what  I
have  never  countenanced,  —  a  fraud.  You  can  make  such  disposition  of  this
narrative  as  its  intrinsic  value,  as  it  appears  to  you,  may  warrant.  I  neither
court  nor  shun  publicity.  I  am  a  spiritualist  from  conviction  on  what  to
me  is  demonstration  of  the  fact.  If  I  am  deceived,  it  is  after  many  and
varied  experiences,  both  of  myself  and  others.  I  might,  if  desired,  relate
some  dreams,  or  what  appeared  to  be  such,  that  seemed  to  foreshadow
coming  events.

I  will  interest  myself  in  gathering  information  on  Schedule  G,  and  should
I  be  so  fortunate  as  to  gather  any,  will  forward  at  once,  and  will  cheerfully
give  you  all  the  aid  I  can  in  your  search  into  the  grandest  subject  of  this  or
any  age,  or  the  biggest  humbug  that  ever  cursed  the  earth.

I  cannot  believe  from  the  knowledge  I  have  of  a  few  of  the  names  of


474   •         Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

those  who  appear  as  officers  of  your  Society,  that  you  will  emulate  the
Seybert  Commission.     If  such  is  your  intention,  it  will  be  a  matter  of  deep


and  lasting  regret.


Respectfully,


S.  F.  DEANE,  M.D.


[57]  Case  of  Mr.  F.  H.  Krebs.

1.
{Statement  by  Prof.  William  James.)

Mr.  Krebs  (special  student)  stopped  after  the  logic  lesson  of  Friday,
November  26,  and  told  me  the  facts  related  in  his  narrative.

I  advised  him  to  put  them  on  paper,  which  he  has  thus  done.

His  father  is  said  by  him  to  be  too  much  injured  to  do  any  writing  at
present.

WM.  JAMES.

Dec.   1,  1886.

2.

{Statement  by  Mr.  F.  H.  Krebs.)

On  the  afternoon  of  Wednesday,  November  24,  I  was  veiy  uneasy,  could
not  sit  still,  and  wandered  about  the  whole  afternoon  with  little  purpose.
This  uneasiness  was  unaccountable;  but  instead  of  wearing  away  it  in-
creased, and  after  returning  to  my  room  at  about  6.45  it  turned  into  positive
fear.  I  fancied  that  there  was  some  one  continually  behind  me,  and,  although
I  turned  my  chair  around  several  times,  this  feeling  remained.  At  last  I
got  up  and  went  into  my  bedroom,  looked  under  the  bed  and  into  the  closet ;
finding  nothing-,  I  came  back  into  the  room  and  looked  behind  the  curtains.
Satisfied  that  there  was  nothing  present  to  account  for  my  fancy,  I  sat  down
again,  when  instantly  the  peculiar  sensation  recurred;  and  at  last,  finding  it
unbearable,  I  went  down  to  a  friend's  room,  where  I  remained  the  rest  of
the  evening.  To  him  I  expressed  my  belief  that  this  sensation  was  a  warn-
ing sent  to  show  me  that  some  one  of  my  family  had  been  injured  or  killed.

While  in  his  room  that  peculiar  sensation  ceased,  and,  despite  my  ner-
vousness, I  was  in  no  unusual  state  of  mind  ;  but  on  returning  to  my  room
to  go  to  bed  it  returned  with  renewed  force.  On  the  next  day  (the  25th),
on  coming  to  my  grandfather's,  I  found  out  that  the  day  before  (the  24th),
at  a  little  past  12,  my  father  had  jumped  from  a  moving  train  and  been
severely  injured.  While  I  do  not  think  that  this  warning  was  direct  enough
to  convince  sceptics  that  I  was  warned  of  my  father's  mishap,  I  certainly
consider  that  it  is  curious  enough  to  demand  attention.  I  have  never  before
had  the  same  peculiar  sensation  that  there  was  some  being  besides  myself
in  an  apparently  empty  room,  nor  have  I  ever  before  been  so  frightened
and  startled  at  absolutely  nothing.

(My  Father's  Statement.)

On  questioning  my  father,  he  said  that  before  the  accident  he  was  not


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  475

thinking  of  me,  but  that  at  the  very  moment  that  it  happened  his  whole
family  seemed  to  be  before  him,  and  he  saw  them  as  distinctly  as  if  there.

(Chauncey  Smith's  Statement.)

On  questioning  Smith,  he  said  that  he  distinctly  remembered  my  coming
down  and  stating  my  nervousness,  but  as  he  was  studying  he  did  not  pay
much  attention  to  my  talk,  and  could  not  vouch  for  the  particulars.

On  the  eve  of  the  25th  I  went  to  his  room  and  told  him  how  my  feeling
had  been  verified,  and  he  did  not  dispute  my  statement  of  the  case ;  there-
fore to  me  his  forgetfulness  is  astonishing.

P.  H.  KREBS,  Jr.

Nov.  29, 1886.

3.

(Statement  by  Mr.  Chauncey  Smith,  Jr.)

I,  the  undersigned,  distinctly  remember  that  F.  H.  Krebs,  Jr.,  came  into
my  room  November  24  and  complained  of  being  very  nervous.  I  cannot
remember  exactly  what  he  said,  as  I  was  studying  at  the  time,  and  did  not
pay  much  attention  to  his  talk.

On  the  25th  he  came  into  my  room  in  the  evening,  and  made  a  statement
that  his  state  the  evening  before  was  the  consequence  of  an  accident  that
happened  to  his  father,  and  that  he  had  the  night  before  told  me  that  he  had
received  a  warning  of  some  accident  to  some  one  dear  to  him.  This  I  did
not  contradict,  because  I  consider  that  it  is  extremely  probable  that  he  said
it,  and  that  I  did  not,  through  inattention,  notice  it.

CHAUNCEY  SMITH,  Jr.


[58]  1.

(From  Prof.  E.  W.  C,  June,  1886.)

About  the  end  of  1874,  Mrs.  C,  then  living  in  Montreal,  was  feeling  some-
what anxious  in  regard  to  a  younger  brother,  with  whose  temporary  occu-
pation and  associations  she  was  not  altogether  satisfied.  One  night  in  a
dream  she  saw  him  going  upstairs  to  a  garret  or  loft  without  any  door,
where  a  man  and  a  woman  were  engaged  in  sorting  and  piling  boxes.  He
was  apparently  going  to  fetch  some  of  them,  and  a  disagreement  sprang
up  between  him  and  the  man,  when  the  latter  took  up  a  piece  of  a  broken
lid  and  struck  the  former  on  the  head  two  or  three  times.  He  would  ap-
parently have  done  more,  but  the  woman  interposed.  This  dream  she  told
to  her  sister  and  to  one  or  two  other  members  of  the  family  at  breakfast
time,  but  after  the  younger  brother  had  left.  She  purposely  avoided  letting
him  know  of  it,  lest  he  should  become  aware  that  he  was  an  object  of
anxiety.  She  was  laughed  at,  but  no  further  notice  was  taken  of  the
matter.

About  7  o'clock  the  same  evening  the  brother  returned  from  his  place
of  business,  pale,  and  with  wounds  on  his  head.     When  questioned,  he  said


476  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

that  he  had  been  sent  upstairs  to  the  garret  for  some  boxes,  and  that  he
had  had  words  with  a  man  up  there,  who  had  picked  up  a  rough  piece  of
a  box  with  nails  in  it,  and  had  hit  him  twice  on  the  head  with  it.  The  man
would,  he  said,  have  done  more  if  a  woman  had  not  interposed.

After  the  occurrence,  he  went  to  the  office  of  an  elder  brother  living  in
another  part  of  the  city,  who  made  inquiry  into  the  story,  and  found  that  it
was  true.  The  matter  was  pushed  further,  and  not  dropped  until  some  com-
pensation or  reparation  —  1  do  not  know  what —  had  been  made  to  the  boy,
so  that  no  doubt  can  be  entertained  concerning  the  truth  of  the  story.

2.
Professor  C.  writes,  May  8,  1887  :  —

The  account  of  Mrs.  C/s  brother's  being  struck  on  the  head  was,  as  you
suppose,  by  Mrs.  C.  On  thinking  over  this  case,  the  thought  occurred  to  me
that  I  might  have  the  original  letter  in  which  she  told  me  of  it.  The  ac-
count previously  sent  was  given  from  memory  at  the  time  of  writing.  I
send  you  herewith  this  letter,  or,  at  least,  the  part  relating  to  the  case.  The
rest  is  immaterial.  You  will  observe  that  another  minute  coincidence  which
Mrs.  C.  had  forgotten  is  hereby  introduced,  —  the  place  where  the  injury
was  inflicted.  The  letter,  as  you  see,  just  mentions  the  fact  without  going
into  detail.

Mrs.  C.  read  over  the  statement  last  sent,  and  told  me  it  was  correct  in
every  point.  If  she  has  time  she  will  draw  up  a  short  narrative  without
communication  with  me,  and  send  it  with  this.

3.

{Extract  from  a  letter  by  Mrs  C,  dated  Sept.  25,  1874.)

I  was  called  away  to  dinner,  and  had  to  leave  off  abruptly ;  now  my
thoughts  are  scattered.  At  dinner  my  brother  told  me  that  a  man  in  his
store  set  upon  him  to-day,  and  beat  him  on  the  head  with  a  stick.  W.  took
the  matter  up,  and  a  warrant  was  taken  out;  but  listen,  —  at  breakfast  this
morning  we  were  all  laughing  at  my  dream  of  last  night,  which  was,  that
I  saw  a  man  hitting  L.  [the  brother]  on  the  head  with  a  stick.  L.  has  a
bruise  on  the  exact  place  I  dreamt  he  had.  What  do  you  make  of  this
coincidence?    The  boys  beg  me  not  to  dream  of  them.

4.

Dream  concerning  my  Brother.

[May,  1887.]

I  did  not  like  the  position  held  hy  my  youngest  brother,  and  was  sure
that  he  did  not  like  it  for  himself.

I  had  in  my  mind  a  vague  feeling  of  anxiety  for  my  brother.  One  night
I  dreamed  that  I  saw  him  going  up  some  stairs  that  opened  at  once  upon  a
rough  sort  of  garret.

A  man  was  at  work  there,  and  after  a  few  words  with  my  brother  (I  do
not  remember  whether  I  heard  them  or  not,  I  rather  knew  that  he  and  the


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  477

man  were  talking)  the  man  suddenly  picked  up  a  rough  piece  of  board
lying  at  hand,  and  began  to  strike  him  on  the  head.

I  wanted  to  interfere,  and  whether  I  or  another  woman  did  I  cannot
now  remember.  In  the  morning  the  man's  attack  was  clear  in  my  mind,
also  the  details  of  stairs  and  garret ;  but  there  remained  an  indefinite  im-
pression that  I  had  seen  a  shadowy  woman,  and  that  she  had  stopped  the
blows.

I  related  this  dream  to  my  sister  as  we  dressed  next  morning,  and  at
breakfast  to  those  of  the  family  who  had  not  already  left  for  their  respec-
tive occupations.  I  am  sure  my  youngest  brother  was  not  there,  first,  because
he  always  took  his  breakfast  earlier  than  the  rest  of  us,  his  work  beginning
earlier ;  second,  because~I  should  not  have  thought  it  wise  to  tell  the  dream
in  his  presence.  Looking  back  now,  I  see  my  mother,  my  second  brother,
and  the  sister  to  whom  I  had  already  told  the  dream  sitting  at  the  table.

In  the  evening  my  youngest  brother  appeared  at  supper  with  a  bruise  on
his  head,  and  when  asked  to  account  for  it,  he  said  that  he  had  been  sent
upstairs  to  a  sort  of  garret  for  some  boxes,  and  that  he  and  the  man  at
work  there  had  had  words  ;  the  man  had  set  on  him  with  a  rough  piece  of
wood,  and  had  given  him  two  or  three  blows  before  a  woman,  also  at  work
there,  stopped  him.  He  had  gone  to  one  of  his  elder  brothers,  who  had  the
man  arrested,  and  the  woman  had  testified  that  no  ground  had  been  given
for  the  assault.

We  laughed  a  great  deal  over  the  coincidences  of  my  dream  and  the  real
event,  and  so  far  as  I  could  get  a  description  of  the  stairs  and  rough  land-
ing or  garret,  it  agreed  well  with  what  I  had  myself  seen.

KATHERINE  B.   C.

5.
Her  (Mrs.  C.'s)  Dream  of  L


[May,  1887.]

In  Montreal,  one  morning,  she  awoke  from  a  troubled  sleep,  said  she
had  dreamed  so  uncomfortably  of  L.,  — that  the  storeman  had  been  very
cruel  to  him;  had  struck  him  on  the  head.  In  the  evening,  when  the  lad
came  home  with  the  story  of  the  assault  on  him,  he  implored  my  sister
most  pathetically  not  to  dream  anything  more  about  him.

(Signed)  A.   M.  T.

Miss  T.  adds  that  "  this  is  all  my  own  recollection,  without  communica-
tion with  any  one  else  concerned."

6.

Mrs.  C.  adds,  in  a  letter  of  Jan.  29,  1889 :  "  In  reply  to  your  question  T
will  make  the  following  statements :  —

"  I  was  at  that  time,  September,  1874,  giving  lessons  in  some  of  the  pri-
vate schools  of  Montreal,  and,  in  order  to  meet  my  classes  at  nine  or  half-
past  nine,  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  breakfast  not  later  than  eight.  I  there-
fore rose  at  or  about  seven  every  morning.

"  My  brother  left  home  every  morning  in  time  to  begin  his  work  at  eight.


478  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

The  assault  took  place  after  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  necessarily,  as
his  hours  of  work  began  at  eight.

"  I  related  my  dream  to  my  sister  on  waking,  or  while  getting  up  in  the
morning,  about  seven  o'clock,  and  I  related  it  again  at  breakfast.  My
brother  was  not  present,  as  he  had  left  to  go  to  his  work.  I  am  sure  that  I
should  not  in  any  case  have  related  it  in  his  presence,  and  that  my  sister,
who  felt  as  I  did  in  regard  to  the  matter,  would,  on  no  account,  have  men-
tioned it  to  him.  I  must  have  related  the  dream  to  my  sister  while  he  was
still  in  the  house,  and  he  could  but  have  just  reached  his  place  of  business
when  I  was  relating  it  for  the  second  time."


[59]  1.

{From  Prof.  E.  W.  C,  June,  1886.)

About  Christmas  in  the  year  1866  or  1867  Mrs.  C,  then  living  at  Aylbur-
ton,  in  Gloucestershire,  England,  dreamed  between  1  and  2  o'clock  in
the  morning  that  she  saw  one  train  running  into  another,  alongside  of
the  long  platform  at  Gloucester  station.  So  vivid  was  the  impression,
that  she  seemed  to  put  her  fingers  into  her  ears  to  deaden  the  noise  that
would  follow.  Waking  immediately,  she  told  the  dream  to  her  sister
who  slept  with  her.  In  the  dream  she  saw  a  gentleman,  a  teacher  of
music  in  the  neighborhood,  in  the  train  or  on  the  platform.  The  same
evening,  when  at  a  party,  and  having  nearly  forgotten  the  dream,  she
overheard  two  men  talking  about  the  accident  at  Gloucester  station  during
the  previous  night.  At  the  party  one  of  the  first  persons  whom  she  saw
was  the  above-mentioned  music-teacher,  who,  by  the  way,  was  almost  a
stranger,  being  known  only  by  sight.  On  inquiry  she  then  learned  that
one  train  coming  in  had  run  into  another  standing  at  the  platform,  between
1  and  2  in  the  morning,  just  as  she  had  seen  in  her  dream,  and  that  the
teacher  had  been  in  one  of  the  trains.


{Account  by  Mrs.  C.)

DREA.M   OF  THE   COLLISION  AT   GLOUCESTER   STATION.

December,  1866  or  '67.
I  dreamed  that  I  was  at  a  railway-station,  —  our  nearest  at  Lydney,
Gloucestershire,  twenty  miles  south-west  of  Gloucester.  I  believed  it  was
our  station,  but  I  saw  the  long  platform  of  Gloucester.  There  was  a  train
standing  ready  lo  start,  and  I  knew  there  was  to  be  a  collision,  and  dread-
ing the  noise,  I  was  relying  on  our  Lydney  ticket-porter  to  warn  me  in
time  so  that  1  might  shut  out  sight  and  noise.  I  then  saw  Mr.  Matthews,
the  music  teacher,  and  covered  my  face  and  ears,  knowing  the  time  had
come.  I  believe  I  saw  the  collision;  I  know  I  heard  a  terrific  bang  and
woke  with  the  shock  of  it.  I  suppose  I  woke  my  sister,  for  I  remember  tell-
ing her  about  it  in  the  night ;  and  I  believe  we  ascertained  by  some  means


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  479

that  it  was  about  2  A.M.,  but  at  this  distance  of  time  I  cannot  be  sure  on
this  point.  We  heard  nothing  of  any  accident  until  evening,  when  we  were
on  our  way  to  a  party  at  Lydney.  Father  had  come  home  from  business
in  the  omnibus,  and  he  sent  us  on  to  the  party  in  its  return  trip.  Some-
where we  picked  up  two  men ;  one  at  least  was  unknown  to  us.  They
talked  of  various  things,  and  among  others  of  an  accident  in  the  night  at
Gloucester  station,  which  has  but  one  long  platform.

The  Cheltenham  train  was  ready  to  start,  when  another  ran  into  it  with
a  great  shock.  !No  one  was  seriously  hurt.  It  happened  between  1  and
2  A.M.

At  the  party  we  saw  Mr.  Matthews,  and  he  told  us  that  he  had  taken  his
seat  in  the  Cheltenham  train,  but  had  got  out  for  a  minute,  just  before  the
collision  occurred.     We  did  not  mention  my  dream  to  him  or  to  any  one.

KATHERINE  B.  C.

3.
{Account  by  Miss  A.  M.  T.)

With  regard  to  the  accident  at  Gloucester  station .

She  (Mrs.  C.)  told  me  early  one  morning  about  1864  or  1865,  that  she
had  dreamed  that  she  was  present  at  a  railway  accident  near  Gloucester.
As  far  as  I  can  remember  her  account  was  very  circumstantial,  just  as
that  of  an  eye-witness  of  the  terrible  scene.  We  lived  at  Ayl burton,  in
Gloucestershire,  England,  a  village  to  which  news  penetrated  slowly,  so
that  I  am  sure  it  was  mid-day  before  we  heard  that  an  accident  had  taken
place  on  the  line.  I  do  remember  also  that  we  found  my  sisters  account,
and  that  given  by  those  really  present  in  the  flesh,  almost  identical ;  but  it  is
too  long  ago  for  me  to  recall  these  details  other  than  as  I  state  them  here.

A.  M.  T.

4.

Mrs.  C.  adds,  in  a  letter  of  Jan.  29,  1889,  postscript:  —
"  I  open  my  letter  to  tell  you  that,  while  in  England  last  summer,  I  had
the  opportunity  of  talking  to  Mr.  Matthews  and  his  wife  regarding  the  rail-
way accident  at  Gloucester,  of  which  I  dreamed  the  night  that  it  occurred,
and  about  the  time  of  its  occurrence.  He  could  not  recall  the  circumstance
at  first,  —  that  is,  the  circumstance  of  his  being  in  the  train.  His  wife,
however,  remembered  it  well,  and,  after  talking  together  in  his  presence,
he  began  also  to  remember  something  about  it.  His  wife  remembered  that
he  had  taken  his  seat  in  the  wrong  train,  — there  are  and  have  always  been
two  trains  leaving  that  platform  for  different  destinations  at  the  same  time.
Becoming  aware  of  his  error  he  stepped  out  of  the  train,  and  had  not  reached
the  right  one  when  the  accident  happened  to  the  one  he  had  left.  Mrs.
Matthews,  of  her  own  accord,  recalled  these  details.  After  she  had  done
so  I  related  my  dream,  which  she  heard  for  the  first  time,  although  I  had
met  her  and  Mr.  Matthews  the  evening  after  the  dream.  But  at  that  time
I  should  have  thought  it  '  silly  '  to  tell  the  dream."


480  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

[60]  1.

{From  Prof.  E.  W.  0.,  June,  1886.)

In  August,  1876,  with  a  party  of  young  men  from  Montreal,  I  went  off
on  a  camping  excursion  up  the  Ottawa  river.  All  were,  of  course,  in  good
health,  and  we  expected  to  be  away  for  a  fortnight.  On  the  second  Thurs-
day, however,  after  our  departure,  one  of  the  party  having  cut  his  knee
severely  with  the  axe,  and  the  wound  not  healing  well,  we  set  out  to  return.
I  should  add  that  another  of  the  party  had  been  ill  from  the  outset,  and  had
caused  much  trouble.  After  a  day's  travel  we  reached  the  Ottawa  river  and
took  the  steamer  for  Montreal.

On  the  night  of  Thursday,  the  day  on  which  we  began  our  return,  Mrs.
C,  then  in  Montreal,  dreamed  that  she  was  in  our  camp,  and  saw  me  with
an  axe  in  my  hand,  and  also  learned  in  some  way  that  one  of  the  party  had
cut  his  knee,  and  that  another  was  in  some  trouble,  and  that  the  whole  party
had  determined  to  come  home.  She  also  heard  some  one  say,  "  We  will
never  go  camping  with  H.  G.  again.  He  has  been  sick  all  the  time.1'  This
was  actually  said  by  more  than  one  of  us.

This  dream  was  told  to  her  sister  on  awakening,  An  elder  brother,  W.
T.,  on  coming  down  to  breakfast  the  same  morning,  remarked  :  '*  I  fear  they
have  had  some  trouble  up  there  at  the  camp.  I  have  been  dreaming  about
them  all  night.  I  dreamed  that  H.  G.  was  sick,  and  that  they  are  all  com-
ing home.11

On  our  return  on  Saturday  night  we  were  surprised  by  the  absence  of  all
appearance  of  astonishment  at  our  premature  return,  until  we  learned  of
the  dream.

2.

{Professor  C.  writes,  in  May,  1887.)

As  to  the  camping  excursion,  you  ask  me  if  we  determined  to  return  on
Thursday  night.  I  have  referred  to  my  note-book,  and  find  that  we  started
on  our  return  on  Thursday,  about  noon ;  so  that  the  decision  was  probably
made  the  same  morning,  as  it  was  caused  by  an  accident  to  one  of  the  party
who  had  cut  his  knee  with  the  axe.  The  wound  did  not  heal  as  I  wished,
and  this  induced  us  to  decide  to  return.  In  this  decision  I  probably  had
great  part,  as  I  was  the  oldest  member  of  the  party ;  but  of  the  exact  details
I  have  no  recollection.

Mrs.  C.  is  confident  that  the  dream  occurred  on  Thursday  night,  but  of
this  we  have  no  other  evidence.  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  the  decision
to  return  had  been  made  the  night  before,  but  of  this  I  cannot  be  certain.

3.

{Account  of  Mrs.  0.,  May,  1887.)

Dream  of  the  Camp  on  the  River  Lievre,  August,  1876.

Mr.  C,  my  brothers  John,  Lewis,  and  two  or  three  other  young  men  were
camping  on  the  river  Lievre  for  a  fortnight  in  August,  1876.     Among  them


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  481

was  a  young  man  named  Howard  Gardner,  who  was  one  of  the  most  enthu-
siastic when  the  party  left.  My  brother  Wallace  was  to  have  been  of  the
party,  but  was  detained  by  business.

I  believe  the  campers  were  to  return  to  town  on  a  Monday.  On  the  Thurs-
day night  before  this  Monday,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  at  the  camp  and  saw
that  things  were  not  going  well ;  one  of  the  party  was  ill.  I  felt  indefi-
nitely that  it  was  Howard  Gardner.  But  I  was  sure  that  Howard  had  in
some  way  given  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  and  that  I  heard  Mr.  C.  and  John
say  decidedly,  "  We  will  never  go  camping  with  Howard  again.11  Some
one  had  cut  his  knee  with  an  axe ;  was  going  about  with  a  handkerchief
round  it.  I  thought  it  was  Mr.  C,  but  was  sure  that  he  was  troubled  and
anxious  about  something.  I  felt  also  that  they  were  all  coming  home  at
once,  instead  of  pushing  on  to  the  lake.  I  told  my  sister  as  we  dressed.
At  breakfast  Wallace  said,  "  Girls,  they've  got  trouble  up  at  the  camp  ;  I
don't  know  what  it  is ;  I  think  Howard  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  I  was  there
all  night,  and  they  are  coming  home  at  once."

On  Saturday  evening,  about  6,  I  was  dressed  to  make  a  call,  when  in
walked  John  and  Lewis.  They  were  surprised  that  we  took  their  coming
as  a  matter  of  course.  I  asked  for  Mr.  C,  and  they  said  he  had  gone  round
to  see  Howard,  who  had  returned  ill  that  morning,  leaving  Buckingham
before  their  return  to  the  town,  though  expressly  enjoined  to  do  nothing  of
the  kind.  He  had  been  sick  almost  from  the  first  day,  and  by  his  rashness
had  caused  every  one  trouble,  and  Mr.  C.  had  to  take  him  back  to
Buckingham  to  nurse  him  for  a  few  days.

Mr.  C.  left  Howard  there  and  returned  to  the  camp  for  a  few  days,  but
they  all  felt  too  uneasy  and  anxious  for  enjoyment,  and  decided  to  come
back  a  few  days  earlier  than  intended.     Howard  died  within  a  day  or  two.

A  young  man  named  Goodhue  had  chopped  his  knee  with  an  axe,  and
John  showed  us  a  sketch  roughly  made  by  one  of  the  party,  showing
Goodhue  with  a  handkerchief  tied  round  his  knee.  This  sketch  is,  I  believe,
still  in  existence.

KATHERINE  B.   C.

4.

{Account  by  Miss  A.  M.  T.,  May  14, 1887.)

Her  (Mrs.  C.'s)  Dream  of  the  Camping  Party.

Professor  C.  and  our  brothers,  with  some  young  friends,  had  gone  on  a
camping  expedition  up  the  Lievre  river.  We  thought  they  must  have  ar-
rived at  their  destination,  White  Fish  lake,  but  my  sister  told  me  one  morn-
ing she  had  dreamed  that  the  party  had  been  obliged  to  stop  on  their  road,
as  one  of  the  friends  had  cut  his  knee  with  a  hatchet,  and  another  of  the
party  was  sick.  She  had  been  to  the  camp  in  her  dream,  and  gave  a  cir-
cumstantial account  of  the  boys  as  they  were  at  the  moment  of  her  dream,
which  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  forget.  But  the  truth  of  it  all  was  quickly  verified ;
for  a  few  mornings  later  the  party  of  depressed  campers  returned,  their  ex-
pedition a  complete  failure,  one  of  the  party  sick,  the  other  badly  cut
with  the  hatchet.

A.  M  T.


4:82  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

[61]  1.

{From  Julius  Jacob.)

New  York,  March  29,  1888.

Dear  Sir,  —  In  the  "  World"  of  March  4,  I  read  an  article  in  regard
of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  As  I  take  great  interest
in  the  work  you  and  the  other  members  of  the  Society  are  performing,
by  trying  to  unvail  the  mystery  of  the  human  soul,  since  an  occurrence  at
the  time  of  my  father's  death  happened  to  me,  therefore  I  give  this  fact
to  you.

About  fourteen  years  ago,  one  Sunday  morning  about  5  o'clock  I  woke
up  by  a  voice  saying  to  me,  "  Julius,  your  father  died."  It  was  no  dream.
My  father  living  that  time  in  Milwaukee,  myself  here  in  New  York.
Certainly  any  one  feels  downhearted  on  account  of  such  a  remark.  During
the  forenoon  I  received  a  telegraphic  despatch  announcing  the  death  of  my
father.  I  knew  it  sooner  than  my  step-mother,  as  she  wrote  to  me  that  my
father  laid  dead  alongside  of  her  when  she  woke  about  7  o'clock.  I  must
have  been  notified  the  very  moment  he  died.

Thousands  of  such  mysteries  may  happen  without  being  known ;  how  it
is,  it  is  very  difficult  to  conceive.  We  know  it  is  so,  but  how  and  why  it
is  so  we  do  not  know.  It  must  be  a  transmission  of  the  soul,  or  whatever
you  may  call  it.  To  come  a  little  nearer,  we  must  try  to  convince  our-
selves that  there  is  no  space  and  no  time  in  existence  in  the  spiritual
world.  To  conceive  such  ideas  is  very  hard,  even  to  those  who  have
proof  of  it,  like  myself.  Many  proofs  we  have  by  a  very  reliable  and
remarkable  man,  —  I  refer  to  the  Honorable  Sweden borg,  — by  stating  to
the  captain  of  a  vessel,  while  on  board,  the  large  fire  of  Stockholm  in
progress  the  very  same  time,  while  being  far  from  it.  W^hen  they  arrived
in  Stockholm  the  captain  found  everything  to  be  true  what  Swedenborg
told  him.     The  very  house  where  the  fire  stopped  even  was  told.

As  you  do  not  know  me,  still  you  must  admit  my  statement  to  be  true,

for  no  one  would  dare,  or  would  have  any  reason,  to  make  a  false  remark

about  his  father's  death.

Yours  very  respectfully,

JULIUS  JACOB.

2.

New  York,  May  11,  1888.
Dear  Sir,  —     ...     I  hereby  send  to  you  the  answer  in  connection
with   the  occurrence  which   happened  to  me  at  the  time  of  my  father's
death.

I  have  the  telegraphic  despatch  of  Milwaukee,  which  announced  the
death  of  my  father,  in  my  possession.

I  did  not  speak  to  any  person  before  I  received  the  despatch  what  hap-
pened to  me  the  same  morning,  or  the  very  time  my  father  died.    .     .     .

Very  respectfully  yours,

JULIUS  JACOB.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  483

[62]  {From  Mrs.  L.  P.  E.)

1.

May  12,  1888.

In  1877,  while  spending  a  few  months  in  Hartford,  1  was  invited  on  a
day  in  May  to  make  a  little  trip  from  New  Haven  to  Rockaway,  —  a  trip
requiring  only  the  day.  After  reaching  New  Haven,  where  boat  was
to  be  taken,  an  indescribable  nervous  feeling  came  to  me,  making  a  lump
in  my  throat,  and  otherwise  upsetting  me.  When  the  gentleman  with  me
escorted  me  to  the  deck  of  the  steamer,  I  was  so  apprehensive  of  a  some-
thing that  I  felt  sure  was  to  happen,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  get  off  at  the
only  landing-place  after  leaving  New  Haven,  which  was  at  the  west  end  of
New  Haven,  a  pier  where  persons  from  that  part  of  the  city  could  embark.
The  specimen  of  the  excursionists  about  us  on  the  start  prepared  me  for
the  downright  rough  element  we  saw  awaiting  the  boat  at  the  pier  above
named.  I  used  all  persuasive  power  possessed  by  me,  and  induced  my
companion  to  land,  much  against  his  will.  We  then  spent  a  few  hours  at
Savin  Rock,  and  reached  Hartford  in  time  for  tea.

The  sequel  is,  that  next  day  the  boat,  which  was  to  have  reached  New
Haren  on  the  eve  of  the  excursion  day,  did  not  get  into  port  until  forty-
eight  hours  behind  time ;  all  hands  were  drunk,  some  had  been  stabbed,
and  a  terrific  storm  on  the  Sound  had  seriously  damaged  the  boat.

Since  then  I  never  neglect  a  nervousness  born  of  a  warning  of  danger
ahead.

MARY  M.  E.

2.

June  4,  1888.
Richakd  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  favor  of  May  16  came  duly  to  hand.  In  reply  to
your  query  as  to  the  possibility  of  securing  statement  of  my  companion  of
the  trip  I  outlined,  I  do  not  know  where  he  is  now,  having  heard  nothing
of  or  from  him  since  1879.

I  do  not  know  if  I  have  had  so  clearly  any  other  intimation  or  warning
as  the  one  referred  to,  but  I  do  have  peculiar  "waking  dreams"  which
would,  if  deftly  handled,  outdo  even  such  fantastic  creations  as  "  Hyde  and
Jekyll."  But  I  do  not  think  any  one  could  possibly  doubt  my  experience  of
1877  was  a  certain  sort  of  warning.     .     .     .

MARY    M.    E.


[63]  1.

Dreams  of  Mrs.  H.

Brookline,  Jan.  23,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  to  you  the  account  of  four  dreams  which  seemed
to  me  equally  pertinent,  so  I  asked  Mrs.  H.  to  write  them  all.     I  see  that


484  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

they  are  dated  November  26 ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  came  into  my
possession  only  two  days  ago.

It  seems  an  interesting  fact  that  Mrs.  H.'s  mother  had  a  dream  about  her
deceased  husband  which  influenced  her  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  She  was  a
Swedenborgian ;  this  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  effect  pro-
duced by  that  dream.

Yours  truly,

ANNIE  R.  W.

2.

Four  Remarkable  Dreams.

I.

At  the  request  of  a  friend,  I  give  the  following  statement  in  regard  to
four  remarkable  dreams,  occurring  at  different  periods  of  my  life.  My
husband  has  aided  me  in  preparing  the  statement.  He  well  remembers
my  relation  of  the  dreams  when  they  occurred.  The  first  occurred  at  the
time  of  the  departure  to  the  other  world  of  my  husband's  mother,  in  the
year  1855.  She  went  from  Baltimore,  from  our  house  in  the  suburbs  where
she  had  been  living  with  us  for  a  few  months  previously,  to  the  neighbor-
hood of  Donaldsonville,  La.,  where  her  eldest  son  resided  with  his  family.
It  was  in  the  month  of  October,  I  think.  The  yellow-fever  still  lingered  in
some  places,  and  in  a  few  days  after  her  arrival  at  her  son1s  house  she  was
stricken  down  with  the  fever,  and  passed  away.  My  husband's  brother,
George,  then  resided  with  us.  The  news  of  my  mother-in-law's  death
came  by  telegraph  to  my  husband's  office  in  Baltimore,  and  he  brought  the
news  out  from  the  city.  We  had  had  no  news  of  her  sickness,  nor  any
letter  from  her.     This  was  about  1  o'clock  in  the  day.

On  the  night  preceding  the  reception  of  the  telegram,  I  dreamed  that
George  and  I  were  sitting  together,  waiting  for  the  return  of  my  husband,
in  the  evening,  when  he  usually  came  home.  I  tried  to  light  the  lamp,  and
it  went  out.  I  then  crossed  the  room  to  a  window  to  watch  for  my  hus-
band's return,  and  I  saw  some  one  coming  towards  the  house  who  I  thought
was  he,  and  I  turned  to  George  to  tell  him  he  was  coming,  and  in  turning
I  saw  a  bright  light  in  the  doorway.  I  did  not  look  at  the  light,  but  at
George,  who  was  staring  at  it,  and  I  said,  "  O  George !  you  see  some-
thing ?  "  That  was  all  of  the  dream.  I  may  add,  however,  that  I  felt
afraid  to  look  at  the  door.

The  next  morning,  when  all  three  of  us  sat  by  the  fire,  I  told  my  dream.
George  then  said,  "  Yes,  it  is  mother.  I  did  see  something,"  and  imme-
diately he  left  the  room.  When  my  husband  entered  the  door,  before  he
had  said  anything  about  his  having  a  telegram,  George  approached  him
and  said,  "  Mother  is  dead."

n.

The  second  dream  occurred  at  Wilmington,  Del.,  in  1871  or  1872.  My
mother  lived  with  us  at  the  time.  She  had  gone  up  to  Philadelphia,  and  I
was  expecting  her  to  return  in  the  evening.     She  did  not  come,  and  I  was


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  485

anxious  about  her.  She  stopped  in  Chester,  at  her  son's  home,  half-way
between  Philadelphia  and  Wilmington.

I  dreamed  that  I  saw  my  mother.  She  appeared  to  be  suffering  some  pain,
and  her  face  presented  a  singular  appearance,  which  I  could  not  describe
when  telling  my  dream  the  next  morning.  My  sister,  living  in  Phila-
delphia, who  was  with  her,  came  down  to  Wilmington  to  explain  to
us  the  cause  of  my  mother's  delay.  She  had  fallen  off  a  step  into  a  yard
and  dislocated  her  arm  at  the  shoulder,  which  had  been  replaced  by  physi-
cians with  some  difficulty.  She  was  seventy  years  old.  In  falling  upon
her  face,  it  became  smeared  with  soft  mud.

The  dream  was  very  distinct,  and  I  had  no  doubt  it  was  my  mother.

ni:

The  third  dream  occurred  in  1875,  while  we  resided  on  Price's  Hill,  Cin-
cinnati, O.

I  dreamed  that  I  entered  a  room  which  was  most  beautifully  and  pro-
fusely decorated  with  flowers.  The  flowers  greatly  attracted  my  attention,
they  were  so  beautiful.  Afterwards,  I  looked  through  an  opening  and  saw
a  number  of  horses  and  carriages.

In  telling  the  dream  to  my  husband,  I  said,  "  We  must  be  going  to  a
funeral."  Some  weeks  afterwards,  my  husband,  who  is  a  clergyman,  was
invited  to  officiate  at  a  wedding.  The  parties  were  entire  strangers  to  us.
We  had  never  seen  them  or  the  home  of  the  bride  ;  but  their  friends,  who
took  their  meals  at  the  same  boarding-house  with  us,  and  whom  we  saw
every  day,  conveyed  the  request  to  my  husband.  We  rode  with  our  friends
in  a  carriage  to  the  house  of  the  bride's  father,  a  florist,  who  resided  some
three  miles  distant  from  our  residence,  in  the  country.  The  room  where
the  ceremony  was  performed  was  very  elaborately  adorned  with  flowers,
and,  as  we  entered  it,  I  said  to  my  husband,  "  I  have  seen  all  this  before  "
On  going  out,  after  the  ceremony,  to  walk  in  the  grounds  around  the  house,
I  looked  to  the  rear  of  it  and  I  saw  a  great  number  of  carriages  gathered,
and  I  repeated  the  remark  I  had  made  about  the  flowers.

The  dream  was  very  vivid,  and  it  seemed  to  be  perfectly  fulfilled ;  that  is,
the  scenes  were  exactly  reproduced.


IV.

The  fourth  dream  occurred  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  in  January,  1883.

I  dreamed  I  saw  some  one  lying  on  a  bed,  writhing  in  great  agony.  The
person  seemed  to  be  my  sister  or  my  mother.  And  then  a  young  man  ap-
peared to  me,  who  seemed  very  anxious  to  tell  me  something.  His  face  was
familiar,  but  I  was  not  sure  who  it  was.  Then  came  a  telegram,  when,  it
seemed,  others  were  present.  It  was  addressed  to  my  husband,  but  I  only
knew  it  was  a  call  to  go  somewhere,  and  some  one  said,  "  Why  do  they
want  to  take  him  away  from  us  ?  he  has  been  a  very  good  pastor  to  us."

In  the  morning,  while  I  was  relating  the  dream  to  my  husband,  the  ser-
vant came  into  the    room   and   handed  him   a    telegram.     He  read  it,.


486  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

and  said  to  me,  "It  is  your  sister."    It  was  written  by  my  sister's  son,
living  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  worded  thus  :  —

"  Mother  died  last  night  at  9  o'clock.  Can  you  come  on  and  attend  the
funeral  ?  "

My  sister  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill,  after  rising  and  dressing  in  the
morning  as  usual.  The  physicians  could  afford  her  no  relief.  She  suffered
intense  pain  all  day,  and  passed  away  as  stated.  We  had  no  previous  in-
timation of  her  being  ill,  or  that  she  was  threatened  with  this  attack.  The
news  of  her  death,  therefore,  coming  as  it  did,  was  a  great  surprise  and
shock.

R.  B.  H.

Nor.  26,  1887.

3.

Rev.  W.  H.  H.'s  replies  to  the  following  questions  will  be  found  be-
low: —

Can  a  brief  statement  signed  by  Mr.  H.  be  obtained,  to  the  effect  that  he
heard  the  dreams  related  before  their  confirmation  was  known  ?  This  is
very  important  as  regards  the  evidential  value  of  the  cases.  It  would  be  of
advantage  that  a  specific  statement  should  be  made  in  connection  with  each
case,  so  that  each  case  may  be  complete  separately.

Has  Mrs.  H.  had  dreams  which  impressed  her  strongly,  yet  which  were
not  verified  ?

Is  there  any  peculiarity  distinguishing  her  verified  dreams  from  others  ?

Dream  I.,  1855.

1.  Is  Mr.  George  H.  still  alive,  and  if  so,  can  any  account  be  obtained
from  him  as  to  the  relation  of  the  dream,  etc.  ?

2.  Did  he  have  a  dream  himself,  and  is  anything  now  recollected  of  his
experience  during  the  night  of  Mrs.  H.'s  dream  ?

3.  Can  Mr.  H.  write  a  brief  statement  concerning  his  recollections  of  the
mornino-  when  the  teleorarn  arrived  ?

o  o

Dream  II.

1.  Can  statements  be  obtained  from  any  persons  who  heard  the  dream
narrated  in  the  morning  ?

2.  Can  a  statement  be  obtained  from  Mrs.  H.'s  sister  concerning  both
the  incident  and  any  remembrance  which  she  may  have  of  Mrs.  H.'s  dream?

3.  Was  there  distinct  reason  to  think  that  some  accident  had  befallen
Mrs.  H.'s  mother  when  she  did  not  return  to  Philadelphia  ?

Dream  III.

1.  At  the  time  Mrs.  H.  had  her  dream  had  it  already  been  decided  that
Mr.  H.  should  be  requested  to  officiate  at  the  wedding?  Probably  this
could  scarcely  be  ascertained  now.  The  object  of  this  question  is  to  dis-
cover whether  the  floral  scene  in  Mrs.  H.'s  dream  might  have  been  sug-
gested telepathically,  in  consequence  of  some  conversation,  say,  between


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  487

the  bride  and  her  friends,  the  mental  pictures  of  these  persons  concerning
the  projected  wedding  being  impressed  upon  the  mind  of  the  distant
Mrs.  H.

2.     It  is  particularly  important  in  this  case  that  Mr.  H.  should  state  his
recollections  of  the  relation  of  the  dream.  «


Dream  IV.

1.  Can  we  obtain  the  name  and  address  of  Mrs.  H.'s  sister?  This  is
merely  so  that  the  fact  of  the  death,  etc.,  ma}'  be  independently  ascertained.

2.  Was  the  dream  told  to  any  one  besides  Mr.  II.  ?

We  shall  be  glad  to  have  statements  from  Mr.  H.,  and  also  from  any
other  person  who  may  have  heard  it  before  the  telegram  arrived.

3.  What  was  the  nature  of  the  sister's  illness?

4.

Brookline,  Mass.,  Feb.  13,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Miss  Annie  R.  W.  has  handed  Mrs.  H.  and  myself  your  let-
ter to  her  of  26th  ult.,  with  accompanying  list  of  questions,  requesting
us  to  communicate  with  you  in  relation  to  the  subject-matter  referred  to  in
your  letter.  I  shall  endeavor  to  answer  your  interrogatories  now,  after
consulting  with  Mrs.  H.,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  do  so.

You  ask  in  your  letter,  "  Does  the  sensitiveness  to  phenomena  of  this  kind
run  in  Mrs.  H.'s  family?"  This  may  be  answered  somewhat  affirmatively,
as  we  know  that  her  mother  had  two  dreams,  at  different  periods  of  her  life,
very  similar  to  the  ones  now  reported  in  their  general  character.  As  to
Mrs.  H.'s  father  and  her  brothers  and  sisters,  we  cannot  speak  with  the
same  certainty.

The  above  statement  answers  the  inquiry  in  regard  to  a  dream  of  Mrs.
H.'s  mother.  Mrs.  H.  was  born  more  than  thirty  years  before  her  father
died.

Four  Remarkable  Dreams.

I  can  say,  with  some  degree  of  certainty,  that  Mrs.  H.  related  her  dreams
to  me  before  their  fulfilment.  In  regard  to  the  last  one  of  the  four,  which
is  fresher  in  my  memory,  I  can  say  this  with  positive  certainty.  That  dream
impressed  me  much  more  strongly  than  the  others,  I  think.

As  to  the  circumstances  of  the  first  dream,  they  are  very  vivid  in  my  mem-
ory, although  thirty-two  years  have  elapsed.

Mrs.  H.  has  had  dreams  which  were  not  verified,  certainly  one  which  she
now  remembers,  which  occurred  fourteen  years  ago.

We  cannot  state  definitely  whether  Mrs.  H.'s  verified  dreams  have  had  a
peculiarity  distinguishing  them  from  others.  Three  of  the  dreams  reported
have  had  relation  to  members  of  her  family  or  connections.  The  other  in
Cincinnati  had  no  such  relation,  as  the  wedding  parties  and  the  scene  were
unknown  before .


488  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

Dream  I.

1.  Mr.  George  H.  died  in  1886.

2.  He  did  not  relate  a  dream  in  connection  with  the  above,  nor  did  he
say  he  had  had  a  dream;  but  merely  said,  "  Yes,  I  did  see  something,"
and  then  left  the  room.

3.  I  recollect  somewhat  distinctly  the  occurrences  of  the  morning,  when
the  telegram  arrived  in  Baltimore  at  my  office,  which  was  some  two  miles
from  my  house  in  the  suburbs.  I  took  it  out  at  once  to  my  home,  and  met
my  brother,  who  came  out  of  the  parlor  and  said  at  once,  "Mother  is
dead."  He  avoided  conversation  because  he  was  much  distressed,  as  well
as  myself.     This  was  about  noon  of  the  day  succeeding  the  dream.

Dream  H.

1.  Mrs.  H.  says  that  she  cannot  say  certainly  whether  any  one  but  her
sister,  Miss  R.,  remembers  this  dream.  The  other  sister,  who  came  from
Chester  to  Wilmington  to  announce  the  accident,  was  Mrs.  S.,  of  whose
death  dream  No.  4  speaks.

2.  This  query  is  answered  by  the  above.  Mrs.  H.'s  sister  is  living  in
the  other  world,  and  her  testimony  cannot  be  obtained  by  natural  means.

3.  There  was  no  reason  to  think  that  any  accident  had  befallen  Mrs.  H.'s
mother.

Dream  HI.

1.  We  do  not  know  whether  the  bride  and  groom  had  decided  to  ask
Mr.  H.  to  officiate  before  Mrs.  H.  had  her  dream.  Our  impression  is  to  the
contrary,  as  we  think  it  was  not  ascertained  positively  until  a  few  days  be-
fore the  wedding  that  the  other  minister  would  not  officiate.  So  far  as  we
know,  the  bride  and  groom  are  still  living.

2.  My  impression  is  so  fixed  that  Mrs.  H.  related  her  dream  to  me  be-
fore it  occurred,  that  I  feel  safe  in  saying  so.  At  the  time  she  related  it  I
did  not  take  much  notice  of  it.  Some  weeks,  I  think,  elapsed  before  the
dream  [was  fulfilled] .  I  was  not  in  the  habit  of  recording  such  things,  but  I
wrell  remember  that  when  she  recognized  the  fulfilment  of  her  dream  and
reminded  me  of  it  that  I  recalled  the  fact.  I  have  related  the  dream  sev-
eral times  to  intimate  friends,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  facts.  My
wife's  recollection  is  perfectly  clear  and  distinct  as  to  all  these  circum-
stances, and  there  is  no  difference  in  our  memory.

Dream  IV.

1.  Answered  above  in  part:  in  full,  Mrs.  H.'s  sister's  name  was  Mary  S.,
the  wife  of  James  W.  S.,  of  Philadelphia,  who  died  before  her;  maiden
name,  R.     Her  death  and  the  circumstances  can  be  ascertained.

2.  Mrs.  H.  thinks  she  told  it  to  her  sister,  Miss  R.,  now  living  in  Nor-
folk, Mass.,  but  this  is  doubtful.  The  telegram  was  received  soon  after
breakfast,  the  servant  handing  it  to  me  in  my  chamber,  where  Mrs.  H.  was
with  me ;  and  at  the  time  she  was  narrating  the  dream  to  me  more  fully  and


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  489

circumstantially.     The  circumstances  are  perfectly  clear  and  distinct  in  my
mind.

Mrs.  S.'s  illness  was  very  sudden,  lasting  only  one  day.  She  was  taken
in  the  morning  and  died  at  night.  She  had  some  disease  of  the  stomach
and  bowels,  symptoms  of  which  had  been  manifested  somewhat,  but  not
dangerously,  previously,  and  she  seemed  in  her  usual  health  the  day  before.
She  suffered  great  agony,  and  no  relief  could  be  obtained.

W.  H.  H.

Brookline,  Mass.,  Feb.  13, 1888.

5.

Dream  IV.

{Statement  of  Miss  B.,  sister  of  Mrs.  E.)

Norfolk,  Mass.,  Feb.  27,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  remember  that  Mrs.  H.  had  a  remarkable  dream  at  the
time  of  Mrs.  S.'s  death,  but  I  have  forgotten  the  particulars  of  it.     .     .     .

Yours  very  truly,

C.  L.  R.

6.

Dream  IV.

(Statement  of  Miss  M.  S.  P.)

As  far  as  I  recollect,  Mrs.  Mary  S.  was  lying  on  her  back  for  some  time
in  great  agony  before  she  died  ;  I  was  with  her  at  the  time  ;  she  suffered
intensely.  She  had  symptoms  of  some  trouble  for  two  or  three  years
previously,  but  the  exact  nature  of  the  malady  was  unknown  until
she  died.  She  was  seized  suddenly  with  extreme  pain  twenty-four  hours
before  her  death.  No  special  apprehensions  had  been  previously  enter-
tained, and  she  had  dined  with  the  family  as  usual.  Her  son,  Mr.  Frank  S.,
and  her  medical  attendant,  Dr.  Farrington,  were  in  the  sick-room  at  inter-
vals during  the  twentj^-four  hours.  I  believe  that  it  was  Mr.  Frank  S.
who  sent  the  telegram  to  Mrs.  H.  The  son  and  Dr.  Farrington  are  now
dead.

M.  S.  P.

Somerville,  April  20,  1888.

7.

Brookline,  March  20,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  called  at  your  residence  yesterday,  intending  to  hand  you
the  enclosed  letter  [document  8]  which  I  received  last  week.  You  will
find  that  it  corroborates  the  statements  already  given  about  the  Cincinnati
dream.    Please  return  it  to  me.

Have  you  written  to  Miss  P.  of  Philadelphia  as  proposed,  and  have  you
received  a  reply  from  her  ?

Perhaps  I  should  explain  that  the  gentleman  spoken  of  as  Uncle  Charles
in  the  Cincinnati  letter  is  the  friend  mentioned  in  the  narrative  of  the


490  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

dream  as  being  with  us  at  table  daily,  and  the  one  who  communicated  the
invitation.

Yours  truly,

W.  H.  H.

8.
Dream  III.
{From  Mrs.  C.)

Delhi,  March  10,  1888.
Rev.  W.  H.  H. :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Yours  of  February  18  was  duly  received,  and  would
have  been  answered  sooner,  but  I  waited  for  an  opportunity  to  talk  with
my  mother  on  the  subject  of  my  wedding,  as  I  thought  she  would  remem-
ber whether  anything  had  been  said  in  the  preseuce  of  Aunt  Mary  or
Uncle  Charles  about  the  floral  decorations  of  the  house ;  and  I  find  from
her  that  they  could  not  have  known  anything  of  the  arrangements,  as  we
did  not  know  ourselves  just  what  they  would  be  until  completed,  for  that
part  of  the  arrangements  was  left  entirely  to  my  brother-in-law,  Mr.  G.
About  two  weeks  before  our  marriage  Mr.  C.  went  to  Price  Hill  and  asked
Uncle  Charles  to  introduce  him  to  Mr.  Goddard ;  and  ascertained  that  Mr.
Goddard  was  away  from  the  city,  so  it  was  left  for  a  few  days,  until  he
learned  to  a  certainty  that  Mr.  G.  [Goddard]  would  not  be  back  in  time;
then  the  invitation  was  sent  to  yourself  and  wife.

Hoping  these  few  lines  will  satisfactorily  answer  the  questions  you  asked
in  your  letter,  I  remain,

Yours  respectfully,

ELIZABETH  M.   C.


[64]  1.

(From  E.  M. .)

March  4,  1888.
Dr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  An  article  in  to-day's  "  World  "  (New  York)  speaking  of
you  and  your  peculiar  work  induces  me  to  offer  unsolicited  a  singular  ex-
perience which  I  had  some  years  ago.

I  will  say  in  the  beginning  that  I  am  in  no  sense  of  the  word  a  spiritual-
ist, and  that  I  am  prompted  to  send  the  account  simply  to  add  to  the  num-
ber of  incidents  which  you  already  have  in  your  possession.  I  sign  my  own
name,  but  expect  you  to  withhold  it  from  the  public,  since  my  home  is  just
out  of  Boston.

The  incident  occurred  while  I  was  at  a  boarding-school,  about  eighteen
miles  from  my  home.  All  the  members  of  the  family  were  well,  as  I  sup-
posed, and  I  had  no  apprehensions  to  the  contrary  when  I  retired  at  night.
But  in  a  dream  I  saw  my  father  laid  out  in  his  coffin ;  I  saw  my  mother
very  distinctly,  quite  overcome  with  grief;  and  frightened  knots  of  chil-
dren crying,   wholly  unnoticed,  in  the  corners.     There  were  a  great  many


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  491

strangers  about  the  house,  and  a  sale  seemed  to  be  going  on.  I  awoke  ter-
ribly agitated,  and  should  have  gone  home  if  there  had  been  direct  railroad
communication  between  me  and  my  home.  I  tried  to  throw  off  the  feeling
of  depression  all  the  morning;  but  at  noon  a  messenger  arrived  in  a  private
conveyance,  and  I  was  not  surprised  to  learn  that  my  father  had  died.  As
far  as  I  could  learn  he  died  at  the  time  the  vision  occurred  to  me.  The
house,  when  I  arrived,  presented  the  very  appearance  it  had  in  my  dream,
except  the  selling,  and  that  came  a  few  months  later.

I  have  never  been  able  to  think  of  any  circumstance  that  would  shape
the  dream,  and  I  certainly  had  no  knowledge  of  my  fathers  illness,  which
was  very  sudden,  and  so  severe  that  I  could  not  be  reached  before  he  died.

At  another  time,  while  at  the  same  school,  the  door-bell  rang  and  I  was
seized  with  a  fit  of  trembling,  feeling  sure  that  some  ill  news  awaited  me ;
and  it  was  for  me,  for  a  sister  had  died  very  suddenly.

Yours  respectfully,

E.  M.  .

2.
Dream  of  Father's  Death.

1.  Date  of  experience?    Early  March,  1872.

2.  Place  of  experience  ?     Framingham,  Mass.

3.  Place  of  father's  death  ?     Stow,  Mass.

4.  Did  you  mention  your  dream  to  any  other  person  before  hearing  the
sad  news  ?  If  so,  we  should  like  very  much  to  receive  some  account  of
any  persons  to  whom  you  mentioned  it.

5.  Did  you  mention  your  dream  to  any  other  person  after  hearing  the
news?  Any  statements  by  persons  to  whom  you  mentioned  the  dream  at
about  the  time  will  add,  as  you  doubtless  appreciate,  to  the  evidential
value  of  your  experience.

Answer  to  4  and  5.  I  mentioned  my  dream  to  no  one  until  after  my
father  was  buried,  and  then  only  told  it  to  my  mother  at  the  time,  but  have
since  mentioned  the  circumstances  to  several  persons.  I  can,  however,
recall  to  mind  no  person  whose  evidence  I  could  get  to  add  to  my  own
statements.  At  the  time  the  dream  occurred  I  thought  it  too  weird  and
eerie  to  tell,  except  in  great  confidence.  The  memory  of  it  has  returned
to  me  over  and  over  again,  as  I  have  grown  older  and  thought  more
seriously  about  the  inexplicable  experience  of  our  life.

I  was  nineteen  years  at  the  time,  so  the  dream  can  hardly  be  pronounced
a  childish  fancy.  I  can  think  of  no  further  information  that  will  interest
you.

E.  M. .


492  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

[65]  {From  Miss  H. .)

1.

Boston,  Nov.  5,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Seeing  a  notice  from  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in
the  "Transcript"  of  this  date,  I  am  urged  to  send  you,  for  what  it  may
be  worth,  an  experience  of  my  own.

A  dear  friend,  who  is  like  my  sister,  is  married  and  living  in  London,
Canada.  I  was  expecting  to  hear  news  from  her  of  the  birth  of  her  child
any  time  subsequent  to  August  20,  but  had  not  given  her  any  especial
thought  before  that  time  in  the  way  of  anxiety.

On  the  night  of  Aug.  17,  1887,  I  had  a  most  vivid  dream  of  her  as
standing  by  my  bed,  waking  me,  and  showing  me  her  child,  saying  that  it
weighed  nine  pounds  and  was  a  girl.  The  dream  so  impressed  me  that  it
was  fully  a  day  before  I  could  shake  off  the  impression,  and  on  the  after-
noon of  August  19,  I  received  a  card  telling  me  of  the  birth  of  the  little
girl  on  the  17th,  and  that  my  friend  had  earnestly  desired  that  she  might
be  able  to  show  it  to  me.

I  may  mention  that  this  is  the  only  occasion  upon  which  I  have  dreamed
of  her  since  she  left  Boston.

The  Rev.  Dr.  Courtney  of  St.  Paul's  Church  will  vouch  for  my  veracity,
I  think,  and  the  occurrence  has  seemed  peculiar  enough  to  warrant  my
relating  it.

I  must  ask  that  my  name  be  not  used.     Believe  me,


Very  truly,
(Signed)


2.


November  25,  1887.


Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  letter  of  November  8  was  received,  and  I  have
been  waiting,  hoping  to  give  you  some  information  which  would  be  more
satisfactory.  I  wrote  to  my  friend  in  Canada,  and  in  a  private  letter  to  me,
she  answers :  —

"Baby   was  born  Wednesday,   August  17,    at    G.15   P.M.     May  have

expressed  a  wish  that  you  and might  see  her ;  in  fact,  it  is  more  than

likely."

I  am  quite  aware  how  perfectly  unsatisfactory  this  is,  and  I  have  hunted
all  through  my  letters  to  find  the  one  in  which  the  mother  of  my  friend  told
me  she  had  expressed  a  desire  to  show  me  the  baby,  but  of  course  that
particular  one  is  missing.

The  child  was  a  girl  and  weighed  nine  pounds,  and  my  friend  left  Bos-
ton in  September,  1886.

The  only  other  question  in  your  letter  must  also  remain  unanswered  evi-
dentially. My  mother  is  rather  nervous,  and  I  did  not  mention  my  own
dream  for  fear  of  arousing  her  fears.  She  was  the  only  person  to  whom
I  should  have  been  likely  to  speak.  Regretting  that  I  cannot  be  more
definite,  believe  me,

Very  sincerely  yours,

(Signed)  .


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  493

[66]  {From  W.  B.  0.)

Boston,  May  22,  1888.

About  the  year  1873  or  1874,  when  I  was  at  my  place  of  business  one
afternoon,  I  became  suddenly  impressed  with  the  feeling  that  an  old  ship-
mate of  mine  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  several  years,  and  of  whom  I  had
not  heard  during  this  interval,  was  in  the  neighborhood.  This  feeling
became  so  strong  that  I  went  out  upon  the  sidewalk  and  looked  up  and
down  to  see  if  he  was  not  actually  there.     No  person  was  visible.

On  the  following  morning,  when  I  arrived  at  my  place  of  business,  I
found  the  very  man  waiting  to  see  me.  On  inquiring  as  to  what  he  was
doing  the  previous  afternoon,  I  learnt  from  him  that,  as  nearly  as  I  could
ascertain,  he  was  coming  up  the  harbor  in  steamship  (name  unknown) ,
and  was  asking  a  passenger  about  myself.

(Signed)  W.  B.  C.


[67]  1.

(From  Miss  W.)

Jamaica  Plain,  Jan.  5,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  You  ask  me  for  an  account  of  the  presentiment  my  father
had  concerning  an  accident  happening  to  his  wife,  my  step-mother.  I  am
very  glad  to  tell  you  anything  which  may  prove  of  interest.

My  father  is  not  living  now;  he  died  in  July,  1884,  seven  months  after
this  event  which  I  am  about  to  tell  you.  He  was  ill  at  the  time,  and  for  two
weeks  I  had  had  nearly  the  entire  care  of  him,  day  and  night.  I  slept  in  the
same  room,  and  one  night  was  awakened  by  a  cry  from  him  —  no  unusual
thing,  for  he  was  often  delirious,  and  talked  wildly  in  his  sleep.  I  heard
him  say,  "Is  she  killed?  Stop  him!"  and  when  I  ran  to  his  bedside,  I
found  him  trembling  violently,  bathed  in  a  cold  sweat,  and  yet  seemingly
awake.  I  tried  to  soothe  him,  but  he  clung  to  my  arm  repeating  his  cries.
I  said,  ' '  What  is  it,  father  ?  no  one  is  killed ;  you  are  here  with  me  "  —  ' '  Oh,
no  !  Rebecca,  my  wife,  is  hurt.  Do  you  not  see  the  horse  running?  The
buggy  is  all  broken,  and  Rebecca  is  lying  there.  Go  to  her  and  see  if  she
is  killed."  I  tried  in  vain  to  quiet  him  ;  he  moaned  and  cried,  repeating,
"  The  horse  is  running  and  my  wife  is  hurt."  It  must  have  been  a  half-
hour  before  I  could  awaken  him  sufficiently  to  know  he  was  at  home  and
mother  upstairs,  safe.  Then  he  would  say,  "  It  was  so  real,  so  real!  "  In
the  morning  I  asked  him  if  he  remembered  his  dream.  He  said  he  did,  and
that  it  seemed  as  though  he  was  awake  all  the  time.  Then  he  said  again,
"  I  thought '  mother'  was  in  South  Middleboro1  (the  adjoining  town),  and
that  the  horse  ran  away  and  she  was  thrown ;  but  I  could  not  see  if  she
was  alive ;  she  lay  on  her  face,  but  the  horse  ran  away  down  the  road,  and
the  buggy  was  broken  all  to  pieces."

I  told  my  step-mother  that  father  dreamed  she  had  been  hurt  by  the


494  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

horse  running,  and  we  both  thought  no  more  about  it  then.  But  about
10  o'clock  my  step-mother  prepared  to  drive  to  South  Middleboro',  saying
she  would  be  back  by  12.  Father  seemed  rather  nervous  after  she  had
gone,  and  when  12  o'clock  came  and  mother  had  not  arrived,  he  seemed
very  much  troubled  and  begged  me  to  watch  at  the  window  for  her.  An
hour  later  a  messenger  appeared  with  the  news  that  the  horse  had  become
frightened  and  had  run,  throwing  Mrs.  W.  from  the  carriage,  and  that  she
had  been  taken  up  unconscious,  and  was  unable  to  be  brought  home  then.
Inquiry  showed  that  all  had  happened  as  my  father  dreamed.  The  next
day,  when  she  was  brought  home  most  severely  cut  and  bruised,  she  told  us
that  during  all  her  drive  she  had  thought  of  father's  dream,  and  felt  a  sense
of  danger.  That  was  my  father's  last  illness,  for  he  never  recovered  even
enough  to  leave  his  room  between  January  and  the  following  July.

My  step-mother  is  still  living.  Although  I  was  barely  sixteen  at  the
time,  I  remember  that  night  and  the  dream  as  though  it  were  yesterday.

Trusting  you  will  find  this  satisfactory,  I  am,

Most  sincerely  yours,

E.   T.   W.

2.

Jamaica  Plain,- Jan.  18,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Pardon  my  delay  in  replying  to  your  last  letter,  but  I  was
obliged  to  write  to  Mrs.  W.,  whose  home  is  in  Rochester,  Mass.,  for  her
account  of  my  father's  dream.     I  enclose  it  in  this  letter.

I  do  not  know  of  any  other  experience  my  father  had,  than  the  one  I  have
told  you,  but  I  do  know  that  his  mother,  my  grandmother,  is  said  to
have  had  one  or  two  very  remarkable  ones  ;  what  they  were  I  cannot  tell
you,  as  my  knowledge  is  limited.  My  brother  also,  in  his  last  illness,  had  a
presentiment  quite  interesting.  Should  you  care  to  hear  it,  I  will  ask  my
sister,  who  was  with  him  at  the  time,  for  the  facts.

Very  sincerely,

E.   T.  W.

3.

{Statement  by  Mrs.  W .)

Jan.  3,  1884, 1  left  my  home  in  North  Rochester,  for  the  South  Mid-
dleboro' post-office.  Previous  to  my  leaving  home,  my  daughter,  E.,  told
me  of  her  father's  dream  ;  he  was  sick  and  confined  to  his  room  at  the  time.
He  cried  out,  as  if  very  much  frightened,  there  was  a  horse  running  away ;
then  he  says,  "  It  is  my  horse  ;  she  has  cleared  herself  from  the  buggy  and
running,  stripping  off  her  harness,  etc."  Then  he  looked  around  and  says,
"  Where  is  mother  ?  "  She  assured  him  I  was  lying  down.  I  think  there
must  have  been  a  perfect  panorama  of  the  whole  scene.

I  did  not  drive  over  the  road  I  usually  travelled,  on  account  of  the  ice.
The  road  I  took  was  smoother,  and  you  could  see  a  long  distance,  there
being  no  obstruction.  I  naturally  thought  of  the  dream  while  driving  over
the  distance  of  three  miles ;  but  when  I  had  crossed  the  railroad  I  thought
the  danger  was  all  over  and  ceased  to  feel  any  anxiety  about  it.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  495

After  being  picked  up  and  cared  for,  the  doctor  rode  over  to  tell  my  hus-
band of  the  accident.  He  told  me  afterwards  he  was  not  surprised,  for  he
knew  when  he  came  in  what  his  business  was.  I  think  it  must  have  ap-
peared very  real  to  him,  everything  was  so  vivid.

R.   B.   W.


[68]

{From  S.  C.  D.)

In  the  fall  of  1865,  I  was  in  the  employ  of  an  elderly  gentleman  who
was  doing  a  small  manufacturing  business  in  Boston.  The  customers  of
this  gentleman  were  large  jobbers  doing  business  in  New  York  City  and  in
Western  cities.  It  was  the  custom  for  the  buyers  of  these  houses  to  come
on  in  December,  January,  and  February,  to  make  their  purchases  for
spring  trade.  Such  was  the  regularity  with  which  these  buyers  came,  that
it  could  be  told,  almost  with  certainty,  what  month  and  what  day  in  the
month  each  one  would  be  at  our  store.  For  instance,  there  was  one  buyer
from  Philadelphia  who  always  came  about  the  10th  of  December,  another
from  New  York,  about  the  20th,  and  so  on.  Amongst  others  who  came  was
a  Mr.  B.,.  of  the  'firm  of  W.,  B.,  &  F.,  New  [York]  City,  whose  regular  time
was  from  the  3d  of  January  to  the  10th.  I  had  entered  Mr.  E.'s  employ
the  year  before,  and  seen  most  of  the  customers  once,  among  them  Mr.  B.
The  thing  I  most  remembered  about  him  was  that  he  Avas  a  very  sharp  and
uncompromising  buyer.  Mr.  E.  always  went  to  New  York  and  Philadel-
phia in  the  latter  part  of  November  or  the  first  few  days  in  December  to
invite  the  trade  to  visit  him  and  make  their  purchases.  On  his  return  from
this  trip  in  1865,  he  reported  that  Mr.  B.  had  concluded  not  to  come  to
Boston  that  year,  but  to  buy  his  goods  in  New  York.  Early  in  December,  I
think  not  later  than  the  7th,  I  had  the  following  dream :  I  thought  that
I  was  seated  at  the  high  desk  in  our  office  busily  writing.  Suddenly,  from
the  office  door,  which  was  behind  me,  I  heard  a  voice  say :  —

"  Good-morning,  E ."

I  dreamed  that  I  turned  around,  and  there,  in  the  doorway,  stood  Mr.  B.,
of  W.,  B.,  &  F.,  having  on  a  very  glossy  black-silk  hat  anda  pair  of  trousers,
the  cloth  of  which  was  of  a  pattern  I  had  never  before  seen.  This  pattern,  I
thought,  consisted  of  a  dark  background  with  a  large,  peculiar,  greenish
check.  I  remember  dreaming  that  he  bought  a  very  large  bill  of  goods.  I
also  remember  the  feeling  of  pleasure  that  I  had  while  the  dream  was
going  on,  and  the  sense  of  disappointment  when  I  awoke  to  find  that  it  was
only  a  dream.

The  morning  after  this  dream  I  went  to  the  office  as  usual.  About  10
o'clock,  as  I  was  engaged  in  writing,  and  Mr.  E.  was  reading  his  letters,  I
heard  some  one  behind  me  say :  —

"  Good-morning,  E."

I  looked  behind  me,  and  saw  Mr.  B.  standing  in  the  doorway  just  as  I  had
seen  him  in  my  dream.  He  had  on  a  glossy  black  hat,  exactly  as  I  had  seen
him  have  on  in  my  dream.  I  instantly  looked  at  his  trousers,  and  was  surprised
to  see  that  they  resembled  those  of  my  dream  in  every  particular,  the  sin-


496  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

gular  pattern  of  the  cloth  being  very  noticeable.  Mr.  B.  bought  a  very
large  bill  of  goods,  —  much  larger  than  he  had  bought  the  previous  year.
It  seems  that  it  was  only  the  day  before  that  he  decided  to  buy  in  Boston,
and  came  earlier  in  the  season  than  usual,  on  account  of  a  business  trip  to
the  West  that  he  was  intending  to  take.

(Signed)  S.  C.  D.


[69]

{From  Judge  Travis.)

Have  you,  at  any  time  during  your  life,  but  not  within  the  past  twelve
years,  when  in  good  health,  and  completely  awake,  had  a  distinct  impression
of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  human  being,  or  of  hearing  a  voice  or  sound
which  suggested  a  human  presence  when  no  one  was  there  ?

In  answer  to  the  above  question,  I  make  the  following  statement  of
facts : —

I  was  born  in  1830,  and  was  the  youngest  member  of  my  father's  family.
A  very  strong  attachment  existed  between  my  mother  and  myself.  I  lived
at  home  with  my  father  and  mother,  etc.,  until  1854,  at  St.  John,  N.B.,
when  I  went  to  Restigouche,  where  I  continued  to  reside  for  a  number  of
years,  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits.  In  .1856  I  was  engaged  on  the
Quebec  side  of  the  Restigouche  river,  erecting  a  milling  establishment  for
my  business  purposes.  My  father,  mother,  etc.,  then  still  continued  living
in  St.  John,  N.B.,  which  is  distant  between  four  and  five  hundred  miles
from  Restigouche.  At  that  time  there  was  no  railway  or  telegraphic  com-
munication between  those  places,  the  mails  between  them  passing  by  stage
three  times  a  week;  and  thus,  any  letters  mailed  on  a  day  when  the  mail
stage  did  not  leave  either  of  those  places,  would  go  in  the  same  mail  with
other  letters  mailed  on  the  day  of  the  stage  leaving,  if  mailed  prior  to  the
hour  for  the  closing  of  the  mail  on  that  day.

In  the  middle  of  the  forenoon  of  a  day  in  the  summer  of  1856  I  was  alone  in
a  room  in  one  of  my  houses  connected  with  my  business  establishment,  when
1  became  mentally  conscious  of  the  presence  of  my  father  being  with  me.
At  that  time  both  my  father  and  mother  were  in  perfect  health,  as  they
usually  were,  aud,  outside  of  the  communication  made  to  me  by  my  father,
I  had  no  more  reason  to  suppose  that  my  mother  was  about  to  die  than  that
my  father  or  any  other  person  was.  My  father  communicated  to  me  the
fact  of  my  mother's  death.  I  had  a  perfect  consciousness  of  his  presence
with  me,  and  have  still  a  perfectly  vivid  recollection  of  his  using  the  words
to  me  with  reference  to  the  communication  by  him  to  me  of  my  mother's
death,  literally,  "  Wexre  all  alone  now,  Jerry,"  using  to  me  this  abbrevia-
tion of  my  Christian  name,  as  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  doing  to  me
personally.  From  my  earliest  childhood  down  to  that  time  there  had  never
been  a  death  in  our  immediate  family,  and  the  practical  idea  of  death  had
never  particularly  affected  me.  I  felt  fairly  stunned  by  the  communication
made  to  me  by  my  father,  which  so  affected  me  as  almost  to  unfit  me  for


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  497

business  for  the  next  two  weeks ;  and  I  remember  well,  even  yet,  that  dur-
ing those  two  weeks  I  had  a  feeling  of  misery  such  as  no  event  that  has
ever  since  transpired  has  produced  in  me.  The  effect  of  the  communica-
tion, in  its  startling  reality,  was  most  depressing  to  me.

At  about  the  close  of  the  two  weeks  named,  I  was  in  the  post-office
at  Campbellton,  Restigouche,  N.B.,  where  my  mail-matter  was  then  re-
ceived. The  post-office  there  was  kept  by  James  S.  Morse,  Esq.,  barris-
ter-at-law,  and  I  was  alone  with  him  in  the  inner  of  his  two  offices,  where
he  was  opening  the  mail  which  had  arrived  from  St.  John.  He  handed  me
two  letters,  both  of  which  were  addressed  to  me  in  the  writing  of  one  of
my  brothers,  from  whom  1  not  infrequently  received  letters.  The  letters
were  contained  in  common  buff  envelopes,  which  were  then  very  generally
used,  and  there  was  nothing  on  the  envelopes,  such  as  a  black  seal,  etc.,  to
indicate  their  contents.  Neither  had  I  any  knowledge  or  information  what-
ever either  as  to  the  illness  or  death  of  my  mother,  except  the  communica-
tion which  had  been  mentally  conveyed  to  me  by  my  father.  On  receiving
the  letters  from  the  postmaster,  I  said  to  him  intuitively,  spontaneously,
"Morse,  my  mother's  dead!"  I  then  opened  the  letters,  and  found  that
they  were  written  to  me  by  my  brother  on  consecutive  days.  The  first,
mailed  the  day  before  the  mail  left,  contained  the  intelligence  of  my  mother
having  been  suddenly  attacked  with  severe  illness,  and  the  second,  written
a  day  later,  contained  the  news  of  her  death.

Some  four  or  five  months  later  than  this  I  drove  through  with  my  busi-
ness partner,  the  late  Hon.  John  McMillan,  to  Fredricton,  N.B.,  on  the  St.
John  river,  where  we  left  our  conveyance,  and  proceeded  by  steamer  to
the  residence  of  my  father,  reaching  there  about  1  A.M.  on  a  Sunday,  and
going  to  my  father's  residence.  In  the  morning,  about  8  o'clock,  I  met  my
father  in  the  dining-room,  who  came  forward  to  me,  burst  into  tears,  and
said  to  me  in  the  very  words,  neither  less  nor  more,  that  I  heard  him  use
to  me  months  before  in  Restigouche,  "  We're  all  alone  now,  Jerry !  "

I  mentioned  all  these  facts  at  the  time  to  both  McMillan  and  Morse.
The  former  is  dead.  The  latter,  if  living,  must  now  be  a  very  old  man,
and  would,  probably,  after  the  lapse  of  so  many  years,  scarcely  remember
the  circumstance,  as  remarkable  as  it  seems  to  me  to  have  been.  The  last
I  heard  of  him  he  was  then  in  Dalhousie,  Restigouche,  N.B.,  to  which
place  I  addressed  a  letter  to  him  a  couple  of  weeks  since,  in  order  to  ascer-
tain if  he  remembered  these  facts,  but  I  have  not  heard  from  him  in  reply.
He  may  have  left  that  place,  or  he  may  be  dead.  I  was  married  in  December,
1856,  and  stated  these  facts  to  my  wife,  who  is  here  with  me ;  and  I  have
frequently  referred  to  them  to  others  as  the  most  remarkable  and,  on  mere
natural  grounds,  unexplainable  incident  within  my  knowledge.  At  the
time  of  the  occurrence  I  was  in  perfect  health,  and  there  was  nothing  at
the  time  in  my  reading  or  train  of  thought  to  induce  the  startling  impres-
sion that  was  conveyed  to  me  by  the  apparent  presence  of  my  father,  and
by  the  communication  he  made  to  me.

Between  the  ages  of  sixteen  and  twenty-three  I  was  largely  engaged  in
literary  pursuits,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  writing  stories,  essays,  poetry,
etc.,  for  different  periodicals.     Frequently,  I  would  find  myself  in  a  train  of


498  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

thought,  when  I  would  seem  to  be  in  some  other  place,  and  in  conversation
with  some  one  or  more  persons.  There  was  nothing  special  to  induce  such
thoughts  as  would  then  spring  up  ;  the  whole  seemed  to  be  a  kind  of  "  day-
dreaming." During  that  period,  at  times  almost  innumerable,  I  have  sud-
denly received  a  shock  at  finding  the  whole  scene  reenacted,  with  the
minutest  circumstances  of  persons  and  place,  exactly  as  had  appeared  to
me  weeks,  months,  or  even  jTears  before.  This  occurred  so  frequently  that
I  scarcely  engaged  in  a  conversation  without  being  prepared  to  expect  that
it  would  result  in  the  repetition  of  one  of  the  scenes  which  had  passed
through  my  mind  previously ;  and  it  often  happened,  so  thoroughly  had  the
previous  enactment  of  the  scene  been  impressed  on  my  mind,  that  when  it
was  actually  taking  place  I  knew,  verbally,  exactly  what  was  to  follow,  so
as  to  be  able  to  anticipate  the  very  words  which  would  be  used,  following
those  which  had  been  used.  This  often  occurred  with  reference  to  matters
of  the  most  trifling  character ;  but  the  difficulty  of  furnishing  any  "  rational "
explanation  of  them  is  not  the  less  on  that  account.

The  following  are  a  couple  of  such  incidents.

From  1846  to  1853  I  was  engaged,  in  connection  with  the  timber  business
in  St.  John,  with  the  late  Mr.  M.  Fisher.  Edwin  Fisher  (late  mayor  of
Portland,  St.  John)  was  in  the  office  with  me,  and  one  Ezekiel  Jordan  was
a  surveyor  employed  in  Mr.  Fisher's  timber  ponds.  One  day  the  three  of
us  were  in  conversation  about  the  Church  of  Rome,  when,  in  the  midst  of
the  conversation,  I  remembered  that  the  whole  scene  had  passed  through
my  mind  before,  and  that  at  a  time  when  /  did  not  even  know  Ezekiel
Jordan,  and  had  never  then  been  in  the  office  where  the  conversation  was
taking  place.  The  whole  thing  re-presented  itself  to  me  as  it  had  passed
through  my  mind,  with  all  the  minutiae  of  persons  and  place,  at  a  previous
period ;  and  before  Mr.  Jordan  uttered  the  words  which  he  did,  I  knew  he
was  going  to  say,  "  I  have  a  different  opinion  of  the  mystic  Babylon
spoken  of  in  Revelations  from  that  which  is  generally  held.  I  believe  that
it  does  not  refer  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  but  to  money."  I  might  add  that  I
had  never  before  met  with  the  statement  of  such  a  view  except  as  it  had
previously  passed  through  my  mind  in  one  of  those  scenes  to  which  I  have
referred.

On  another  occasion  I  was  going  home  at  mid-day  from  Mr.  Fisher's
office,  when  I  overtook  a  cart-load  of  furniture,  near  which  was  a  person
whom  I  knew  well,  —  a  Mr.  Wm.  A.  Reynolds.  As  I  came  up  to  him,  I
said,  "  Hello,  William  I  who  is  moving '?"  Immediately  on  uttering  these
words  —  in  fact,  in  the  very  act  of  uttering  them  —  I  knew  that  they,  with  the
scene  before  me,  had  passed  through  my  mind  previously,  and  without  any-
thing else  to  suggest  the  remainder  of  the  conversation  to  me,  I  ^knew  and
could  have  repeated,  by  anticipation,  the  exact  language  which  followed.
The  reply  was,  "  I  am."  Almost  mesmerically  the  next  question  came
from  me,  "  Where  are  you  moving  to  7  "  which  was  followed  by  the  somewhat
singular  answer,  which  I  knew  was  coming,  "  Into  John's  house.  At  least ,
they  call  it  Johrts  house,  but  I  believe  it  belongs  to  your  father.'1''  The  prop-
erty was  one  that  had  been  purchased  by  my  father  in  his  own  name,  but
which  he  intended  to  present,  and  subsequently  .did  present,  to  my  brother,
Mr.  John  B.  Travis.


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  499

Both  of  these  incidents,  although  they  took  place  about  forty  years  ago,
are  as  fresh  in  my  mind  as  though  they  were  but  of  yesterday,  — probably
from  their  special  and  peculiar  circumstances.  Legions  of  other  cases,
which  during  those  years  were  constantly  occurring,  have  passed  from  my
mind,  having  reference  to  the  most  trivial  circumstances  that  were
transpiring.

I  remember  that  it  was  about  that  time  that  I  read x  the  work  by  the  emi-
nent English  psychologist,  Dr.  Moore,  "  Body  and  Soul,1'  where  numerous
as  singular,  and  other  much  more  remarkable,  circumstances,  well
authenticated,  are  detailed;  to  all  of  which  I  was  prepared  to  give  my
fullest  assent,  from  the  host  of  analogous  facts  of  which  I  had  had,  myself,
the  clearest  knowledge.

Have  you,  at  any  time  during  your  life,  but  not  within  the  past  twelve
years,  when  in  good  health,  had  a  dream  of  the  death  of  some  person  known
to  you  {about  whom  you  were  not  anxious  at  the  lime) ,  which  dream  you
marked  as  an  exceptionally  vivid  one,  and  of  which  the  distressing  impres-
sion lasted  for  at  least  an  hour  after  you  arose  in  the  morning ?

I  have  had  many  dreams  during  my  life.  In  one  of  them  I  remember  of
repeating  stanzas  by  the  score  of  original  verse,  when  I  was  quite  young,
and  at  a  time  when  I  had  never  written  two  lines  of  poetry  in  my  life,  and
was  utterly  unable  to  do  so,  having  frequently,  and  in  vain,  made  the  trial.
Years  after  I  wrote  poems  in  great  number,  and  some  of  them  of  consider-
able length ;  numbers  of  them  having  been  published  in  English  and
Colonial  periodicals.

With  the  exception  of  that  dream,  there  are  scarcely  any  of  which  I  have
now  the  slightest  recollection.  One,  however,  has  stood  out  prominently
in  my  recollection  for  over  fifty  years.  It  was  utterly  unlike  any  dream  I
have  ever  had.  It  was  more  like  those  strange  visions  which  seem  so  real
and  life-like  to  persons  suffering  under  the  delirium  often  caused  by  small-
pox in  its  more  malignant  form.

When  I  was  somewhere  about  eight  or  ten  years  old,  I  was  suffering
from  an  attack  of  fever  of  some  description.  When  lying  in  bed  there
appeared  to  me,  with  a  distinctness  as  clear  as  though  they  were  actually
before  me,  two  lights,  each  of  which  was  held  in  a  hand.  There  Avere  two
arms,  hands,  and  candles,  each  arm,  hand,  and  candle  being  antagonistic  to
the  other,  —  one  of  them  representing  me  or  my  champion,  and  the  other  my
enemy,  — the  two  opposing  lights,  as  held,  representing  to  me  the  embodi-
ment of  myself  and  the  enemy,  or  opposition  of  my  particular  self,  for
time  and  for  eternity.  A  fierce  contest  took  place  between  these  two  (each
endeavoring  to  destroy,  by  burning  up,  the  other),  which  I  watched  with
my  whole  soul  absorbed  in  what  was  passing  before  me.  The  struggle  to
me  was  fearfully  real  and  important.  For  a  time  my  enemy  seemed  to
be  likely  to  conquer,  by  my  opposing  light  consuming  that  of  my  defender
or  representative ;  but  at  length  the  result  proved  otherwise,  and  the  light
representing  me  destroyed,  by  completely  consuming  or  burning  up,  the

1  This  was  done  at  the  suggestion  of  my  office  mate,  Mr.  E.  Fisher,  on  my  naming  to  him
many  of  the  incidents  to  which  I  have  referred.  I  also  read  in  the  same  connection  "  Body  and
Mind  "  and  "  Man  and  his  Motives,"  by  the  isaine  author,  Dr.  Moore.


500  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

other,  so  that  nothing  was  left  but  my  light  and  the  hand  and  arm  by  which
it  was  sustained.  The  contest  referred  to  took  place  in  the  air  before  me,
where  the  bitterest  battle  was  waged.  On  awaking,  or  as  it  more  really
appeared  to  me  at  the  close  of  the  vision,  I  awoke  and  said  to  my  mother,
who  was  sitting  near,  watching  by  me,  "  Ma,  how  beautiful  that  light
seems!"  There  was  simply  a  candle  burning  on  a  table  before  me;  but
it  seemed  to  have  a  beauty  transcending  anything  I  had  ever  before  seen ;
the  light  to  my  eyes  following  so  closely  the  vision  or  dream  in  which  my
welfare  for  time  and  eternity  seemed  to  be  bound  up  in  the  conflict.  The
dream  or  vision  was,  no  doubt,  caused  by  my  fevered  state,  affected  or
influenced  by  the  light  burning  before  me  ;  but  throughout  my  whole  life,
the  vision  of  my  future,  which  seemed  then  to  be  so  plainly  portrayed  to
me,  has  been  most  strikingly  realized,  just  as  it  was  then  impressed  on  my
mind.  During  the  whole  of  my  life  my  course  has  been  marked  with  most
violent  struggles.  I  have  scarcely  ever  attempted  anything  in  my  life,  but
what  I  have  had  to  contend,  at  every  successive  stage,  with  the  most  violent
opposition,  which  I  have  generally  looked  upon  as  a  matter  of  course,
where  others  have  easy  and  plain  sailing.  The  end  of  nearly  all  such
struggles,  as  a  rule,  has  been,  that,  by  almost  superhuman  exertions,  the
opposition  has  been  crushed.  That  one  dream  or  vision,  which  stood  out
so  conspicuous^,  and  in  which  I  saw  the  opening  out  of  my  whole  life,
has  been  uppermost  in  my  mind  all  my  life  since,  and  I  have  been
thoroughly  satisfied  that  the  predictions  in  it  have  been  quite  fulfilled.
That  period,  too,  was  important  to  me  as  the  crisis  in  the  fever,  which,  too,
was  then  mastered,  and  I  was  speedily  restored  to  health  and  strength,  as
though  the  series  of  victories  over  the  enemy-principle  of  my  life  had
already  begun.

J.   TRAVIS,   LL.B.,

Judge  of  the  late  High  Court  of  Justice  of  the  Canadian  N.W.  Territories;
Commissioner,  under  the  Extradition  Acts,  etc.


[      ]  1.

(From  E.  F.  H.)

Melrose  Highlands,  Dec.  31,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  a  brief  account  of  a  dream  that  I  had  many  years
ago,  and  its  sequel.  I  am  aware  that  it  is  almost,  if  not  wholly,  worthless
as  scientific  evidence  unless  it  is  corroborated.  I  can  give  the  names  of  all
persons  alluded  to  in  my  little  story,  and  will  gladly  do  so  if  you  wish,  but
I  fear  they  will  not  recall  the  circumstances.  The  dates  have  bothered  me.
and  I  have  long  delayed  to  write  you,  while  I  have  searched  in  vain  for  my
diaries  of  those  years.  If  I  find  the  diaries  I  can  send  the  exact  dates,  and
will  gladly  do  so  if  you  care  for  them.

I  have  had  several   other  dreams  which   afterwards  were  fulfilled,  but


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,  501

none  so  striking  as  this  absurd  one.  I  often  dream  of  places,  and  they  be-
come in  this  way  familiar  to  me,  so  that  when  I  see  them  for  the  first  time
I  instantly  recognize  them  as  places  seen  in  dreams,  though  I  previously  did
not  know  their  location.

I  have  also,  within  two  years,  met  a  man  of  whom  I  had  dreamed  so
plainly  that  his  face  was  perfectly  familiar,  and  the  whole  scene  of  our
meeting  (a  room  in  which  I  was  for  the  first  time),  together  with  his  words
and  manner,  was  like  part  of  a  well-known  story.  I  spoke  of  these  facts  at
the  time,  and  think  some  of  those  present  might  perhaps  remember  them.

The  worst  thing  about  giving  positive  proof  in  regard  to  my  dreams  is
the  fact  that  I  very  rarely  mention  them  or  even  remember  them,  and  so
when  one  is  fulfilled,  I  can  only  call  attention  to  the  fulfilment  and  say,
"  I  dreamed  all  this  a  long  time  ago."

Hoping  my  account  may  be  of  interest  if  not  of  value,

I  remain,  yours  truly,

E.  F.  H.

2.
A  Singular  Dream.

In  the  fall  of  1874  (October  or  November)  I  had  a  dream  that  seemed  to
me  very  singular  in  its  absurdity,  but  as  I  often  had  grotesque  and  unusual
dreams,  I  did  not  mention  it  to  any  one,  and,  in  fact,  soon  ceased  to  think
of  it  myself.

The  dream  was  this :  —

I  was  walking  up  the  street  in  Wellesley  Village  on  my  way  to  the  house
of  an  uncle  where  I  had  previously  visited.  I  reached  the  gate,  turned  up
the  path  to  the  front  door,  and  rang  the  bell.  The  door  was  opened  by  one
of  my  old  playmates,  a  daughter  of  my  uncle's  wife  by  a  former  husband,
who  held  out  her  hand  to  me  with  the  somewhat  peculiar  greeting,  "  Do
you  like  hulled  corn  ?  "

Beyond  this  point  I  have  no  recollection  of  what  I  dreamed,  but  all  the
foregoing  is  indelibly  fixed  in  my  memory,  being,  in  truth,  much  more
vivid  than  the  real  events  that  followed.

The  following  March  (1875)  I  received  an  invitation  to  visit  an  uncle  in
West  Roxbury,  and  went  to  Boston  for  that  purpose.  (I  fixed  the  date  by
the  fact  that  I  was  in  Boston  on  Palm  Sunday.)  I  soon  met  the  uncle  who
lived  at  Wellesley,  and  accepted  an  invitation  to  visit  him  during  my
stay.  Accordingly  T  went  one  day  to  Wellesley,  which  place  I  reached
about  noon.  I  found  my  uncle's  house,  walked  up  the  path,  rang  the  bell,
and  met  face  to  face  the  identical  young  lady  of  whom  I  had  dreamed
months  before.  Doubtless  she  was  glad  to  see  me,  for  she  smiled  sweetly
as  we  shook  hands,  but  she  said  softly,  "  Do  you  like  hulled  corn  ?  "

To  say  that  I  was  surprised  would  be  stating  the  case  very  mildly,  but  I
managed  to  reply  that  I  was  fond  of  hulled  corn;  and  then  I -went  on  to
relate  rny  curious  dream  and  its  fulfilment.  This,  I  am  certain,  was  the  first
time  I  had  ever  spoken  of  the  matter  to  any  one,  because  the  dream  was  in
itself  no  more  strange  than  many  that  I  had,  and  I  should  never  have
thought  of  it  again  had  it  not  been  so  completely  fulfilled.     The  narration


502  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

seemed  to  make  little  impression  on  my  friend  or  on  my  uncle  and  his
wife,  to  whom  I  told  it  later,  and  I  dare  say  they  all  soon  forgot  the  entire
matter.

It  only  remains  to  add  that  the  anxiety  as  to  my  liking  for  hulled  corn
arose  from  the  fact  that  on  that  particular  day  it  was  the  chief  dish  for
lunch,  and  that  I  arrived  just  as  lunch  was  served.


[71]  1.

(From  Prof.  A.  B.  Nelson.')

Danville,  Ky.,  Dec.  10,  1887.

Mr.  E.  G.  Gardiner,  Secretary  Society  Psychical  Research,  12  Otis  place,
Boston,  Mass.:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  I  have  just  read  a  letter  from  Mr.  Joseph  James,  of  Wester-
ville,  O.,  giving  an  account  of  a  dream  he  had  that  may  be  of  interest  to  the
Society  of  Psychical  Research.  It  was  written  to  an  old  servant  of  the
family  in  relation  to  Mr.  J.'s  son,  Rev.  Jno.  R.  James,  who  was  thrown
from  a  buggy  while  on  his  way  from  Paris,  Ky.,  to  Millersburg,  Ky.,  where
he  was  to  preach  the  Thanksgiving  sermon.  He  was  picked  up  unconscious,
and  remained  so  till  his  death,  a  few  hours  afterwards.  Mr.  J.  dreamed  the
night  his  son  died  (not  having  heard  of  the  accident)  that  he  saw  his  son
meet  his  (Mr.  J.'s)  mother  in  front  of  a  beautiful  cloud.  He  awoke  imme-
diately and  roused  his  wife,  telling  her  to  look  at  the  vision,  but  in  the
mean  time  it  had  vanished.

Mr.  James  is  a  gentleman  of  the  highest  integrity,  whom  I  know  well.
He  removed  from  Danville  several  years  ago  and  now  resides  in  Wester-
ville,  O.  I  was  told  last  night  by  his  son-in-law,  who  lives  here,  that
another  member  of  Mr.  James1  family  had  a  similar  dream  the  same  night.

Mr.  J.  sometimes  writes  his  name  McJames.

Truly  yours,

A.  B.  NELSON,
Professor  Mathematics,  Centre  College.

2.
(From  Mr.  J.  McA.  James.)

Westerville,  O.,  Dec.  28,  1887.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass.:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  As  I  am  well  acquainted  with  Professor  Nelson,  of  Danville,
Ky.,  I  will  simply  say  I  was  never  a  strong  believer  in  dreams  or  presenti-
ments, but  the  dream  I  had  the  night  of  November  22  last,  in  regard  to  a
daughter  who  died  two  years  last  February,  and  the  death  of  my  dear  son
who  died  about  12  o'clock  the  night  of  November  22  last,  as  above  stated.

My  son  was  located  at  Paris,  Ky.,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church
at  that  place,  and  was  devotedly  loved  by  all  churches  and  people.     He  was


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  503

twenty-eight  years,  lacking  three  days.  He  had  only  been  preaching  four
years  and  a  half;  was  ordained  four  years  ago ;  since  that  time  he  had  con-
verted and  baptized  five  hundred  and  forty-seven  persons.  He  was  a
devoted  Christian  and  a  thorough  scholar  and  one  of  the  best  preachers  of
his  age  in  Kentucky,  and  his  character  and  standing  as  a  man  and  minister
of  the  gospel  was  without  a  blemish.  Now  I  will  give  you  an  outline  of
my  dream  and  coincidents  connected  with  it.

My  son,  as  before  stated,  lived  at  Paris,  Ky.,  about  two  hundred  and  twenty
miles  from  us.  We  had  contemplated  visiting  him  about  Christmas,  but  on
the  night  of  the  22d  of  November,  I  dreamed  of  seeing  my  daughter  at  some
distance  ;  then,  in  a  few  moments,  I  saw  in  my  dream  my  son  and  daughter
meet  together  just  in  front  of  a  beautiful  bright  cloud  ;  then,  in  my  dream,  I
called  to  my  wife  and  said  to  her,  "  O,  Margaret!  look,  yonder  comes
Johnny  and  Martha,  coming  home!  Come  and  see,  quick!1'  Then,  in
my  dream,  I  took  hold  of  her  to  show  to  her  our  dear  children.  Then,  in  my
dream,  when  I  turned  and  looked  for  them  they  had  disappeared  out  of  my
sight.  I  then  woke  up,  and  the  clock  struck  12.  The  dream  impressed  me
so  I  could  not  get  it  off  my  mind,  and  at  10  o'clock  next  morning  we  got  a
telegram  that  our  dear  boy  had  been  thrown  from  a  buggy  and  killed.
Oh,  that  dreadful  telegram,  causing  our  poor  old  hearts  to  bleed  with  sor-
row and  grief  at  every  pore  !  We  pray  God  to  help  us  to  bear  it  the  best
we  can,  looking  forward  to  the  time  we  trust  we  shall  meet  with  our  dear
children  in  that  heavenly  land,  where  we  shall  part  no  more.

Now,  as  to  anything  further :  when  I  related  my  dream  to  my  wife,  at
the  breakfast  table  the  morning  after  the  dream,  she  said  to  me,  "  Mr.
James,  I  don't  know  why  it  is,  but  the  college  bell  disturbs  me  so  I  can
hardly  eat,  and  has  ever  since  yesterday,"  saying,  "  it  sounds  like  it  was
tolling  for  the  death  of  somebody."

In  about  two  hours  after  that  we  got  that  dreadful  telegram,  telling  us  of
the  death  of  our  dear  son,  who  died  and  passed  out  of  my  sight  just  as  I
awoke  out  of  my  dream.  Whether  there  was  anything  in  the  dream  tend-
ing to  warn  us  of  the  death  of  our  dear  son  or  not,  I  shall  never  forget  the
strange  dream  or  vision  I  had  in  regard  to  his  death  and  our  daughter
meeting  him.  One  thing  I  do  know,  God  is  able  to  give  us  visions,  and
tells  us  what  he  does.  Now  we  know  not,  but  shall  know  hereafter ;  so  we
will  take  God  at  his  word,  trusting  in  him,  and  waiting  for  his  revelation
hereafter.

As  you  have  given  me  reference  to  Professor  Nelson,  of  Danville,  you  can
use  this  letter  in  any  way  you  think  best,  not  to  change  or  misconstrue  its
true  meaning.     I  am,  dear  sir,

Yours  most  respectfully,

J.  McA.  JAMES.

3.

Westerville,  O.,  Jan.  7,  1888.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. :  —

Dear  Sir,  — I  cannot  see  how  you  came  in  possession  of  what  occurred
in  our  visions  or  dreams.    As  to  our  dreams,  we  only  told  a  few  of  our


504  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

friends,  not  expecting  them  to  be  made  public,  although  they  occurred  on
the  night  of  the  death  of  our  dear  son,  and  just  at  the  hour  he  passed  to  the
spirit  world,  which  was  the  22dof  November  last,  about  11  o'clock  at  night,
and  on  getting  up  the  next  morning  I  related  all  the  coincidents  con-
nected with  my  dream  to  my  wife  and  daughter ;  they  then  made  a  state-
ment to  me  of  their  own  dreams,  and  while  it  seemed  so  strange  to  us  all,
yet  but  little  did  we  think  what  a  sad  calamity  had  befallen  our  dear,  pre-
cious son  till  we  received  a  telegram,  two  hours  afterwards,  of  his  sad
death.  At  your  request  my  daughter  will  write  you,  giving  you  her  own
dream.  Very  respectfully,

J.  McA.  JAMES.

As  to  the  bell  disturbing  me,  it  was  as  my  husband  stated.

MARGARET  JAMES.

4.

Several  nights  before  my  brother's  (Rev.  J.  R.  James)  death,  in  my
dreams  I  plainly  saw  the  hearse  drive  up  to  our  door,  with  white  horses
hitched  to  it.  This  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind  that  l  repeated  it
the  next  morning  at  the  table,  and  remarked  to  the  family  that  "  some  of
our  family  are  going  to  die  very  soon."  This  same  thing  I  had  dreamed
before  my  husband's  (H.  C.  Saunders,  of  Danville,  Ky.)  death,  which
occurred  in  two  days  after  the  dream.  Also  dreamed  the  same  before  his
mother's  and  my  sister's  death  (Mrs.  Jno.  B.  Cook,  Columbus,  Ky.).  I  sup-
pose this  is  why  this  last  dream  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind.  On
Tuesday  night  (November  22),  the  very  night  my  brother  (J.  R.  James)
died,  I  dreamed  of  being  in  a  strange  place,  dressed  in  deep  mourning,
with  a  heavy  crape  veil  extending  to  the  bottom  of  my  dress.  This  I  told
at  the  table  Wednesday  morn  (November  23) ,  and  in  about  one  hour  from  that
time  /received  the  telegram  bearing  the  sad  news  of  his  death.  I  am  not
one  bit  superstitious,  and  only  send  this  thinking  by  so  doing  I  may  confer
a  favor  on  you.  I  had  not  only  told  this  to  my  own  family  before  his
death,  but  had  repeated  it  to  several  of  the  neighbors.

Very  respectfully,

Mrs.  ELLEN  JAMES  SAUNDERS.

Pa,  being  in  the  city,  did.  not  receive  the  telegram  until  an  hour  after  I
did.


[Received  Jan.  10,  1888.]


5.

Westerville,  O.,  March  11,  1888.


Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.  :  —

Dear  Sir,  — Your  letter  bearing  date  January  12  was  received,  and
owing  to  sickness  in  family  my  reply  had  to  be  postponed,  and  during  that
time  by  some  means  your  letter  got  misplaced,  and  not  knowing  your  address
could  not  reply  earlier.  Have  since  obtained  it  from  my  father,  who  is  now
in  Kansas.     Hope,  however,  this  may  be  in  time.

My  dream  was  told  on  the  morning  of  November  23,  at  my  father's  table,


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  505

in  the  presence  of  my  parents  and  three  children,  Maggie  Lee  Saunders,
eighteen  years  of  age;  Clarence,  sixteen;  and  Annabel,  thirteen,  —  all  of
whom  can  testify.     My  son  is  now  in  Kansas.
Hoping  this  will  prove  satisfactory,  I  am,

Very  respectfully,

Mrs.  ELLEN  SAUNDERS.

6.

Having  read  both  of  mamma's  letters  I  can  truthfully  testify  to  what  she
has  written.

ANNABEL  SAUNDERS.

7.

Both  mamma's  dreams  were  related  in  my  presence  before  we  heard  of
the  sad  occurrence.

MAGGIE  L.  SAUNDERS.

8.

Mrs.  Saunders  related  her  dream  to  me  several  days  before  her  brother's
death  (just  as  she  wrote  it  to  you) .  I  am  a  close  neighbor  and  was  there
several  times,  as  she  seemed  so  impressed  with  her  dream  that  she  became
low-spirited  and  often  said,  "  I  am  sure  some  of  our  family  is  going  to  die,
as  I  have  dreamed  it  several  times  before,  and  each  time  some  near  relative
has  been  taken."

Mrs.  HENRY  WILCOX.

Miss  FANNIE  WILCOX.


[72]

{From  Mrs.  A.  Z.)

Dear  Sir,  —  I  enclose  a  personal  incident  which  may  have  some  interest
in  the  line  of  your  investigations.  The  voice  I  alluded  to  was  so  strong  and
clear  that  long  after  I  could  recall  the  sound  of  it.     .     .     .

(Signed)  [Mrs.  A.  Z.]

Washington.

I  am  requested  to  tell  you  of  a  curious  personal  incident.

At  the  time  I  speak  of  I  was  living  with  my  grandparents.  My  grand-
mother was  not  strong,  and  I  occupied  a  room  with  her.  My  grandfather
had  for  a  few  days  been  suffering  from  a  severe  pain,  which  the  physician
assured  us  was  rheumatism.  For  two  nights  I  had  remained  all  night  in
his  room  to  give  him  hot  applications.  The  third  night  he  felt  quite  well
again,  and  I  returned  to  grandmother's  room.  Early  in  the  morning  I  was
awakened  by  a  clear,  distinct  voice,  saying,  "  Go  to  grandpa,  he  is  dying.1'
I  started  from  the  bed,  wondering  who  had  spoken,  and  found  myself
entirely  alone.  I  ran  to  my  grandfather  and  found  him  bleeding  and  unable
to  speak.  He  died  during  the  morning  from  an  aneurism  of  the  heart.  No
one  had  suspected  any  trouble  but  rheumatism.  I  retired  without  a  shadow
of  anxiety  regarding  him.     He  was  in  a  room  so  far  away  from  my  room


506  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

that  only  a  loud  voice  could  have  reached  me.  The  door  was  shut.  My
grandmother  had  risen  early  and  was  downstairs.  In  fact,  no  one  in  the
house  had  any  knowlege  of  his  condition,  nor  could  he  have  made  me  hear.
[Feb.  3,  1889.  Mrs.  Z.  tells  me,  in  reply  to  inquiries,  that  the  above
incident  occurred  about  15  years  ago,  and  that  she  did  not  recognize  the
voice.  Besides  herself  and  her  grandfather,  her  two  uncles,  her  grand-
mother, and  a  servant  were  in  the  house.  She  found  her  grandfather  alone
in  his  room.     No  further  corroboration  can  be  obtained.  —  R.  H.]


[73]  1.

(From  Mr.  N.  X.)

New  Jersey,  March  4,  1888.

Sir,  —  The  "  New  York  World  "  of  this  morning  makes  reference  to  you,
to  your  investigations  into  certain  mysteries  of  life,  and  relates  some  peculiar
facts,  so  far  as  the  events  or  incidents  may  be  so  termed.

I  am  not  a  "  spiritualist11  in  religious  faith,  and  therefore  do  not  associate
the  phenomena  I  now  submit  with  the  "  unconscious  cerebration  "  of  that
belief,  for  I  was  trained  in,  and  retain  much  of,  the  hard-headed  sceptic  faith
as  to  all  faiths  which  are  not  of  divine  revelation  ;  but  the  phenomena  of  life
and  the  laws  of  nature  are  a  legitimate  study  to  all  sectarian  theocrates.

I  propose  to  relate  some  inexplicable  phenomena  within  my  personal
experience,  in  which  personal  friends,  absolute  strangers  to  the  actors  in
the  phenomena,  were  witnesses,  and  to  ask,  if  your  interest  is  excited,  for
some  rational  explanation,  and  you  may  use  this  communication  at  your
discretion,  suppressing  my  name.

Col.  Jno.  A.  Cockerill  of  "  The  World"  is  a  personal  friend,  if  a  refer-
ence is  needed,  and  many  more  can  be  given  to  sustain  my  identity  and
integrity.

In  the  year  1874  my  attention  was  first  directed  to  psychic  sympathies ;
that  is,  to  the  correspondence  in  thought  existing  where  warm  attach-
ments lived,  though  vast  distances  separated  the  parties  ;  and  later  reflec-
tions and  experiences  confirm  my  then  crude  ideas  that  thought  in  its
physical  structure  possesses  the  same  material  characteristics  that  mark
magnetism,  electricity,  and  the  other  ethics,  so  to  speak,  of  nature.  On
this  point  I  will  give  my  views  later.

In  the  winter  of  1874  a  most  dear  friend  was  in  Florida  for  her  health.
I  had  known  her  in  childhood :  she  had  married,  was  the  mother  of  two
fine  sons,  and  at  this  date  was  a  widow.  Her  husband  was  a  dear  friend.
The  closest  friendly  relations  existed  between  us  for  years,  so  close  that
in  his  last  illness  he  would  permit  only  me  to  aid  his  wife  in  caring  for
him.  Financial  reverses  came  to  him,  and  he  begged  me  to  counsel  his
widow  for  their  mutual  sakes.  Love  was  not  engendered  through  this
counsel,  and  she  now  resides  in  California,  striving  to  eliminate  the  pul-
monic tendency  from  her  youngest  son,  a  lad  of  eighteen  years.  But  the
deepest  sympathy  for,  and  interest  in,  a  noble  woman  —  noble  then  and  now


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc..  507

in  all  true  womanhood  —  incited  me,  and  the  correspondence  strengthened
the  friendly  ties  of  years,  which  continues.  So  much  for  the  dramatis  per-
sona. I  was  ever  a  home-body,  rarely  leaving  my  room,  books,  and  desk,
as  to  me  the  younger  men  came  for  counsel ;  perhaps  to  smoke  or  chat,
and  otherwise  find  a  surcease  from  their  merrier  joys.

One  of  these  visitors  was  a  spiritualist,  as  were  his  family,  all.  A  man
of  fine  and  sensitive  sympathetic  nature,  he  frequented  my  rooms  more
than  any  of  the  rest.  One  night  as  we  were  playing  "  casino,"  he,  facing
the  door,  had  a  startled  look,  which,  knowing  or  surmising  its  cause,  made
me  ask,  "What  do  you  see?"  —  "  A  woman's  face  and  bust  half  leaning
through  the  door."  —  "  Nonsense,"  I  said,  "  describe  her  features."  He  did
so  to  the  life.  I  had  seen  this  — apparition  shall  we  call  it?  —  frequently,
hence  I  was  unmoved ;  he  was  the  startled  one.  He  was  an  absolute
stranger  to  the  lady,  had  never  seen  her,  knew  not  her  name,  history,  or
aught  about  her.  I  could  understand  the  psychic  action  that  made  me
materialize  her  face,  though  she  was  at  Green  Cove  Springs,  Florida,  at
that  moment,  as  her  letter  to  me  proved ;  but  why  this  visible  appearance
to  an  absolute  stranger  ?    It  has  ever  been  a  mystery.

Financial  reverses  came  to  me,  and  my  wife,  residing  with  relatives  in  a
remote  town  in  South-western  Virginia,  died  suddenly  of  apoplexy  on  a
Thursday  and  was  buried  on  the  Saturday  following.  Remoteness  made
the  telegraph  useless  as  a  summons  to  me,  and  on  the  Monday  morning
following  I  received  two  letters,  —  one  announcing  her  death,  and  one  from
a  lady,  a  school-teacher,  a  principal,  with  whom  I  corresponded  much  on
the  educational  matters  affecting  her,  in  which  she  informed  me  that  a
spirit  had  appeared  to  her  and  desired  her  to  inform  me  of  her  identity  as
my  wife,  and  of  her  death.

Neither  party  had  ever  met ;  one  was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the
other.  The  teacher  lived  near  the  Delaware  Water  Gap,  and  I  had  not
seen  her  for  some  years.  She  was  a  spiritualist,  sixty-five  years  old  then,
and  is  living  now.

Qucere :  Why  this  communication  to  an  absolute  stranger,  by  a  vision,
and  not  to  me,  the  only  party  in  interest?  Nor  have  I  ever  had  a  vision
of,  or  spiritual  communication  with,  my  deceased  wife.

The  sudden  death  of  my  wife,  a  few  hours'  illness,  her  ignorance  of  the
existence  of  my  correspondent,  preclude  all  physical  communications  or
idea  of  any  form  of  material  ones.  Whence  this  phenomenon  ?  I  married
again,  —  a  woman  of  rare  beauty,  accomplished  beyond  the  high  average  of
accomplished  women.  We  were  orthodox  in  religious  faith,  but  we  read,
thought  upon,  and  discussed  psychic  phenomena.  Before  and  after  mar-
riage, when  she  was  in  trouble  (for  she  had  much  trouble  with  property,
and  was  robbed  under  the  garb  of  friendship) ,  I  have  known  when  at  my
writing  that  she  needed  me,  and  though  miles  away,  found  on  arrival  that
I  was  ;  and  in  marriage,  when  in  town,  and  she  at  our  country  home,  some-
thing told  me  to  come  home,  and  the  necessities  proved  it.  Our  lives  were
a  symphony :  both  devoted  to  flowers,  we  wandered  all  over  these  hills,
glades,  forests,  after  ferns,  wood  flowers,  and  they  seemed  to  grow  by  the
incense  of  her  breath.


508  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

In  music,  painting,  song,  in  the  wide  magnificence  of  astronomy,  to  the
subtler  mysteries  of  vegetable  life,  in  the  natural  alembic  of  terrestrial
laboratory,  she  wandered  with  me  during  the  four  short  years  of  our  mar-
ried bliss ;  yet,  close  as  was  our  ante-nuptial  sympathy,  close  as  were  the
harmonies  of  our  married  life,  fearless  as  I  am  known  to  be  as  to  spiritual
realizations,  I  have  never  had  a  response  to  the  wailing  cry  for  her
presence.

Tell  me  why  these  conditions  in  life,  this  silence  of  the  tomb,  now  ?

Again,  and  repeatedly,  for  my  correspondence  has  included  many  bril-
liant women,  when  remote  from  each  other  by  hundreds  of  miles,  we  have
felt  a  spirit  move  us  to  write,  and  from  sleepless  beds  we  have  risen  to
write  the  night  thoughts,  only  to  find  an  identity  of  action  as  to  time  and
theme.     .     .     .

I  am,  very  truly,

(Signed)  [N.  X.]

2.

New  Jersey,  March  11,  1888.

My  dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  8th  inst.  received  yes-
terday, I  have  to  state  that  my  friend  who  saw  the  apparition  is  now  a
resident  in  Chicago,  and  there  being  no  correspondence  between  us,  —  not
from  unfriendly  reasons,  but  simply  from  the  causes  natural  to  a  mere  man
of  business,  —  I  do  not  know  his  exact  address,  but  the  first  time  I  am  in
town  I  will  obtain  it  and  send  it  to  you.  I  never  did  attempt  to  learn  what
the  lady  was  doing  at  that  moment  in  Florida.  She  was  there  for  health,
and  what  her  social  or  other  hygienic  pleasures  were,  to  me  were  of  little
moment  so  long  as  she  recovered  her  health.

I  possess  no  letters  from  my  first  wife.  In  the  wide  range  of  corre-
spondence, and  specially  in  the  sacredness  of  the  family  relation,  I  do  not
believe  in  the  retention  of  letters  for  the  idle  to  read  after  I  am  dead,  hence
I  retain  few  and  have  an  annual  holocaust  of  "  friendship's"  offerings.

By  the  term  "idle,"  above,  I  refer  to  the  curious-eyed  class  which  are
indigenous  to  all  families.

The  school-teacher  was  named  Miss  B.,  of ,  N.J.,  where,  and  by

which  name,  a  letter  will  still  reach  her,  although  she  married  some  two
years  since  at  the  age  of  sixty-five  :  her  married  name  I  do  not  remember,
as  communication  has  ceased  for  various  reasons.     .     .     .

(Signed)  [N.  X.]

3.

The  following  letter  is  from  Mrs.  B.  Y.,  formerly  Miss  B.,  referred  to  in
(2):-

April  6,  1888.
Mr.  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  ...  Mr.  X.'s  report  of  my  interview  with  his  de-
ceased wife  is  correct,  and  only  one  of  many  like  experiences  which  have
occurred  to  me  and  other  members  of  my  family.

(Signed)  '  [Mrs.  B.'  Y.]'


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  509

May  13,  1888.

I  cannot  recall  the  details  of  my  interview  with  Mrs.  X.  I  only  remember
that  I  seemed  to  be  at  her  home  in  Virginia,  and  in  conversation  with  her,
in  which  she  requested  me  to  inform  Mr.  X.,  who  was  then  in  New  York,
of  her  sudden  "  transition,"  which  I  did  immediately.  On  the  same  day  I
received  a  letter  from  him  containing  the  same  news,  our  letters  having
passed  each  other,  and  a  few  days  after  came  a  reply  to  my  letter  ask-
ing why  her  spirit  came  to  me,  an  entire  stranger,  and  not  to  him,  a  ques-
tion I  could  not  answer.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  B.  Y.]

[74]

(From  Mrs.  J.  O.  W.)

1.

Feb.  23,  1888.
Mr.  Richard  Hodgson:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  My  illness  proved  more  of  a  bondage  than  I  expected.  I
was  out  yesterday  for  the  first  time,  and  am  not  yet  strong  enough  to  write
out  other  experiences.  The  friend  with  "  open  vision"  has  been  confined
to  her  own  home  with  a  similar  sickness.  She  is  also  better  I  hear  this
morning,  not  yet  out,  so  I  could  neither  see  her  nor  write  for  the  permission
you  desired.  Perhaps  I  can  next  week.  I  have  written  out,  perhaps  with
tedious  definiteness,  the  vision  that  preceded  the  dream  of  the  Nautilus
fleet  that  you  have.  But  you  can  select  from  it  the  points  you  need.  It  is  all
psychologically  important  to  me  for  the  quiet  succession  of  its  steps.  Of
course,  it  would  be  silly  and  superfluous  to  write  of  "tearful  eyes,"  but
they  expressed  by  "  unconscious  cerebration"  or  something  else  my  sym-
pathy for  the  living,  who  were  in  desolation  of  grief.

The  stages  of  that  experience  were  well  defined,  —  the  vision  of  July
29,  1876,  the  dream  of  July  30,  1876,  the  walk  of  Oct.  31,  1876,  the  dream
of  Dr.  Holmes.

Truly  yours,  *

(Signed)  [Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]

Boston.

Thursday  P.M.  —  I  have  just  found  in  folding  your  papers  that  you  have
an  account  [4]  of  the  vision  of  Miss  X.  I  did  not  remember  that,  but  I
will  now  send  this  more  definite  one,  as  something  in  it  may  be  of  use.
Of  course  I  should  not  have  written  it  out  had  I  remembered  telling  it.

2.

On  Saturday  morning,  July  29,  1876,  as  the  clock  was  striking  4,  I
awoke  with  every  mental  perception  keenly  alive.  Three  or  four  feet  from
me,  looking  at  me  with  intent,  grave  desire  for  me  to  understand  some-
thing, was  C X.     I  supposed  that  she  was  spending  that  part  of  her


510  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

vacation  at  Mt.  Desert,  and  was  intellectually  interested  to  find  her  men-
tally projected  before  me  with  such  distinctness,  when  I  had  not  been
especially  thinking  of  her.  I  noticed  the  progress  of  the  dawn,  the  lapsing
of  the* waters  under  my  windows,  —  everything  which  would  naturally  break
the  continuity  of  the  spell ;  then  tried  to  picture  the  faces  of  my  children
asleep  in  the  next  room,  then  of  my  husband  passing  that  night  in  our  own
home  in  Boston,  then  I  tried  to  mentally  see  other  friends  of  strong  indi-
viduality in  both  worlds.  Finally  I  wondered  that  every  face,  whether  of
husband,  children,  or  friends  was  obscure,  as  if  seen  through  a  mist  or
veil,  compared  with  the  face  of  Miss  X.,  so  steadfastly  waiting  for  me  to  un-
derstand. I  looked  all  around  the  room  and  back  again  several  times,
intellectually  curious  why  I  should  see  her  with  as  much  definiteness  as
any  object  in  my  apartment.  Finally  Miss  X.  slowly  disappeared.  Then
I  laughed  softly,  as  one  ashamed  and  convicted  of  rudeness  and  inhospi-
tality  to  a  beloved  but  unexpected  guest,   spoke  aloud  deprecatingly,

"  Why,  little  C ,  I  have  driven  you  away,  trying  to  see  others  instead

of  you!"

It  was  wonderful,  but  so  quiet  and  natural  that  the  thought  of  vision  did
not  come  to  me.  About  five  I  rose  to  dress,  but  remembered  the  next  day
how  my  eyes  looked  in  the  glass  as  I  was  brushing  my  hair.  Years  after-
ward, seeing  the  picture  of  Joan  of  Arc  in  the  Art  Museum,  I  recognized
the  same  look  in  the  eyes.  Through  that  day  my  eyes  often  filled  so  that  I
could  neither  see  my  books  or  sewing.  When  my  husband  arrived,  about
twelve  hours  later,  he  immediately  looked  anxious.  "  Mary,  you  are  sick  ! "
— •■  Oh,  no,  not  at  all !  "  —  "  You  are,  and  needn't  hide  it.  I  never  saw  your
eyes  look  so  before."  I  laughed,  saying,  "  Nonsense,  I  am  perfectly  well,"
but  found  my  mouth  quivering  and  my  eyes  filling.  He  noticed  that,  and
questioned  the  little  daughters.  "  Had  anything  happened  to  grieve  their
mother,"  etc.  Finally  he  said,  "  I  will  try  if  a  drive  will  freshen  and  restore
you,"  and  ordered  the  carriage.  He  drove  us  by  the  Preston  House,  fre-
quentty  turning,  anxious  and  thoughtful,  and  too  often  catching  my  eyes
overflowing.  I  was  constantly  thinking  of  Miss  X.,  but  with  no  premoni-
tion of  sickness  and  death.  I  was  picturing  her  as  well  and  joyous  at
Mt.  Desert,  and  when  passing  the  Preston  House,  pictured  her  summering
there  a  year  or  so  before.     Twenty-four  hours  later,  a  lady  friend  came

from to  Swampscott  to  inform  me,  by  the  wish  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  X.,

that  their  daughter  at  4  A.M.  on  the  29th  was  heard  breathing  unnaturally,
was  found  unconscious,  and  at  5  the  breathing  had  ceased.  It  was  at  4  I
had  awakened.  It  was  at  5  that  the  spell  of  her  spiritual  presence  had
sufficiently  left  me,  so  that  I  arose  and  dressed.

The  tearful  eyes  and  trembling  lips  that  kept  my  husband  attentively
observing  me  on  the  29th  and  30th  were  the  repressed  external  signs  of  my
unconscious  sympathy  with  the  anguished  household.  For  I  was  only  think-
ing of  Miss  X.  as  well  and  happy.

The  night  of  the  30th,  before  the  bringing  of  her  material  body,  I  had  the
dream  of  the  Nautilus  fleet.     (See  document  5.)

For  the  next  three  months  my  last  thought  at  night  and  my  first  on
awakening  was  for  the  members  of  the  stricken  household.     The  thought  of


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  511

my  heart  was  always  to  lift  them  out  of  the  atmosphere  of  death  and  the

atrophy  of  hopeless  grief  into  a  vitalizing  sense  of  C 's  happy  freedom

and  usefulness  in  the  spiritual  world.  On  the  31st  of  October  —  her  birthday
—  (I  did  not  record  the  date,  but  think  I  am  accurate)  I  was  walking  down
State  street  feeling  unusually  joyous,  as  if  we  were  hand  in  hand,  and  think-
ing aloud  together  on  very  hopeful  subjects.  The  clear,  crisp  atmosphere,
the  purity  of  the  sky,  —  all  seemed  surcharged  with  her  influence.     Then,

without  abruptness,  C seemed  to  say  with  quiet,  gentle  distinctness,

"  This  is  our  last  walk  for  a  long  time.  You  have  helped  my  parents  and
sister  to  bear  my  apparent  going  away  more  than  they  know  or  you  know.
But  you  need  not  turn  to  them  now.  They  do  not  need  it  longer  and  all
your  strength  is  now  needed  to  support  others,  with  quite  other  but  gravely
oppressive  burdens  to  bear."  I  was  not  startled.  The  voice  was  internal
and  subjective  but  distinct.

I  went  home,  and  for  several  months  after  that  I  hardly  remembered  that
C.  or  her  bereaved  household  were  ever  known  to  me.  By  night  and  day
the  strain  upon  every  faculty  of  my  mind  and  every  nerve  of  my  body  was
all  that  could  be  endured.  Since  then  —  the  morning  of  Oct.  31,  1876  — I
have  had  no  sensitive  or  assured  consciousness  of  Miss  X.'s  presence  or
influence.

A  long  time  after  I  had  some  very  vivid  dreams  advising  me  to  send  the
account  of  the  Nautilus  fleet  to  Dr.  Holmes.  I  seemed  to  be  told  that  he
was  passing  through  very  depressing  and  lonely  conditions  of  baffled  ques-
tioning and  doubt  about  the  nature  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  that  he  would
be  comforted  by  that  evidence  of  the  sympathetic  correlation  of  the  two
worlds,  —  the  evidence  that  this  world  is  real,  only  just  so  far  as  it  is  in  cor-
respondence with  the  spiritual  world,  that  out  of  such  harmony  our  realm
is  one  of  illusions  and  fallacies.  I  dreamed  that  it  would  help  Dr.  Holmes
to  believe  the  truth  that  our  thoughts  are  heard  by  our  associative  spiritual
friends  and  answered  also,  as  spoken  words  are  heard  and  answered  here.

That  dream  had  a  strong  hold  of  me.  I  must  have  told  it  to  Dr.  Holmes'
unconscious  mind,  it  was  so  forcefully  real  to  me.  Perhaps  it  supplied  nu-
trition to  his  spiritual  heart  and  lungs.  But  I  never  outwardly  wrote  or  told
him  aught.  Such  persons  much  in  the  public  eye  are  always  approached
and  hurt  and  weakened  by  the  many  seeking  any  paltry  excuse  to  obtrude
their  own  paltry  personality.  Dr.  Holmes,  with  his  kindly  courtesy,  would
have  thought  he  must  write,  and  I  shrank  from  that  draft,  however  brief
and  conventional,  upon  his  attention.

Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]

3.

In  a  letter  of  Feb.  29,  1888,  Mrs.  W.  adds :  —

Dr.  and  Mrs.  X.  were  telegraphed  morning  of  July  29  to  hasten  home.
C.  had  ceased  breathing  at  5  A.M.,  and  a  letter  from  her,  written  on  the  28th,

was  unread  in  their  hands  when  the  despatch  came.    They  reached

before  night  the  same  day,  and  sent  messenger  to  me  the  next,  July  30.  My
responsive  sympathetic  condition  had  been  one  of  unconscious  connection


512  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc,

with  them,  the  survivors.     I  had  no  desolation  for  the  "  dead;  "  she  "  was
alive"  to  me  "  forevermore."

4.

[The  following  is  the  account  referred  to  by  Mrs.  W.  in  the  postscript
to  (1)  ;  it  was  given  to  me  in  conversation  with  Mrs.  W.  shortly  before
the  letter  of  February  23.  —  R.  H.]

On  July  29,  1876, 1  saw,  as  in  a  vision,  Miss  C.  X.,  the  daughter  of  Dr.  X.,
of ,  standing  close  to  me.  I  thought  it  must  be  some  mental  repre-
sentation, but  she  looked  intently  at  me,  and  the  appearance  did  not  pass
away.  I  tried  to  represent  my  children,  my  husband,  etc.,  as  vividly,  but
failed  to  do  so.  I  closed  my  eyes,  looked  up,  and  saw  the  figure  fading.  I
did  not  think  at  all  that  the  figure  was  any  apparition  from  the  other  world.

My  husband  came  home  the  following  evening  and  remarked  upon  the
sadness,  as  he  thought,  of  my  appearance,  though  I  did  not  feel  mournful
in  reality.  We  went  out  for  a  drive  together,  and  I  thought  of  C.  X.  as  being
at  Mt.  Desert.  This  was  on  Saturday.  On  Sunday  a  message  came  from
Dr.  and  Mrs.  X.,  to  say  that  their  daughter  C.  died  on  Saturday  morning,
suddenly.  They  told  me  afterwards  that  she  had  talked  about  me  almost
the  last  thing  before  going  upstairs  on  Friday  evening.  She  was  heard
making  some  unusual  sound  at  4  A.M.  Saturday,  and  died  at  5  A.M. ;  cause,
heart  disease.

5.

[Dream  of  the  Nautilus  Fleet.]

{From  an  early  account.')

On  the  night  of  July  30,  before  her  mortal  body  had  been  removed  from
its  earthly  home,  I  had  a  symbolic  dream  of  our  friend.  ...  I  saw  a
nautilus  arise  on  the  crest  of  a  dark  wave  not  far  out  from  the  shore-line  of
the  ocean.  As  I  thoughtfully  considered  it,  apparently  from  the  nervous
centres  of  the  head  a  tiny  wand  or  arm  of  pearl  seemed  to  rise  or  grow,  at
first  quite  indistinctly.  Then  still  obscurely,  something  closely  wrapped
shaped  itself  at  the  extremity.  I  thought,  "  a  pennant  or  banner  is  about
to  unfold.11  But  no  !  Connected  as  if  by  an  invisible  silken  filament  to  the
top  of  the  white  wand  was  a  pupa  case.  Very,  very  slowly,  two  soft,  trans-
lucent wings,  also  of  white,  opened  upward.  .  .  .  Then  on  the  dark
crest  of  another  wave  rose  a  smaller  nautilus,  not  as  enchanting  in  opal-
ine tints,  then  another  and  another  till  I  ceased  numbering.  But  near  or
more  remote  from  shore  they  rose  and  fell  in  rhythmic  harmony  with  the
lapsing  waves.  Presently  a  whole  fleet  lighted  the  gloom  of  the  waters,
for  I  remember  no  moon.  But  the  fleet,  collectively  as  well  as  individually,
without  voice  or  sound,  seemed  to  be  in  recognized  and  subtle  connection
with  its  winged  leader,  the  Psyche-guided  nautilus.     There  was  no

"quiring  to  the  young-eyed  cherubim,"

but  after  an  intense  hush  in  that  luminous  darkness,  swelling  out  as  if  on


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  513

the  great  billows  of  an  organ -harmony,  a  voice  filled  all  the  listening  air,
with  these  measured  syllables :  —

"Build  thee  more  stately  mansions,  O  my  soul,

As  the  swift  seasons  roll !

Leave  thy  low-vaulted  past !
Build  each  new  temple  nobler  than  the  last,

Till  thou  at  length  art  free,
Leaving  thine  outgrown  shell  by  life's  unresting  sea ! "

I  had  many  short  slumberings  and  awakenings  before  dawn,  but  each
time  I  slept  the  picture  waited  for  a  clearer  reading,  the  same  transfigured
voice  lighted  the  darkness,  a  "  perfect  music  set  to  noble  words."  As  I
looked  out  the  next  morning  over  the  shadowy  ocean  I  recognized  the  spoken
song  of  salutation  to  The  Chambered  Nautilus  as  being  one  which  some  years
ago  brought  vital  delight  to  my  mental  chambers  of  imagery.  The  inner
memory  had  long  been  unawakened  by  even  an  echo  of  its  resounding
harmony.  It  had  lost  what  partial  verbal  occupancy  it  might  once  have
had  with  me ;   yet  in  this  dream  came  full  possession  of  its   thrilling


cadences.

[75]


[Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]


{From  Mrs.  J.  G.  W.)

1.

[Feb.  23,  1888.]

Through  June,  1871,  I  was  in  Germany.  One  afternoon  I  lay  down  upon
a  sofa  in  my  chamber.  Soon  I  was  quivering  as  if  with  grief  and  sympathy,
and  essaying  to  restrain  sobs  and  tears.  My  husband  anxiously  left  his
papers  and  came  to  minister  to  what  seemed  to  him  the  violent  chill  of  a
sudden  illness.  "  No,  no,  I  am  not  sick.  I  do  not  know  what  it  all  means,
but  something  is  happening  in  Mr.  P.'s  family.  They  all  are  so  full  of
grief,  all  are  weeping.  Oh,  I  think  some  one  is  dying  there ! " —  "  You  must
have  dropped  asleep  and  been  dreaming.  Do  not  be  so  distressed  and
shaken  over  a  dream.1'  —  "  No,  I  have  not  slept  an  instant." —  "  Did  you  see
anything  or  anybody  ?  Why  do  you  say  Mr.  P.'s  family  so  positively  are
the  friends  in  grief?  They  are  always  well." —  "  No,  I  see  nothing,  I  hear
nothing,  and  yet  it  seems  as  if  I  did."  My  husband  was  gravely  impressed
that  I  was  a  true  witness  to  a  household  sorrow  in  St.  John.

The  next  steamer  that  could  arrive,  sailing  after  that  date,  brought  us
letters  announcing  the  death  of  our  beloved  friend,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  of  St.  John,
N.B.,  and  the  papers  expressing  with  most  unusual  impressiveness  the
deep  and  general  sympathy  of  the  citizens  with  the  survivors  and  the  com-
mon sense  of  grief  and  loss  in  the  death  of  that  beloved  and  honored  woman.
I  had  intimately  known  Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.  before  their  marriage,  and  had  been
bridesmaid  at  their  wedding  nearly  twenty-six  years  before.  The  tender
friendliness  of  all  the  members  of  our  united  families  had  been  unbroken.
Every  few  weeks  or  months  some  of  them,  however  briefly,  were  in  our
Boston  home,  whenever  business  or  pleasure  called  them  to  Massachusetts.


514  Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.

In  1870  we  had  received  in  Europe  our  summons  to  the  festivities  of  their
silver  wedding,  which  hundreds  of  friends  still  sympathetically  remember.

When  we  received  the  tidings  of  Mrs.  P.'s  death  we  had  no  difficulty  in
mutually  remembering  that  the  day  of  my  occult  sympathy  was  also  the
24th,  though  neither  of  us  had  made  written  record.

Mr.  P.  and  his  son  have  now  been  visiting  us  a  week  or  two.  Last  even-
ing, just  as  Mr.  P.  was  about  to  take  the  cars  for  St.  John,  I  remembered
this  incident,  and  asked  him  if  Mr.  W.  or  myself  wrote  him  about  it  from
Germany,  or  if  he  remembered  any  corroborations.  He  said  we  did  not
write,  but  both  told  him  of  the  circumstance  when  he  came  to  see  us  on  our
return  from  Europe  the  next  winter.

The  psychological  point  is  the  quivering  sympathy  with  the  survivors
taking  on  their  states  of  desolation.  I  had  two  little  daughters  in  Boston,
but  I  positively  located  the  grief  as  visiting  Mr.  P.'s  family  in  St.  John.  I
find  Mr.  P.  does  not  want  any  publicity  of  names.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]

Boston.

2.

Boston,  Feb.  29,  1888.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson,  —  Of  course  I  will  write  to  Mr.  A.  P.,  if  you  con-
sider that  the  better  way.  But  with  the  care  you  have  to  exercise  that
corroboration  of  testimony  may  not  be  manipulated  (if  that  word  is  not
understandable  I  think  of  none  that  expresses  what  I  mean) ,  would  it  not
be  better  if  you  wrote  to  Mr.  P.,  either  briefly  giving  the  points  of  my
experience  in  Germany,  and  asking  if  they  correspond  with  what  Mr.  and
Mrs.  W.  told  him  in  January,  1872,  or  else  asking  him  for  the  few  lines
that  would  express  his  memory  of  the  occurrence.  If  I  said  Mrs.  P.  died
24  June,  1871,  I  blundered.  I  was  in  Munich  much  of  that  month,  and  at
the  time  of  writing  recalled  that  as  the  month.

But  I  was  in  Baden weiler,  Germany,  on  the  24th  of  August,  including
several  weeks  before  and  afterwards ;  and  I  am  quite  sure,  in  thinking
carefully,  that  it  was  in  Badenweiler  I  had  the  internal  consciousness  of
the  grief  in  the  P.  family,  and  that  it  was  August  24  that  Mrs.  P.  died.  Mr.
P.  is  a  man  of  unusual  thoughtf  ulness  and  common  sense  ;  he  is  very  shy  of
such  experiences,  still  does  not  scoff  at  what  he  cannot  understand.     .     .     .

(Signed)  [Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]

3.

St.  John,  March  9,  1888.
Richard   Hodgson,   Esq.,    Secretary    American    Society  for    Psychical
Research,  Boston:  —
Dear  Sir,  — Your  favor  of  the  2d  inst.  is  at  hand.

My  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.,  were  in  Europe  during  the  summer  of
1871.

My  wife  died  on  the  24th  of  August  of  that  year ;  disease,  oesophagitis.
She  expired  between  5  and  6   o'clock  P.M.     I  had  no   communication


Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Phantasms,  etc.  515

direct  with  my  friends,  I  think,  until  they  returned  home  to  Boston.  When
I  first  saw  Mrs.  W.  after  her  return,  she  informed  me  of  her  extraordi-
nary experience  and  suffering  on  a  certain  day,  which  she  communicated
to  her  husband  at  that  time,  having,  as  she  said,  a  most  vivid  and  painful
impression  that  all  was  not  well  with  us  here,  and  that  we  were  in  great
affliction  and  distress.  This  was  supposed  to  have  been  on  the  day  Mrs.
P.  departed  this  life.    Mrs.  W.  will  doubtless  give  you  fuller  particulars.

Respectfully  yours,
(Signed)  [A.  P.]


[76]  {From  Mrs.  J.  O.  W.)

1.

[Feb.  25,  1888.]

About  two  years  ago,  a  few  months  after  the  sodding  of  a  new  grave,  I
was  returning  from  Forest  Hills.  As  I  sat  in  the  back  of  the  carriage,  I
saw,  as  it  were,  in  the  air,  numberless  pansies  which  appeared  succes-
sively, and  which  I  studied  in  detail  as  they  floated  in  vision  before  me.  On
reaching  home  I  found  a  large  basket  containing  several  hundred  pansies
in  great  variety,  which  had  been  left  for  me  by  a  friend,  and  which  included
very  many  of  the  peculiar  pansies  which  I  had  seen  in  vision  on  my  way
home.

2.

On  another  occasion,  also,  when  I  was  returning  from  Forest  Hills,  I  saw
a  succession  of  flowers  called  bachelors'  buttons.  These  had  special  asso-
ciations for  me,  because  one  who  had  passed  to  the  other  world  had  bought
some  on  a  mountain  walk,  one  of  the  last  ones  we  took  together.  On
reaching  home  I  found  that  a  large  dish  of  bachelors1  buttons  had  been  left
for  me  by  a  friend,  and  every  distinctive  color  that  I  had  seen  photographed
in  the  air  had  its  representative  flower  awaiting  me.  It  was  an  old-fash-
ioned flower  that  had  bloomed  in  our  boy-and-girl  gardens.

(Signed)  [Mrs.  J.  G.  W.]


516  Comments  on  the  Cases  in  Appendix.


COMMENTS  ON  THE  CASES  RECORDED  IN  THE  AP-
PENDIX TO  THE  REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON
PHANTASMS  AND  PRESENTIMENTS.

Opinions  may  vary,  but  records  will  remain ;  and  it  has  seemed
best  to  add  to  the  more  formal  report  of  the  committee  a  large  num-
ber of  the  cases  which  have  reached  us,  reprintiDg  their  chief
documents,  and  so  setting  the  results  of  no  small  labor  on  the  part  of
our  Society's  Secretary  in  a  place  where  all  may  read.  As  to  what
these  documents  prove,  members  will  probably  not  agree.  I  frankly
confess  that  to  my  mind  most  of  them  are  serviceable  as  illustrating
mental  processes  that  do  not  lie  within  the  range  of  telepathy  nor  yet
of  clairvoyance.  But  others  may  regard  the  cases,  especially  when
thus  united,  as  of  much  evidential  value  for  the  hypothesis  of  tele-
pathy. At  all  events  I  feel  sure  that  the  list  contains  a  number  of
beautiful  instances  of  pseudo-presentiments,  as  well  as  a  number  of
fine  illustrations  of  the  difficulties  that  still  beset  our  way  in  all  these
researches.  Many  of  the  best  coincidences  are  remote  in  time,  the
most  valuable  documents  have  sometimes  been  lost,  the  telepathic
coincidences  of  very  recent  time  often  relate  to  minor  matters,
and  the  most  thrilling  dreams,  the  best  developed  spiritual  appari-
tions, have  often  not  surrounded  themselves  with  clouds  of  wit-
nesses. Nevertheless,  so  full  is  this  whole  correspondence  of  live
human  nature,  so  rich  is  our  material  in  sincerely  and  earnestly  re-
ported experiences,  in  quaint  reflections  on  the  part  of  correspond-
ents, in  well-meant  advice  given  us  by  people  of  a  philosophic  frame  of
mind,  in  cool  self-criticism  on  the  part  of  our  best  observers,  and  in
warm-hearted  credulity  on  the  part  of  not  a  few  less  cautious  people,
that  I  heartily  commend  the  whole  material  to  anybody  who  loves
psychological  curiosities  as  much  as  I  myself  do.

For  the  rest,  my  comments  here,  as  in  my  report,  are  made  on  my
own  responsibility.  If  any  reader  finds  me  sceptical  or  unsympa-
thetic or  ignorant  or  credulous,  I  hope  that  he  will  remember  that  it
is  I  who  own  these  faults,  not  the  Society.  Another  in  my  place
might  easily  do  the  work  better,  and  would  be  sure  not  to  make  the
same  comments.  Let  these  comments  therefore  be  considered,
especially  in  this  Appendix,  as  committing  nobody  but  myself.

Two  things  I  want  to  add  yet  in  general,  and  for  the  benefit  of  less
active  members  of  the  Society :  First,  I  hope  that  all  careful  people
will  be  good  enough  to  attribute  to  the  responsible  officers  of  this
Society  only  such  opinions  on  serious  questions  as  the  officers  make


Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.  517

themselves  properly  responsible  for.  The  newspaper  press  of  the
country  which,  at  the  cost  of  no  small  labor,  has  courteously  helped
us  so  much  in  our  researches,  has  also  in  some  few  cases  taken  a
certain  doubtless  good-humored  revenge  upon  us  by  reporting  from
time  to  time  all  sorts  of  marvels  as  having  been  vouched  for  by  this
or  that  officer  or  committee  of  the  Society.  Mr.  Hodgson,  who  is  a
favorite  in  these  respects,  is  made  from  time  to  lime  to  appear  in
some  Western-newspaper  article  as  a  very  magician,  and  he  seems  to
be  rapidly  becoming,  in  certain  outlying  districts  of  the  land,  a  legen-
dary person, —  a  sort  of  Doctor  Faustus.  He  transports  an  astral
body  to  and  fro,  all  but  raises  the  dead,  and  daily  confounds  Madam
Blavatsky,  with  almost  equal  facility.  Others,  to  be  sure,  have  no
such  legendary  distinctions.  For  myself  I  have  only  one  or  two
newspaper  reports  to  complain  of,  and  that  very  slightly,  in  so  far  as
these  reports  have  attributed  to  me  certain  opinions  which  I  have  never
expressed,  —  opinions  both  about  individual  cases  and  about  general
topics.  These  are  small  matters  ;  but  my  own  correspondence  has
contained  already  some  evidence  that,  small  as  they  are,  they  have
puzzled  and  misled  several  persons.  Hence  it  may  be  worth  while,
both  for  my  own  sake  and  for  that  of  some  other  officers  of  the
Society,  to  remind  readers  that  when  newspapers  mention  our  re-
searches, they  may  do  so  without  weighing  well  the  scientific  sense  of
their  words,  or  the  bearing  of  the  matter  on  our  concerns.

The  second  remark  here  is,  that  if  our  documents  prove  nothing  else,
they  prove  the  need  of  having  more  means  at  the  Society's  disposal
for  official  travelling  and  interviewing,  in  connection  with  the  careful
collection  of  good  evidence.  Some  members  of  our  body  have  inter-
vals of  comparative  leisure  at  their  disposal,  which  they  could  use  for
propagating  our  research  by  means  of  interviews  with  such  persons
as  have  reported  valuable  experiences,  were  it  not  for  the  expense  of
such  journeys.  How  very  different  might  not  Case  34  appear,  for
example,  in  the  eyes  of  a  cautious  and  sceptical  reader,  who  should
be  suspicious  of  some  hidden  source  of  error,  in  case  a  good  judge
had  personally  interviewed  all  concerned,  and  had  reported  his  im-
pression, not  only  of  their  sincerity  (for  that  need  not  be  called  for  a
moment  in  question),  but  of  their  good  judgment  in  the  matter  of  a
critical  rendering  of  precise  details  ?  I  hope  that,  if  this  research  is
to  continue,  the  Society  will  provide  ample  means  to  make  it  effective.
In  commenting  upon  the  cases  I  shall  first  speak  of  Cases  34-48,  in
order,  and  shall  then  attempt  a  more  summary  classification  of  the
remaining  cases  according  to  the  categories  suggested  in  the  body  of
my  report,  treating,  however,  one  small  set  of  cases  separately.

Case  34.  —  Here  is  a  narrative  which  the  newspapers   generally


518  Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.

have  reported  as  being  vouched  for  by  us.  For  my  own  part,  I  have
never  had  any  decided  opinion  about  the  matter  at  all.  The  sources
of  possible  error  on  Mr.  Fry's  part  are  considerable.  The  quasi-
supernatural  incident  of  the  clock  depends  on  his  own  memory.  So
far,  the  whole  might  be  a  vivid  pseudo-presentiment,  the  experience
having  its  origin  after  the  news  of  death  came.  Against  this  stands
Mrs.  Fry's  corroboration.  Experience,  however,  shows  that  after  a
few  months,  so  simple  a  corroboration  as  this  one,  "  My  husband
told  me,  early  Monday  morning,  of  the  voice  in  the  clock,"  is  rather
easily  obtainable  from  any  moderately  uncritical  and  friendly  member
of  a  family,  who  has  again  and  again  discussed  the  great  marvel  with
its  original  hero.  More  important  is  the  reported  coincidence  between
the  words  of  the  clock-vision,  "  I'm  gone,  I'm  gone!"  and  the  re-
ported dying  words  of  Mr.  Fry's  brother.  For  Mr.  Fry  is  said  to
have  reported  these  words  before  he  had  received  anything  but  the
telegram  announcing  the  death,  and  were  the  vision  only  a  pseudo-
presentiment,  such  a  coincidence  would  seem  unlikely.  However,  the
evidence  for  this  coincidence  is  apparently  only  Mr.  Fry's  already
well-convinced  memory,  the  uncritical  testimony  of  a  reporter  who  is
probably  no  expert  in  evidence,  and  Mr.  Criswell's  personal  opinion
that  the  whole  is  as  reported.

I  do  not  wish  to  seem  lacking  in  cordiality,  nor  unthankful  for  the
trouble  which  Mr.  Criswell  has  so  kindly  taken ;  but  it  is  my  duty
to  state  difficulties,  and,  for  the  moment,  without  fuller  corroborative
evidence  that  Mr.  Fry  told  his  vision  in  the  reported  form  before  its
verification,  and  that  the  dying  words  were  repeated  by  him  to  the
reporter  before  confirmation,  I  must  think  it  very  possible  that  the
real  experience  was  a  vivid,  sincere,  and  irresistible  pseudo-presenti-
ment of  the  sort  described  in  my  report.  Further  evidence  may
indeed  entirely  alter  this  view.  So  far  as  I  know,  no  member  of  my
committee  has  ever  u  vouched  for  "  this  case.

#Case  35.  —  The  reported  coincidence  seems  to  me  here  somewhat
unsatisfactory,  owing  to  ordinary  dangers  of  error  which  attend  all
reports  from  memory.  The  related  experience  of  M.  O.  A.,  taken
alone,  might  have  been,  notwithstanding  the  actual  fall  of  the  clock-
weight,  a  partial  pseudo-presentiment;  i.e.,  a  false  memory,  which
localized  itself  about  a  real  event,  namety,  the  fall  of  the  weight.  If
the  corroborative  evidence,  however,  contains  no  other  errors  of
memory,  and  is  therefore  accepted  as  establishing  the  coincidence,
then  the  latter  was  doubtless  caused  by  a  more  or  less  well-founded
fear  of  the  uncle's  death.    At  all  events,  the  case  leaves  me  sceptical.

Case  36.  —  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  reality  of  the  coincidence,
which  is,  however,  probably  to  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  Mr.  W.


Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.  519

•

S.  H.  knew,  as  he  says  in  Document  4,  that  the  person  of  whom  he
dreamed  was  ill.

The  following  additional  statements  concerning  this  case  have  only
recently  come  to  hand  :  —

9.

Florida,  Jan.  14,  1889.
Mr.  Wm.  No  yes,  New  York  :  —

Dear  Cousin,  —  Yours  of  January  9  to  hand  this  evening.  Will  say
in  reply  the  C.'s  are  now  living  a  little  over  a  mile  away  and  in  a  direction
that  I  seldom  go  except  when  I  go  to  call  upon  them.  I  will  try  and  get
down  their  way  at  an  early  date  and  see  how  much  they  remember  about
my  dream.  I  do  not  expect  to  get  much  from  them,  however,  as  they  are
remarkably  forgetful,  and  as  I  take  little  interest  in  dreams,  I  little  more
than  mentioned  the  fact  to  them  the  morning  after,  at  breakfast,  and  again
when  I  got  the  letter  announcing  her  death.  I  know  nothing  of  the  detail
of  your  mother's  removal,  and  would  be  pleased  to  know  if  there  was  any-
thing about  the  dream,  as  described  in  a  former  letter,  that  is  anywhere
near  the  truth,  outside  of  the  mere  fact  of  her  death  occurring  about * that
time.

One  of  the  main  reasons  why  C.  was  not  of  sufficient  use  to  me  to  remain
in  my  employ  was  because  he  was  so  forgetful ;  but  he  is  thoroughly  honest,
a  Quaker  in  good  standing,  and  whatever  he  does  say  can  be  relied  upon.
When  I  wrote  you  last  about  the  matter  I  asked  him  and  his  wife  if  they
remembered  the  circumstance  and  they  said  that  they  did.     .     .     .

W.  S.  H.

Will  go  down  to  C.'s  to-morrow  night,  if  not  too  tired,  and  write  you  for
next  day's  mail.  Am  glad  to  give  you  any  help  I  can  in  the  investigation,
and  regret  that  I  haven't  more  facts  to  offer.  What  I  have,  however,  arc
absolute  facts,  without  any  uncertainty  about  them.

WILL.

10.

Florida,  Jan.  25,  1889.
Mr.  Wm.  No  yes,  New  York:  —

Dear  Cousin,  — I  went  down  to  C.'s  the  next  evening  after  I  wrote  you,
and  he  said  he  would  make  out  a  statement  and  send  it  to  me  the  next
morning.  I  waited  two  or  three  days,  then  sent  for  it,  and  he  promised
once  more  to  send  it  to  me.  I  ran  across  him  here  at  the  post-office  to-day,
and  having  my  fountain-pen  and  some  paper  along,  I  got  him  at  it,  and  I
enclose  the  result.  I  let  him  make  his  statement  without  assistance  on  my
part,  and  it  can  be  relied  upon.  His  delay  was  caused  by  the  forgetf  ulness
that  I  spoke  of,  but  I  hope  this  may  come  to  hand  in  time  to  answer  your
purpose.     I  got  quite  a  long  letter  from  your  father  a  few  days  ago.

Yours  hastily,

W.  S.  H.


520  Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.

11.

Jan.  25,  1889.

By  request  of  Mr.  W.  S.  H.  I  will  state  that  I  fully  remember  of  his
coming  to  the  breakfast-table  oue  morning  and  relating  to  myself  and  wife
the  particulars  of  a  dream  he  had  had  the  previous  night,  in  which  he  said
he  had  seen  his  aunt,  Mrs.  Noyes,  laid  out  as  if  dead,  in  a  room  which  he
also  described,  also  other  particulars  which  I  do  not  recall  now,  but  some
days  after  he  received  a  letter  giving  an  account  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  Noyes
at  the  time  of  his  dream.  We  talked  about  it  considerable  at  the  time,  but
since  then  most  of  the  particulars  have  passed  from  my  mind.

Respectfully,

E.  S.  C.

Case  37.  — This  reported  coincidence  as  to  the  "  Cambria  "  would
be  of  great  value  for  the  discussion  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis,
were  it  not  for  the  lapse  of  time  since  the  occurrence,  and  the  con-
sequent meagreness  of  the  evidence.  "What  would  we  not  give  for
a  hundred  such  coincidences,  recent  in  time,  and  verified  by  abundant
evidence  ?

Case  38.  —  The  documents  in  this  case  are  well  worth  reading,  as
illustrating  more  than  one  interesting  feature  of  our  investigation.
One  of  the  corroborating  witnesses  remembers  that  he  heard  the
dream  "  four  or  five  years"  ago  (see  Document  2,  last  portion).
The  dream,  whose  coincidence  with  the  event  he  was  to  corroborate,
occurred,  however,  in  1873.  Such  is  the  human  memory  !  The  actual
experience  may  once  more  be  interpreted  as  possibly  a  pseudo-presen-
timent. "  I  then  for  the  first  time  recognized  the  man  in  my  dream,"
says  our  correspondent,  speaking  of  the  moment  when  the  dream  was
verified.  The  vision  of  Miss  Florence  Boram  is  an  interesting  sub-
jective hallucination  of  a  familiar  type.  Our  correspondent's  rela-
tion of  Mrs.  Boram's  opinion  of  the  work  of  our  Society  has  its  own
charm,  and  should  be  remembered.  We  hope  that  Mr.  Boram's
fears  of  a  shortening  of  his  days  may  prove  unfounded,  and  that  he
may  long  remain  within  the  jurisdiction  of  our  Society.

The  coincidences  reported  in  Cases  39  and  40  call  for  no  comment
beyond  what  every  reader  may  make  for  himself.

Case  41. — The  remembered  experience  is  extremely  vivid  and
elaborate,  and  accordingly  has  its  strong  psychological  interest,
although,  in  view  of  the  loss  of  the  confirmatory  letters,  I  am  now
unable  to  find  this  interest  elsewhere  than  in  the  illustration  which  the
case  seems  to  me  to  furnish  of  the  dangerously  plastic  power  of
memory  when  sufficiently  affected  by  strong  sentiment.  I  need  not
add  that  it  is  of  the  greatest  value  to  everybody  to  learn  just  how
far  this  plastic  power  really  extends,  and  that  the  whole  subject  is


Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.  521

still  in  its  infancy,  so  that  every  new  illustration  is  instructive.
Others  may  find  here,  of  course,  something  far  more  than  I  do.

Case  42.  —  Here  is  a  sporadic  experience  of  a  type  worth  record-
ing, although  it  surely  suggests  no  theoretic  connections  just  now,
and  is  interesting  mainly  because  it  is  sporadic,  and  is  apparently  not
associated  with  any  superstitious  beliefs  of  a  general  sort.

Of  Case  43,  much  the  same  might  be  said,  with  the  special  addition
that  the  story  has,  of  course,  not  precisely  suffered  during  "the
twelve  years  during  which  we  have  often  told  it  in  each  other's  pres-
ence." However,  the  diary  extract  of  1872  establishes  the  essential
facts.  What  happened  may  of  course  have  been  simply  the  pres-
ence of  some  unexplained  but  fleshly  man  on  the  stairway  at  the  time
in  question.  He  was  mistaken  for  another  man,  himself  not  per-
sonally known  to  Mrs.  G.  The  mistake  once  made,  the  rest  soon
follows,  and  it  is  greatly  to  the  credit  of  the  coolness  and  good
judgment  of  our  correspondent  that  during  as  much  as  twelve  years
her  ghost  has  been  kept  so  modest  and  unassuming  a  being  as  he
here  appears.  Ghosts  twelve  years  old  are  usually  much  livelier
than  this.  We  are  much  obliged  to  our  correspondent  for  her  con-
tribution.

In  the  interesting  Case  44,  the  two  informants  differ  as  to  the
state  of  the  dreamer's  health  at  the  time.  The  dreamer  regarded
herself  as  perfectly  healthy,  while  Miss  W.  thought  her  excited,  and
suffering  from  nervous  prostration.  The  dreamer  is  sure  that  she
herself  laughed  at  the  warning,  and  that  Miss  W.  was  made  anxious
on  hearing  of  it.  Miss  W.  is  sure  of  the  reverse  of  this  relation.
In  view  of  these  discrepancies  there  must  be  some  doubt  whether
the  dream  was  not  a  pseudo-presentiment,  exaggerated  by  ordinary
errors  of  memory  into  something  more.

Case  45  is  almost  unquestionably  a  pure  instance  of  a  vivid
pseudo-presentiment.

Case  46,  which  is  printed  verb,  et  lit.  as  we  received  it,  contains
in  its  first  document  a  contribution  to  divine  philosophy  from  a
sincere  friend,  and  we  only  hope  that  our  readers  may  enjoy  it  as
heartily  as  we  do.  The  confirmation  of  a  matter  of  fact  in  Docu-
ment 2  is  meanwhile  of  genuine  and  decided  value.  Enough  more
cases  of  this  kind  might  truly  help  us  far  on  the  way  towards  the
telepathic  doctrine.  Meanwhile,  at  all  events,  no  one  will  see  any
room  for  my  favorite  pseudo-presentiments  here.  I  must  indeed
admit  an  interesting  coincidence  as  probably  established.

Cases  47  and  48  are  also  important  and  probably  established  co-
incidences.    In  both  cases  the  general  character  of  our  informants


522  Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.

gives   added   weight   to   their  judgment,    and   plausibility   to   their
memories.

The  remaining  cases  will  be  dealt  with  in  three  groups.  I  follow
the  classification  of  the  report,  but  shall  make  an  exception  as  to  the
narratives  furnished  us  by  our  correspondent  Prof.  E.  W.  C.

Prof.  E.  W.  C.'s  Cases.

The  cases  referred  to  are  Nos.  49,  50,  58,  59,  and  60.

The  special  interest  of  the  group  arises  from  the  fact  that  one  of  the
coincidences  for  which  the  evidence  is  documentary,  namely,  Case  22  in  the
foregoing  report,  comes  to  us  from  the  same  source,  and  also  because  all
these  cases,  including  the  documentary  one,  represent  experiences  occur-
ring in  one  family,  —  that  of  the  wife  of  our  correspondent.  As  I  have
remarked  in  the  report,  experiences  of  an  apparently  telepathic  sort,  as
well  as  supposed  forewarnings,  seem  characteristic  of  the  family  in  ques-
tion ;  and  at  the  same  time  these  experiences  suggest  to  me,  for  the  most
part,  the  hypothesis  of  chance  coincidence,  or  of  pseudo-presentiment,  or
of  a  combination  of  the  two.  Considerable  value  will  be  given  to  these
instances,  however,  in  the  eyes  of  many,  by  the  very  fact  that  one  of  the
coincidences  is  so  well  established.  Others,  like  myself,  may  feel,  on  the
contrary,  that  the  fact  of  such  repeated  dreams  and  presentiments  relating
to  persons  of  the  same  family  indicates  a  predisposition  to  expect  re-
markable events,  which  renders  occasional  coincidences  less  surprising.
I  begin  the  comments  on  these  narratives  by  calling  attention  to  Case  50.

Here,  in  the  first  place,  a  dream  about  an  expected  baby,  even  a  month
in  advance,  is  not  remarkable  ;  and,  as  to  the  further  coincidence,  the  pos-
sibilities were  but  two.  Against  the  hypothesis  of  pseudo-presentiment  is
the  corroboration  of  Mrs.  C,  to  whom  her  own  mother  shall  have  related
the  experience.  Opinions  must  differ  as  to  the  evidential  value  of  this
corroboration.  Of  its  sincerity  there  is  indeed  not  the  least  doubt.  But
the  family  are  once  for  all  sure  that  they  frequently  have  such  experiences.
I  think  it  very  possible  that  this  assurance  may  have  had  its  origin  in  fre-
quent pseudo-presentiments,  so  that  I  do  indeed  regard  it  as  founded  upon
something  much  deeper  than  any  ordinary  "  fancifulness,"  or  "  imagina-
tive tendencies.'"  Still,  the  assurance  once  established,  there  can  be  no
question  but  that  it  would  greatly  influence  the  interpretation  and  memoiy
of  individual  incidents.

Another  effect  of  the  same  a  priori  assurance  seems  to  me  probably
illustrated  in  Case  49.  Mr.  J.  T.  leaves  home  after  a  period  during  which
he  had  been  frequently  awakened  at  night  by  the  call  of  his  sister  to  aid  in
the  care  of  a  patient,  also  his  sister.  During  his  absence  the  customary
call  at  night  haunts  him,  apparently  in  his  dreams ;  and  his  general  belief
that  such  feelings  are  indicative  of  trouble  at  home  makes  him  return  just
in  time  to  find  his  mother  ill.  To  my  mind  the  indications  are  that  he
would  have  returned  in  any  case,  his  anxiety  being  due  to  the  previous
illness  in  the  family,  and  not  to  anything  telepathic.


Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.  523

Case  58  I  regard  as  a  pseudo-presentiment.  The  corroboration  by  Miss
T.  conies  thirteen  years  after  the  event,  and  is  insufficient  to  characterize
the  case.  The  letter  of  Mrs.  C,  dated  Sept.  25,  1874,  is  most  excellent
evidence  of  the  reality  and  vividness  of  the  experience.  But  observe  the
order  in  which  she  relates  the  facts  in  this  letter.  The  letter  had  been
interrupted,  and  is  continued  immediately  after  dinner.  "Now,"  says
Mrs.  C,  "  now  my  thoughts  are  scattered."  The  cause  of  this  scattering
is  the  brother's  story,  to  which  Mrs.  C.  at  once  adds  the  memory  of  her
dream  and  of  the  scene  at  the  breakfast-table  in  the  morning.  So  rapid
and  definite  a  hallucination  of  memory  as  this  would  indeed  seem  ante-
cedently improbable  were  it  not  for  the  numerous  other  cases  of  a  similar
type  which  we  have  now  collected,  and  especially  for  the  other  instances
of  a  closely  analogous  sort  which  are  given  us  by  Cases  59  and  60.

Case  59  is  very  clearly  a  pseudo-presentiment.  That  the  dream  of  the
railway  accident  was  related  to  Mrs.  C.'s  sister  at  once  is  an  incident  de-
pendent for  its  accuracy  only  upon  a  long-established  belief  of  memory.
The  corroboration  of  Miss  T.  may  be  perfectly  accurate  as  regards  the
fact  of  Mrs.  C.'s  "  circumstantial  account,"  but,  as  Miss  T.  says,  the  whole
affair  is  too  remote  in  time  to  give  the  evidence  as  to  the  time  when  the
dream  was  narrated  any  great  weight.  Case  60  brings  better  corroboration
for  the  coincidence ;  yet  here,  too,  I  fully  believe  that  we  have  only  a
pseudo-presentiment.  Here  once  more  Mrs.  C.  dreamed  of  an  accident  at
a  distance,  and  is  said  to  have  narrated  the  dream,  in  advance  of  news,  to
two  persons.  Of  these,  one  (again  Miss  T.)  gives  a  rather  imperfect  cor-
roboration, eleven  years  after  the  event.  In  Miss  T.'s  words,  Mrs.  C.
'.'  had  been  to  the  camp  in  her  dream,  and  gave  a  circumstantial  account  of
the  boys,  as  they  were  at  the  moment  of  her  dream,  which,  I  am  sorry  to
say,  I  forget.  But  the  truth  of  it  all  was  quickly  verified."  Prof.  E.  W.
C.  himself  did  not  know  of  the  "dream"  until  its  "fulfilment"  was
known  to  Mrs.  C.  But  his  corroboration  as  given  in  his  words,  "  On  our
return  we  were  surprised  by  the  absence  of  all  appearance  of  astonishment
at  our  premature  return,  until  we  learned  of  the  dream,"  has,  of  course,  a
decided  value ;  but  still  I  think  that  the  presumption  is  in  favor  of  my
own  explanation.

In  view  of  the  facts  brought  out  in  this  analysis,  I  conceive  that  all  these
family  experiences,  while  psychologically  very  interesting,  have  a  com-
paratively simple  origin.  Mrs.  C.'s  family  contains  several  impressionable
persons.  They  are  apparently  not  at  all  superstitious  ;  they  are  not  "  fan-
tastic "  people,  in  the  common  sense ;  they  make  no  system  out  of  these
singular  occurrences.  But,  in  fact,  after  noteworthy  events  they  occasion-
ally experience  vivid  and  typical  pseudo-presentiments.  Failing  —  as,  of
course,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  they  must  fail  —  to  understand  this
phenomenon,  they  become  somewhat  disposed  to  expect  similar  warnings
in  future.  Hence  they  are  apt  to  lay  undue  stress  on  the  anxieties  which
separated  members  of  the  same  family  so  frequently  experience.  The
same  tendency  may  affect  their  dreams.  Hence,  finally,  occasional  coinci-
dences of  an  undoubted  sort  may  result.  In  short,  one's  dreams  cry  "  wolf  "
till  the  wolf  comes.     In  my  report  I  have  laid  considerable  stress  upon  the


524  Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.

documentary  coincidence  of  Mr.  J.  T.,  but  our  documentary  cases  are  so
rare  as  to  render  a  little  rejoicing  over  one  recovered  sheep  very  natural.

Of  the  remaining  cases  on  my  list,  I  shall  treat,  first,  the  probable
pseudo-presentiments ;  secondly,  the  apparent  coincidences.


Supplementary  Pseudo-Presentiments.

As  before  indicated,  the  mere  presence  of  a  general  corroboration  from
some  sincere  witness,  who  says,  some  time  after  the  event,  "I  feel  sure
that  I  heard  M.  W.  narrate  the  dream  just  as  he  now  says  he  did,"  is  not
sufficient  to  render  the  hypothesis  of  a  pseudo-presentiment  as  improbable
as  telepathy,  or  as  true  forewarning  would  be,  especially  if  other  circum-
stances of  the  case,  such  as  the  momentary  nervous  excitability  of  the
subject,  suggest  strongly  the  possibility  of  an  abnormal  experience.  Such
indications,  of  course,  exist  in  any  case  occurring  on  the  border-land  of
sleep.  Case  51  (c)  seems  to  me  an  instance  that  would  excellently  illus-
trate our  hypothesis,  if,  after  this  lapse  of  time,  it  could  be  well  reported.
As  it  comes  to  me,  I  very  much  doubt  whether  the  mother  or  the  daughter
was  the  true  dreamer.  One  wakes  and  says  to  the  other,  "I  dreamed  so
and  so;11  and  the  other  says,  "Why,  I  just  dreamed  that,  too!"  Which
was  first  on  the  ground  I  do  not  know.

I  regard  Cases  52  and  53,  notwithstanding  the  corroboration,  as  probably
falling  in  the  same  class.  In  Case  54,  the  corroboration  of  the  coincidence
would  make  our  hypothesis  inapplicable  if  the  letter  mentioned  could  be
recovered.  As  it  is  not  forthcoming,  I  have  no  decided  opinion  of  the  case.
Case  57  is  well  reported,  and  is  probably  a  combination  of  a  slight  coinci-
dence with  a  strong  after-feeling  that  the  coincidence  must  have  been
important.  Mr.  Krebs  feels  that  his  friend's  forgetfulness  about  the  de-
gree of  the  coincidence  is  "  astonishing."  The  experience  is  not  a  typical
pseudo-presentiment,  but  rather  an  instance  of  a  more  familiar  phenome-
non; viz.,  the  almost  irresistible  exaggeration  of  the  importance  of  a
remembered  emotion,  when  subsequent  events  give  that  emotion  signifi-
cance.

The  experience  reported  in  Case  61  seems  to  have  belonged  to  our  class,
but  I  give  it  a  place  in  the  supplement,  not  so  much  on  this  account  as
because  of  the  charming  ncCivet'e  of  the  account.  In  Case  62  it  is  impossible
to  tell  how  far  ordinary  errors  of  memory  have  affected  the  narrative ;
e.g.,  how  far  our  correspondent's  judgment  of  the  character  of  her  fellow-
passengers  on  the  steamer  may  have  been  responsible  for  the  so-called
warning.  Still,  the  case  may  fall  within  our  present  class.  In  Case  63
we  have  four  dreams  reported.  The  first  is  too  remote  in  time  to  have  any
present  significance  under  the  circumstances.  The  second  and  third  are
almost  obviously  pseudo-presentiments,  and  in  the  fourth  case,  notwith-
standing that  the  corroboration  rests  upon  a  comparatively  recent  memory,
I  am  disposed  to  accept  the  same  explanation.

Further  cases  that  are  almost  certainly  of  the  present  type  I  find  in  64,
66,  and  68  (a  most  typical  and  excellent  instance,  notwithstanding  the  lapse


Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix.  525

of  lime).  With  Case  69,  however,  we  reach  what  not  only  illustrates  our
hypothesis,  but  constitutes  also  a  very  important  piece  of  autobiographical
psychology  from  a  professional  man  of  distinction  in  the  Provinces.
Judge  Travis  is  an  author  known  both  in  his  own  profession  and  beyond  it.
His  account  has  to  do  mainly  with  experiences  of  a  rather  long-past  date,
but  that  fact  itself  is  important,  as  it  indicates  that  his  typical  pseudo-pre-
sentiments were  confined  to  a  period  which  he  himself  is  able  to  limit  to
his  youth  and  early  manhood.  The  fever-delirium  of  childhood,  which  he
last  mentions,  is  of  a  type  well  known.  Cases  of  the  sort  are  described
occasionally  in  the  text-books.1  Ever  since  that  experience,  our  corre-
spondent has  had  an  unsystematized  but  decided  tendency  to  regard  his  life
as  the  realization  of  a  sort  of  fate  of  which  he  had  been  warned.  From
the  age  of  sixteen  until  the  period  of  the  experience  of  1856,  typical  pseudo-
presentiments  were  frequent  with  him,  and  were  often  very  precise,  clear,
and  irresistible.  I  attribute  them  to  no  ordinary  form  of  "  imagination."
They  were  simply  irresistible  and  instantaneous  hallucinations,  occur-
ring in  a  state  of  general  good  health,  but  to  a  man  who  worked  much  with
his  brain,  who  was  a  frequent  dreamer  at  night,  and  who  met  at  every
stage  of  his  life  with  "violent  opposition,"  and  had  to  make  "almost
superhuman  exertions."  Since  he  reached  a  more  settled  period  of  life,
our  correspondent  seems  to  have  been  fairly  free  from  these  lightly  patho-
logical phenomena.  In  character,  while  they  lasted,  they  sometimes  very
strongly  differed  from  the  ordinary  experiences  of  "double  memory,"  in
that  the  "previous  occurrence"  whereby  our  correspondent  had  been
warned  was  localized — as  in  case  of  the  events  of  1856  —  at  some  par-
ticular point  in  the  recent  past.  In  other  cases,  the  pseudo-presentiments
seem  to  have  resembled  more  fully  the  ordinary  "  double  memory"  itself.
They  were  accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  "  shock."  They  were  induced,  in
the  special  case  of  1856,  by  a  painful  piece  of  news.  In  other  cases,  the
superinducing  cause  was  slight,  and  the  sensitive  nervous  state  of  an  over-
worked young  man  of  literary  habits  seems  to  have  been  their  main  con-
dition. In  short,  if  I  had  no  other  facts  to  illustrate  my  hypothesis  than
those  which  Judge  Travis  furnishes,  I  should  be  fairly  sure  that  pseudo-
presentiments  are  real  occurrences,  just  as,  if  we  had  no  evidence  of  the
psychological  importance  of  "insistent  ideas"  than  John  Bunyan's  Auto-
biography, "  Grace  Abounding  to  the  Chief  of  Sinners,"  we  should  be  cer-
tain of  their  great  significance.

Case  70  contains  a  most  charming  pseudo-presentiment,  which  needs  no
further  comment.  I  place  the  experiences  of  Case  71  also  in  the  present
category,  but  with  some  decided  doubts,  owing  to  the  comparative  fulness
of  the  corroborating  memories.  In  Case  76,  a  correspondent  whose
experiences,  as  detailed  in  Cases  74  and  75,  have  usually  had  much  more
elaboration,  relates  two  instances  of  what  I  take  to  be  very  simple  forms
of  typical  pseudo-presentiment.

i  ••  Warfare  of  the  good  and  evil  principles  in  hallucinations,"  Schtile :  Klinische  Psychiatrie,
p.  184.      Visions  of  contending  good  and  evil  spirits,  ibid.,  p.  186  and  elsewhere.


526  Comments  on  the   Cases  in  Appendix,

Remaining  Cases.

My  method  of  dealing  with  cases  has  now  been  so  fully  illustrated  that  I
should  prefer  to  leave  the  reader  to  judge  for  himself,  the  most  part,  both
why  the  remaining  cases  have  a  genuine  psychological  value,  and  why
they  do  not  seem  to  me  sufficient  to  convince  any  very  critical  observer  of
the  reality  either  of  telepathy  or  of  more  obscure  matters.  If  by  •'  emu-
lating the  Seybert  Commission  "  the  writer  of  the  letter  given  in  Case  56
means  ridiculing  anybody's  faith,  or  suppressing  evidence,  as  I  suppose  he
does  mean,  then,  while  I  have  here  no  opinion  to  pass  on  the  Seybert
Commission,  I  must  certainly  assure  our  correspondent,  and  all  other
persons,  that  I  have  no  such  intention.  I  am  not  convinced,  to  be  sure,  of
his  interpretation  of  his  own  experience ;  but  I  am  glad  to  publish  his
letter,  and  to  commend  it  to  the  attention  of  all  students  of  psychology.
Cases  51  (a)  and  51  (b)  illustrate  the  very  baffling  character  of  some  of  our
narratives.  The  corroboration  is  considerable ;  but  without  more  time  than
we  have  yet  had  to  give  to  the  work  of  interviewing  our  correspondents,  it
is  very  hard  to  judge  of  the  degree  of  erroneous  memory  that  may  have
affected  the  accuracy  of  the  narratives.  In  Case  65,  one  finds  how  easy  it
is  to  feel  as  if  the  most  ordinary  dream-coincidence  possible  were  of  some
deeper  significance.  August  17,  one  dreams  of  a  birth  expected  at  any  time
after  August  20,  and  dreams  that  the  baby  weighs  nine  pounds  and  is  a  girl.
The  dream  is  verified.  I  make  here  no  supposition  of  pseudo-presentiment.
It  should  be  added  that  our  correspondent  herself  has  serious  doubts
whether  the  coincidence  is  of  any  value.  But  I  print  the  case  mainly
because  there  are  people  who  are  apt  to  have  no  doubts,  and  to  regard  such
cases  with  great  wonder.

Cases  74  and  75  are  from  a  very  well  known  correspondent  and  a  friend
of  our  work,  a  lady  of  the  highest  character,  and  of  the  ability,  which  her
writing  clearly  indicates.  I  regard  her  communications  with  no  small
interest.  In  Case  76,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  see  pseudo-presentiments.
Of  the  decidedly  complex  phenomena  of  the  other  cases,  I  can  offer  no
present  explanation.

I  close  a  long  task  of  analysis  and  comparison  with  a  strong  feeling  that
without  the  constant  aid  of  Mr.  Hodgson,  my  work  would  have  proved  far
too  much  for  my  leisure  and  strength.    I  offer  him  my  hearty  thanks.

JOSIAH  ROYCE.


Addenda  to  Cases  24,  28,  36,  56.  527


ADDENDA   TO   CASES   24,  28,  36,  56.

Case  24.  —  From  additional  documents  that  have  just  come  to  hand,  it
would  appear  that  the  dream  of  Mrs.  H.  must  have  occurred  a  week  or
ten  days  before  the  accident  which  happened  to  Mr.  W.  T.  H.  Mr.  H.
wrote  on  Jan.  22,  1889,  that  he  had  learned  the  exact  date  of  his  accident,
and  in  a  letter  of  February  10  to  Mrs.  H.,  he  states  this  to  be  Aug.  19,
1869,  at  12.40  A.M.  In  a  letter  to  the  secretary,  of  Feb.  22,  1889,  Mr.  H.
states  that  "the  date  of  accident  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  two  inde-
pendent records  made  by  different  persons  on  the  day  of  its  occurrence."
The  original  document  referred  to  on  p.  401  is  dated  Aug.  19, 1869,  and  re-
fers to  Mrs.  H.'s  letter  "  of  the  13th,"  before  which  date,  therefore,  Mrs.
H.'s  dream  must  have  occurred.  The  case  is  instructive,  as  regards  both
the  weakness  of  testimony  depending  on  mere  memory,  and  the  difficulties
that  meet  us  in  our  inquiries,  and  we  hope  to  obtain  permission  to  publish
all  the  details  in  a  future  number  of  the  Proceedings.  What  at  first  sight
gave  promise  of  being  a  well-established  case  of  actual  coincidence  has  its
chief  importance  now  as  illustrating  the  dangers  against  which  we  have
to  guard  in  dealing  with  the  testimony  presented  to  us.

Case  28. — We  learn  from  one  of  our  members,  Mr.  George  Pellew,
that  the  city  surveyor  of  Camden,  N.J.,  gives  1,880  feet  as  the  distance
"by  an  airline  from  805  Broadway  to  the  rear  entrance  of  City  Hall."
"  From  805  Broadway  northward  to  north  side  Washington  street
[which  ought  to  have  been  marked  on  the  plan,  see  p.  411,  between  Berke-
ley and  Benson  streets],  eastward  from  Broadway  to  east  side  Seventh
street  and  northward  to  rear  entrance  City  Hall  (being  the  route  taken  by
one  on  foot)  is  2,570  feet.  By  carriage  would  be  a  trifle  less,  owing  to
corners  turned."

Case  36.  —  (See,  also,  pp.  519,  520.)  We  have  just  received  from  Dr.
Wm.  Noyes  a  sketch  of  the  room  in  which  his  mother  died,  and  also  the
sketch  of  another  room  to  which  the  body  was  removed.  Neither  sketch
bears  any  resemblance  to  the  sketch  given  by  Mr.  W.  S.  H.

Case  56.  —  The  following  letter  has  been  received  from  the  son  of
Dr.  S.  F.  Deane.  He  corroborates  Dr.  Deane's  account  as  to  the  crisis  of
the  wife's  illness,  but  it  will  be  observed  that  he  gives  the  year  as  1870 ;
the  year  in  Dr.  Deane's  account  is  1871  —  a  difference  which  can  be
accounted  for  without  assuming  any  extraordinary  lapse  of  memory :  —

Valparaiso,  Neb.,  Feb.  21,  1889.
Richard  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass.:  —

Dear  Sir,  —  Yours  of  January  21  was  duly  received,  and  I  have
neglected  replying  chiefly  because  I  am  not  cognizant  of  any  facts  that


528         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

appear  to  me  of  material  importance  in  the  case  to  which  you  refer.  I
can  only  say  that  my  mother  was  sick  in  Wisconsin,  either  in  March  or
April,  1870,  and  that  at  one  time  we  thought  she  was  dying;  that  she
rallied  from  this  "  sinking  spell,"  and  finally  recovered  her  usual  health;
and  also  that  at  that  time  my  father,  Dr.  S.  F.  Deane,  was  in  this  State.

Yours  very  truly,

D.  M.  DEANE.


ON  SOME  OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  TELEPATHY.

Professor  James,  in  his  note  to  Professor  Minot's  Report  on  the
Diagram  Tests,  speaks  of  the  "  exceedingly  strong  presumption  in  favor
of  thought-transference  which  the  English  reports  establish,"  whereas
it  will  be  evident  that  Professor  Minot  regards  that  presumption  as
exceedingly  weak.  Professor  James  seems  inclined  to  suggest  that
such  a  difference  of  view  will  be,  in  part,  dependent  upon  the  precon-
ceptions of  the  reader  of  the  English  reports,  "  as  to  the  likelihood
of  the  phenomena  and  the-  competence  of  the  observers."  This  is
undoubtedly  the  case,  and  I  think  it  opportune  to  call  attention  here
more  specifically  to  one  important  but  little  noticed  result  of  the
bias  against  Telepathy,  all  the  more  important  because  it  is  insidi-
ous. Not  only  do  the  preconceptions  of  the  reader  affect  his  esti-
mate of  the  evidence  upon  its  first  presentation,  but  the}'  affect  that
estimate  itself  of  the  evidence  in  recollection,  so  that  what  at  first
sight  may  appear  to  be  a  substantially  valuable  (even  if  incon-
clusive) series  of  experiments,  is  regarded  after  a  few  months'
interval  as  entirely  trifling  and  unsatisfactory ;  precautions  enumer-
ated by  the  experimenters  are  forgotten  ;  the  old  theories  resume
their  sway,  and  it  is  hard  for  the  alleged  facts  to  regain  any  atten-
tive consideration.  The, bias  against  hast}'  generalization,  or  against
a  too  ready  belief  in  new  causal  relations,  is  of  course  a  healthy  one,
and  its  advantages  are  obvious  ;  but  it  frequently  becomes  morbid,
and  degenerates  into  prejudice,  and  the  disappreciation  of  an
opponent's   views   is   then   very  easy.

I  make  these  somewhat  trite  remarks  because  I  wish  to  distinguish
clearly  between  that  kind  of  bias  which  leads  to  positive  misconcep-
tion and  the  bias  which  it  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to  avoid  when
estimating  the  value  of  testimony  to  so-called  supernormal  phenom-
ena, the  justification  for  which,  on  one  side  or  the  other,  must  be  left
to  the  ultimate  verdict  from  scientific  exploration.  Where  the
bias  is  of  the  latter  kind  only,  it  is  well  to  recognize  with  respect
the  differing  opinion  of  another  concerning  the  value  of  evidence  for


On  Some  Objections  to  the   Theory  of  Telepathy.        529

this  or  that  class  of  phenomena ;  but  where  the  bias  is  so  extreme
as  to  lead  to  an  erroneous  representation  of  that  evidence,  it  is  highly
desirable  that  the  mistakes  involved  should  be  plainly  pointed  out.
It  is  hard  for  telepathy  to  get  a  patient  hearing  before  the  majority
of  scientific  men,  who  are  content,  for  the  most  part,  to  read  the
criticism  which  others  of  their  number  pass  upon  the  records,  rarely
consulting  those  records  for  themselves  at  all,  and  still  more  rarely
recurring  to  them  for  the  purpose  of  estimating  the  validity  of  any
fresh  piece  of  criticism.  These  considerations  impel  me  to  enter  the
general  controversy  concerning  telepathy,  not,  I  need  hardly  say,  in
the  hope  of  producing  conviction,  but  in  the  hope  of  helping  to  clear
the  issues,  — which,  after  all,  is  the  main  good  of  controversy.

And  first,  I  shall  refer  briefly  to  some  general  misapprehensions
which  occur  towards  the  close  of  Prof.  G.  Stanley  Hall's  painstaking
and  suggestive  review  {The  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  Vol.
I.,  No.  1)  of  the  experiments  reported  in  the  English  Proceedings,
Professor  Hall,  while  admitting  (op.  cit.,  page  134)  that  there  is  ample
evidence  that  "  these  investigations  have  struck  the  trail  of  some-
thing new  and  strange,  however  rare  and  abnormal  it  may  be,"  does
not  accept  the  theory  of  telepathy,  and  after  giving  various  reasons
for  his  non-acceptance,  with  the  sufficiency  or  insufficiency  of  which
J  am  not  here  concerned,  fortifies  himself  still  further  in  his  rejec-
tion by  two  d,  priori  considerations.  He  writes  (op.  cit.,  page
141)  :  —

Dr.  Prince  states,  as  is  often  implied  in  the  reports,  that  "  no
established  law  is  controverted "  by  the  conclusion  of  telepathy.
But  the  law  of  "  isolated  conductivity,1'  formulated  fully  by
Johannes  Miiller,  which  Helmholtz  compares  in  importance  to  the
law  of  gravity,  first  brought  order  into  the  field  of  neurology  by
insisting  that  impressions  never  jump  from  one  fibre  to  another.

And  he  asks  :  —

Is  it  likely  that  a  neural  state  should  jump  from  one  brain  to
another,  through  a  great  interval,  when  intense  stimuli  on  one
nerve  cannot  affect  another  in  the  closest  contact  with  it?


From  which  it  would  appear  that  Professor  Hall  supposes  the
conception  of  telepathy  to  involve  the  jumping  of  a  neural  state  from
one  brain  to  another !  Not  only  is  there  no  warrant  for  Professor
Hall's  supposition,  but  explicit  warnings  are  given  against  the  adop-


530         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

tion   of   any  supposition  of  that  character  as  forming  part  of  the
theory  of  telepathy.1

This  is  an  important  point,  and  I  quote  a  passage  in  illustration
from  a  review  by  Mr.  Poclmore  of  the  recent  work  by  Dr.  Ochoro-
wicz, —  a  review  to  which  Professor  Hall  refers  (op.  cit.,  page  141),
and  which  he  has  therefore  presumably  read :  —

But  it  may  be  worth  while  to  point  out  that  our  own  conception
of  telepathy  involves,  strictly  speaking,  no  theory  at  all.  It  in-
volves as  little  of  pure  theory  as  Newton's  conception  of  the  law
of  gravitation.  What  Newton  did  was  to  find  the  simplest  general
expression  for  the  observed  facts  by  saying  that  the  heavenly  bodies
acted  upon  each  other  with  a  certain  measurable  force.  He  did  not
attempt  to  explain  the  mode  of  the  action ;  he  contented  himself
with  asserting  its  existence,  and  defining  its  limits.  And  whilst
succeeding  astronomers  have,  tor  the  most  part,  been  content  to
follow  his  example,  the  science  has  nevertheless  advanced  in  a
steady  and  continuous  progression.  So,  the  conception  of  telepathy
simply  colligates  the  observed  facts  of  spontaneous  and  experi-
mental thought-transference,  as  instances  of  the  action  of  one  mind
upon  another.  The  nature  of  that  action  the  theory  does  not
discuss ;  it  merely  defines  it  negatively  as  being  outside  the  normal
sensory  channels.     (Proceedings,  Part  IX.,  p.  568.)

Again,  Professor  Hall  writes  (loc.  cit.)  :  "  Even  the  fundamental
theory  of  Bell  has  to  be  modified,  so  far  as  the  brain  is  concerned,
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis.  In  Mr.  Gurney's
scheme  of  hallucination,  centrifugal  projection,  or  escape  downward,
may  even  be  from  the  cortex  through  the  basal  ganglia  to  the  pe-
ripheral organ."  There  are  several  replies  to  this  statement:  (1)  It
is  only  on  an  exceedingly  careless  reading  that  Mr.  Gurney  can  be
supposed  to  maintain  that  centrifugal  projection  may  be  from  the
cortex  to  the  peripheral  organ.  Mr.  Gurney  urges  that  for  many
hallucinations  the  mode  of  origin  may  be  a  process  in  the  direction
from  higher  to  lower  centres,  — not,  however,  to  the  peripheral  organ
(Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  Chaps.  X.-XII.)  ;  and  I  was  at
first  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  the  misapprehension  of  Prof.  Hall
could  have  arisen.  But  on  carefully  examining  the  chapters  referred
to,  I  find  a  passage  the  relations  of  which  might  be  misconceived  by
any  person  who  had  not  read  Mr.  Gurney's  discussion,  and  who
chanced  to  light  upon  the  paragraph  containing  the  passage.  The
statement  on  which  I  presume  Professor  Hall's  impression  to  be
founded  occurs   on  the   top  of  p.  487  (Phantasms   of  the   Living,


iVid.  Proceedings,  Part  VI.,  p.  135;   Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.6,  7,100-113;
Vol.  II.,  pp.  314-315.


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.       531

Vol.  I.),  ["while,  in  the  most  complete  or  '  external'  form  of  halluci-
nations, it  is  possible  that  by  a  yet  further  process  a  refluent  current
passes  downwards  to  the  external  organ"  ],  but  is  there  given  by  Mr.
Gurney,  not  as  his  own  view,  but  as  interpreting  a  view  differing
from  his  own.  Mr.  Gurney,  moreover,  actually  takes  occasion,  by  a
note  on  the  same  page  appended  to  the  very  statement,  to  point  out
objections  to  the  view  that  "  a  refluent  current  passes  downwards  to
the  external  organ."  (2)  The  view  which  Mr.  Gurney  does  suggest
is,  that  simpler  sorts  of  hallucination  may  "  take  shape  at  the  sensory
centres  ;  but  that  the  more  elaborate  and  variable  sorts  must  be
traced  to  the  higher  origin,  and  that  when  the  higher  tracts  are  first
concerned,  the  production  of  the  hallucination  is  due  to  a  downward
escape  of  the  nervous  impulse  to  the  sensory  centre  concerned  "  {op.
cit.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  xxxi).  Now,  as  to  this  view,  it  suffices  to  say,  that
various  eminent  physiologists  agree  in  supporting  a  form  of  centrifu-
gal projection  which  is  even  more  pronounced  in  its  incompatibility
with  the  "fundamental  theory"  to  which  Professor  Hall  refers,
than  is  Mr.  Gurney's  view.  Indeed,  Professor  Hall's  ensuing
remark,  '•  Qualified  forms  of  projection  have  been  often  assumed,
but  the  matter  is  so  complicated  and  so  under  dispute,"  etc.,  is
enough  to  suggest  that  Bell's  "fundamental  theory  "  is  not  quite
so  fundamental  as  to  be  pressed  into  the  required  service  of  antago-
nism. But  were  even  the  objection  valid  as  against  Mr.  Gurney's
view  of  hallucinations  in  general,  it  would  not  be  relevant  as  against
the  telepathic  hypothesis,  for  (3)  Telepathy  does  not  stand  or  fall  with
any  particular  theory  as  to  the  initiation  and  development  of  hallu-
cinations, and  Mr.  Gurney  has  expressly  guarded  himself  against
such  a  misinterpretation  as  that  shown  by  Professor  Hall.  For
example,  in  addition  to  the  passages  to  which  I  have  already  referred
in  connection  with  the  preceding  objection,  Mr.  Gurney  writes,
towards  the  conclusion  of  his  discussion  of  telepathic  hallucina-
tions :  —

I  have  sufficiently  emphasized  the  difficulty  of  expressing  the
transmission  of  telepathic  impressions  in  physical  terms  (pp.  110-
113),  and  though  I  here  suggest  that  the  difficulty  is  lessened  if  we
draw  on  unconscious  parts  of  the  mind,  and  old  records  of  the  brain,
my  physiological  point  is  independent  of  this  suggestion,  and  is
limited  to  the  percipient's  own  organism.  There  certain  nervous
changes  do  undoubtedly  take  place  in  correspondence  with  the  psy-
chical fact  of  the  hallucination,  and  my  object  is  to  show  that  what
we  observe  as  to  the  psychical  fact  may  be  best  accounted  for  on  a
particular  view  of  the  physical  process.  {Phantasms  of  the  Living^
Vol.  I.,  p.  572,  note.)


532         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

In  brief,  be  the  theory  of  Bell  or  the  law  of  "  isolated  conductivity  "
as  much  or  as  little  fundamental  as  we  please  to  consider  them,  the
telepathic  hypothesis  does  not  demand  their  overthrow  ;  it  is  inde-
pendent of  them,  and  the  introduction  of  them  as  objections  implies
a  fundamental  misconception  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis.

Leaving  these  misapprehensions  of  a  general  nature,  let  us  now
consider  the  more  special  strictures  of  Professor  Minot  in  the  present
number  of  Proceedings.  He  refers  in  his  article  to  No.  2  of  the
Proceedings,  where  he  has  drawn  attention  to  the  existence  of  the
number-habit,  and  its  importance  in  relation  to  experiments  in
thought-transference.  I  have  no  desire  to  underestimate  the  impor-
tance of  the  considerations  depending  upon  this,  though  the  extent  of
their  application  is  very  small  as  regards  the  experiments  reported
by  the  English  Society,  being  limited  to  a  few  of  the  earliest  ones.
Professor  Minot's  research  has  shown  how  important  it  is,  in  experi-
ments of  this  kind,  to  beware  that  our  conclusions  are  not  vitiated
by  ignoring  the  possible  existence  of  certain  habits  in  guessing,
whatever  be  the  class  of  objects  chosen  for  experiment.  And  it  may
be  owing  to  this  research  that  some  later  experiments  with  numbers,
recorded  not  in  the  Proceedings,  but  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (VoL
I.,  p.  34  ;  Vol.  II.,  p.  653),  are  not  open  to  the  criticism  depending
on  the  existence  of  the  number-habit.  These  experiments  appear  to
have  escaped  the  notice  of  both  Professor  Hall  and  Professor  Minot.

The  following  is  a  set  of  400  trials,  made  in  batches  of  40  or  50
at  a  time,  in  June,  1886,  by  the  Misses  Wingfield,  whose  former  ex-
periments have  been  described  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  34.

The  ninety  numbers  wiiich  contained  two  digits  were  inscribed  on
ninety  slips  of  paper,1  and  placed  in  a  bowl.  Miss  M.  Wingfield,
sitting  six  feet  behind  the  percipient,  drew  a  slip  at  random  and
fixed  her  attention  on  the  number  which  it  bore  ;  Miss  K.  Wingfield
made  a  guess  at  the  number,  and  the  real  number  and  the  guess
made  were  at  once  recorded  in  the  table.  The  slip  of  paper  was
then  replaced,  the  contents  of  the  bowl  shuffled,  and  another  draw
made  at  haphazard.  The  most  probable  number  of  right  guesses
for  accident  to  bring  about  in  the  400  trials  was  4.  The  actual
number  of  completely  right  guesses  was  27;  in  21  other  cases
the  two  right  digits  were  given  in  reverse  order ;  and  in  162  others,
one  of  the  digits  was  given  rightly  in  its  right  place.  The  proba-
bility which  this  result  affords  for  a  cause  other  than  chance  is
represented  by  47  nines  and  a  5  following  a  decimal  point;  i.e.,  the
odds  are  nearly  two  hundred  thousand  million  trillions  of  trillions
to  1.    (Loc.  cit.,  p.  653.)

i  We  would  recommend  slips  of  card,  "  chips,"  or  balls,  as  preferable  to  slips  of  paper.  —  R.  JI


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.        533

But  I  must  now  point  out  that  while  the  existence  of  a  number-
habit  was  not  taken  into  consideration  in  the  earliest  experiments
made  by  the  committee  of  the  English  Society,  it  was  recognized  at
the  outset  that  in  experiments  with  cards,  the  card  chosen  must  be
drawn  at  random  from  the  pack,  and  not  selected  according  to  the
whim  of  the  agent.  And  yet,  curiously  enough,  it  is  more  especially
the  card  experiments  which  Professor  Minot  uses  to  illustrate  his
statement  that  "the  law  of  relative  frequency  of  ideas  was  not
known  to  the  committee  reporting."     He  writes  (p.  315)  :  —

For  example,  p.  23,  they  say,  "  The  chances  against  success  in  the
case  of  any  one  card  are,  of  course,  fifty-one  to  one1'  —  (the  italics
are  ours).  On  the  contrary,  the  chances  vary  according  to  the
card,  and  if  the  card  is  not  drawn  at  random  from  a  full  pack,
but  selected  by  some  person  thinking  of  it,  the  chances  in  favor  of
success  are  very  much  greater  than  one  to  fifty-one.

The  sentence  on  p.  23  (Proceedings  of  English  S.  P.  R.,  Part  I.)
to  which  Professor  Minot  refers,  reads  in  full :  "  The  chances  against
success  in  the  case  of  any  one  card  are,  of  course,  51  to  1,  assuming
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  thought-reading,  and  that  errors  of  ex-
periment are  avoided"  —  (the  italics  are  mine)  ;  and  the  method  of
choosing  the  card  is  described  sufficiently  in  other  parts  of  tbe  same
report.  Thus,  on  the  immediately  following  page,  we  read  :  u  Cards
to  be  named,  drawn  at  random  from  a  full  pack ; "  and  on  p.  20  we
read,  "  we  would  choose  a  card  from  a  pack,"  and  "we  then
chose  a  card  from  a  full  pack."  Similarly  in  the  second  report  on
Thought-transference  (Part  II. ,  p.  71)  the  committee  expressly  refer
to  an  objection  that  had  been  brought  against  their  first  report,  that
the  percipient  "  might  have  known  which  card  we  were  likely  to
choose,  whereas  we  have  stated  that  the  cards  were  drawn  at  random
from  a  full  pack."  This  precaution  is  mentioned  again  expressly  in
connection  with  the  experiments  described  in  that  report,  and  it  is
repeated  in  the  third  report  (Part  III.,  p.  170)  :  UA  full  pack  of
cards  was  invariably  used,  from  which  a  card  was  drawn  at  random."
Thus  Professor  Minot  criticises  the  results  of  the  experiments  with
cards  on  the  assumed  ground,  apparently,  that  a  certain  precaution
was  not  taken,  whereas  it  is  repeatedly  and  expressly  affirmed  that
this  very  precaution  was  taken.  I  dwell  upon  this  point  because  it
seems  to  me  desirable  to  show  that  Professor  Minot's  opinion  is
founded  upon  a  very  cursory  examination  of  the  evidence  brought
forward  in  favor  of  Telepathy.

Professor  Minot  later  proceeds  (p.  315)  :  —


534        On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy,

If  we  examine  the  drawings  given  in  the  various  articles  above  re-
ferred to,  we  notice  at  once  that  with  the  exception  of  a  single
series,  those  with  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  as  percipient,  the  figures  drawn
by  both  the  agents  and  percipients  are  in  greater  part  just  such  as
our  diagram-tests  have  shown  to  be  the  ones  likely  to  be  drawn.
The  authors  of  the  articles  in  question  having  fundamentally  miscon-
ceived the  nature  of  the  chances,  of  course  fail  to  offer  the  necessary
proof  that  the  proportion  of  coincidences  was  greater  than  chance
would  account  for.  Until  this  is  done  it  appears  premature  to  accept
these  experiments  a3  valid  proofs  of  thought-transference.


The  "  various  articles  above  referred  to"  are  those  in  Part  I.,  Part
III.,  and  Part  XI.  There  are  no  drawings  at  all  in  Part  I.  ;  in  all  the
drawings  in  Part  III.  Mr.  Smith  was  percipient,  and  these  are
excepted  by  Professor  Minot ;  there  remains  only  the  series  in  Part
XI.,  given  in  the  article  by  Herr  Schmoll.  That  is  to  say,  Professor
Minot's  criticism,  instead  of  being  here  applied,  as  the  reader  might
suppose,  to  the  bulk  of  the  experiments  with  diagrams,  is  applied  to
a  single  series,  that  a  comparatively  insignificant  one,  and,  appar-
ently, is  not  applied  to  the  whole  of  this.  But  even  here  I  venture
to  think  that  Professor  Minot  has  thrown  no  new  light  whatever  upon
this  series.  The  writer  of  the  article,  Herr  Schmoll,  has  offered  no  defi-
nite calculation  of  the  chances ;  but  neither  has  Professor  Minot,  nor
am  I  able,  from  his  tabulations  or  from  the  diagram-returns,  to  make
an}'.  Twenty-six  experiments  are  described,  seventeen  of  which
(Nos.  2,  4-19)  were  with  drawings.  I  enumerate  the  objects  and
drawings  chosen  by  the  agents  as  follow,  with  brief  and  rough
description  :  —

1 .  Pair  of  gold  spectacles.

2.  Capitol  O,  thickened  on  sides.

3.  Penknife.

4.  Two  parallel  horizontal  lines.

5.  Bars  of  a  musical  stave,  with  clef  and  crotchet.

6.  Cross  in  j^osition  of  capital  X.

7.  Triangle  with  dot  in  centre.

8.  Flat  ellipse  with   major  axis  horizontal,    and   straight  line

extending  on  each  side  in  direction  of  major  axis.      *

9.  Capital  A.

10.  Capital  S.

11.  Capital  T.

12.  Spiral  with  axis  vertical.

13.  Two  touching  semicircles  tangent  vertical.

14.  Three  straight  lines  radiating  at  equal  angles  from  a  dot.

15.  Capital  K.


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.       535


16.     ?

i7-  rn

18.  Semicircle  with  dot  near  centre.

19.  The  figure  4  made  with  straight  lines.

20.  Brass  weight  of  500  grms.

21.  Gold  watch.

22.  A  pamphlet  8vo.

23.  A  piece  of  candle,  20  centimeters  long.

24.  A  faience  teapot.

25.  "  The  stamp  of  the  firm."

26.  Double  eye-glasses.

In  order  to  estimate  fully  the  chances  here,  we  require  to
know,  independently  of  other  considerations  (such  as  the  environ-
ment and  conversation  of  the  sitters,  familiarity  with  accounts  of
previous  experiments,  etc.),  what  chance  there  is  of  (l)'s  being
chosen,  and  then  the  chance — (I)  having  been  chosen — of  (2)'s
being  chosen,  and  then  the  chance —  (1)  and  (2)  having  been  chosen
—  of  (3)'s  being  chosen,  and  so  on.  It  will  be  obvious  that  to  esti-
mate this  with  any  approach  to  accuracy  we  should  need  a  much
greater  series  of  statistics  than  is  at  all  likely  to  be  available.
Herr  Schmoll's  conclusion  is  :  —

The  results  of  the  preceding  trials  clearly  leave  much  to  be
desired ;  nevertheless,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  in  many  cases  the
reproduction  possesses  the  fundamental  character  of  the  original,
and  indeed  in  many  (as,  for  example,  Xos.  2,  8,  12,  13,  18,  21,  24,
25)  very  strongly  approaches  precision.  In  no  single  case,  strictly
speaking,  did  there  appear  absolute  discrepancy  between  the  form
of  the  reproduction  and  that  of  the  original.  We  have  therefore
been  able  to  convince  ourselves  that  the  agents,  concentrating  their
looks  on  the  given  object,  projected  on  the  mental  eye  of  the  percip-
ient a  picture  more  or  less  resembling  it,  and  we  take  it  as  incon-
trovertible that  the  above  results  could  not  have  been  achieved  by
conscious  or  unconscious  guessing.

Whether  the  reader  who  refers  to  the  article  for  a  detailed  account
of  the  experiments  agrees  with  this  conclusion  or  not,  I  venture  to
think  that  his  judgment  would  not  be  unfavorably  affected  by  the
stud}'  of  Professor  Minot's  results  from  the  diagram-cards.  Pro-
fessor Minot  says  (p.  314)  :  —

Let  us  suppose  by  way  of  illustration  that  two  persons  make  an
experiment    in  thought-transference   with   diagrams.      The    agent


536         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

draws  a  circle ;  now  four  persons  out  of  ten  are  likely  to  draw  a
circle  (see  Table  VI.),  and  to  draw  it  near  the  beginning  of  a  series
of  diagrams ;  instead,  therefore,  of  the  chances  of  the  percipient's
drawing  a  circle  being  almost  infinitely  small,  they  are  very  great.
The  trial  is  proceeded  with;  the  circle  having  been  drawn,  it  is
probable  that  the  next  figure  will  be  different,  as  our  cards  show ;
the  agent  draws  a  square  ;  again  the  percipient's  unconscious  chances
are  very  great,  and  so  on  with  a  considerable  series  of  diagrams.
In  this  manner  thought-transference  might  be  simulated,  and  a  proof
of  its  reality  obtained,  which  would  seem  overwhelming  so  long  as
the  law  of  relative  frequency  is  disregarded  as  an  explanation.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  we  must  remember  that  the  diagrams  drawn
on  the  cards  returned  are  not  necessarily  bjr  any  means  such  as  would
have  been  drawn  had  their  artists  been  engaged  in  experiments  for
testing  thought-transference.  But,  putting  this  consideration  aside
for  the  present,  I  draw  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fact  that
although  "  four  persons  out  of  ten  are  likely  to  draw  a  circle  (see
Table  VI.),"  as  one  in  a  series  of  ten  diagrams,  only  one  person  in  ten
is  likely  to  draw  it  as  the  first  of  that  series,  as  I  find  from  the  manu-
script tabulations,  which  give  less  than  50  cards  where  the  first
figure  is  a  circle.  Examining  the  cards  (50 1)  myself,  I  find  43
in  which  the  first  figure  is  a  plain  circle.  In  2  of  these  the  second
figure  is  a  five-pointed  star,  in  2  others  it  is  a  horizontal  oblong,  in
14  it  is  a  triangle,  and  in  16  a  square.  In  the  remaining  9  cards
the  series  diverge  after  the  first  figure.

Taking  the  "  circle-triangle"  group,  I  find  —


a.  Circle,  triangle,  diverge  l    .

b.  Circle,  triangle,  triangle,  diverge

c.  Circle,  triangle,  square,  diverge

d.  Circle,  triangle,  square,  triangle,  diverge

e.  Circle,  triangle,  square,  cross,  diverge


The  fourth  figures  are  not  formed  in  exactly  the  same  way  either
in  ((?)  or  (e)  ;  and  in  neither  pair  is  any  one  of  the  remaining  figures
common.

Taking  the  "  circle-square  "  group  I  find  :  —


/.  Circle,  square,  diverge        ....

g.  Circle,  square,  oblong,  diverge  .

h.  Circle,  square,  triangle,  diverge

k.  Circle,  square,  triangle,  octagon,  diverge  .

Z.  Circle,  square,  triangle,  heart,  cross,  diverge


1  Diverge,  i.e.,  the  next  diagrams  in  these  series  differ  from  one  another.


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.       537

In  I  the  crosses  differ  in  type,  one  being  placed  like  a  capital  X ;
and  in  neither  k  nor  I  is  any  one  of  the  remaining  figures  common.

Here,  then,  we  have  two  similar  series  of  five  figures,  beginning
with  a  plain  circle,  in  five  hundred  cards.  The  chance,  therefore,
of  such  a  run  is  1  in  250.  Professor  Minot  says,  "  And  so
on  for  a  considerable  series  of  diagrams."  Let  us  suppose  that
this  "considerable  series"  consists  of  ten  diagrams;  and,  as  the
returns  in  the  case  before  us  do  not  provide  a  basis  for  the  chances
beyond  five  diagrams,  let  us  suppose  that  each  of  the  second  five  is
half  as  likely  to  be  correct  as  the  corresponding  diagram  in  order
in  the  first  five  ;  in  other  words,  that  the  sixth  diagram  of  the  series
is  half  as  likely  to  be  correct  as  the  circle  was  originally,  the  seventh
diagram  half  as  likely  to  be  correct  as  the  square,  and  so  on.  On
this  estimate,  the  chance  of  a  run  of  ten  consecutive  correct  diagrams
would  be  1  in  2,000,000.  Continuing  the  same  estimate,  the  chance
of  a  run  of  twenty  consecutive  correct  diagrams  would  be  1  in
128,000,000,000,000.

These  diagrams  present  an  aspect  of  great  importance  which
Professor  Minot  appears  to  have  either  overlooked  or  ignored,  viz.,
the  order  in  which  the  diagrams  occur.  I  cannot  otherwise  account
for  his  statements  that  certain  diagrams  in  the  English  records  are
"  likely  to  be  drawn."  The  question  is  one  not  simply  of  the  "  rela-
tive frequency  of  ideas,"  but,  and  much  more,  of  their  relative
sequence.  The  chances  are  fundamentally  misconceived  unless  the
relative  position  of  each  diagram  in  the  series  is  kept  clearly  in  view.
As  I  have  suggested  above  (p.  536),  it  is  manifest  that  Professor
Minot  has  lost  sight  of  this  consideration  when  he  can  write,  "Four
persons  out  of  ten  are  likely  to  draw  a  circle  (see  Table  VI.),  and  to
draw  it  near  the  beginning  of  a  series  of  diagrams ; "  he  wants  to
know  the  chance  that  a  circle  will  be  drawn  first,  and  it  is  obvious
from  the  manuscript  tabulations  that  the  chance  is  not  four  in  ten,
but  one  in  ten.1  To  say  that  a  diagram  is  likely  to  be  drawn  some-
where in  a  series  of  ten  is  a  very  different  thing  from  saying  that  it
is  likely  to  be  drawn  at  any  particular  place  in  that  series.  It  may
be  very  likely  to  occur  in  one  position,  and  very  unlikely  to  occur  in
another.     I  find  from  the  returns  that  —

The  circle  is  drawn  as  the  first  figure  once  in  10  times.
"  "  "       second        "  20     "

"  "  "      third  "  13     "

"  "      fourth        "  26     "

1 1  need  hardly  Bay  that  I  do  not  regard  the  number  of  cards  returned  as  by  any  means  large
enough  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  detailed  conclusions  concerning  the  relative  frequency  and  sequence
of  more  than  perhaps  two  or  three  of  the  simplest  figures,  such  as  the  circle,  triangle,  and  square,


538         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

The  circle  is  drawn  as  the  fifth  figure  once  in  38  times.

sixth  "  45

"  "  "      seventh       "  42

eighth  "  45

"  "  "      ninth  "  50

11  "      tew*&  ■'*  62

Of  course  this  does  not  imply  that,  e.g.,  whatever  the  previous
nine  figures  have  been,  the  chance  is  only  1  in  62  that  the  tenth
figure  will  be  a  circle.  The  chance  might  be  greater  or  less,
depending  on  the  previous  nine  figures  and  their  order ;  and  the
chances  will  unquestionably  vary  enormously  according  to  the  order.
Thus,  recurring  to  our  two  similar  series  of  five  diagrams,  if  the
order  is  cross,  heart,  triangle,  square,  circle,  the  chance  of  a  similar
series  would  be  much  less  than  for  the  reverse  order.  I  find  from
the  manuscript  tabulations  that  in  only  12  cards  out  of  the  500
is  the  first  figure  a  cross,  and  by  inspection  of  the  cards  I  find
that  in  not  one  of  the  sets  beginning  with  a  cross  is  the  second
figure  a  heart ;  so  that  on  the  basis  of  these  returns  the  chances  are
greater  for  the  series  of  the  five  diagrams  circle,  square,  triavgle,
heart,  cross,  than  for  the  series  of  the  two  diagrams  cross,  heart.
Again,  there  is  only  1  card  in  the  500  where  the  first  figure  is  a
heart,  viz.,  the  card  to  which  Professor  Minot  refers  on  p.  307:
it  "  has  ten  hearts  arranged  like  the  pips  on  a  playing-card,  but
inside  each  heart  are  four  marks;"  (these  marks  are  different  for
each  heart,  and  are  intended  to  represent  two  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth).
On  the  basis  of  these  returns,  then,  the  chance  is  greater  for  the
correctness  of  the  series  circle,  square,  triangle,  heart,  cross,  than  it
is  for  the  drawing  of  a  heart  as  the  first  figure.  Hence  it  is  of  funda-
mental importance,  for  the  calculation  of  the  chances,  that  we  should
know  not  only  what  diagrams  are  commonly  drawn,  but  in  what
order  they  are  commonly  drawn.

Bearing  the  various  foregoing  considerations  in  mind,  let  us  turn
to  Professor  Minot's  criticism  of  the  experiments  described  by  Herr
Schmoll  (vide  p.  534).  Professor  Minot  says,  "The  figures  drawn
by  both  the  agents  and  percipients  are  in  greater  part  just  such  as
our  diagram- tests  have  shown  to  be  the  ones  likely  to  be  drawn."
Now,  of  the  17  drawings  by  the  agents  (vide  p.  534)  not  more
than  3.  can  be  regarded  as  coming  within  the  ten  most  frequent
on  the  diagram-cards  returned  (Table  VI.,  p.  308),  and  not  more
than  7  within  the  twenty  most  frequent ;  while  of  the  drawings  by
the  percipient  (op.  cit.,  Art.  IV.),  certainly  not  more  than  five
can  be  regarded  as  coming  within  the  same  group  of  twenty.  I
venture  therefore  to  traverse  Professor  Minot's  statement,    even  if


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.       539

he  means  by  "  likely  to  be  drawn,"  —  likely  to  be  drawn  as  one  of  a
series  of  ten  diagrams.  But  his  criticism  has  no  point  unless  he  means
much  more  than  this,  —  unless  he  means  that  the  figures  in  question
are  likely  to  be  drawn  at  certain  assigned  places  in  the  series,  and
this  is  just  what  our  diagram-tests  have  not  shown  with  regard  to  the
series  in  question.

Similar  remarks  apply,  still  more  forcibly,  to  Professor  Minot's
later  statements,  which  are  yet  more  extraordinary  than  those  which
I  have  discussed  in  detail.     He  writes  :  —

If  we  examine  the  diagrams  reproduced  in  the  Proceedings  of
the  English  Society,  Part  II.,  pp.  83-97,  and  Part  III.,  pp.  175-215,
we  observe  among  them  also,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  figures
which  are  most  likely  to  be  drawn,  so  that,  even  under  the  assump-
tion that  everything  was  perfectly  fair,  the  evidence  is  much  less
strong  than  the  English  committee  have  represented  it.

I  beg  the  reader  to  refer  to  these  diagrams  in  the  English  Proceed-
ings and  compare  his  descriptions  of  them  with  the  titles  of  the
twenty  most  frequent  figures  enumerated  in  Professor  Minot's  Table
VI.  He  will  surely  be  surprised  that  Professor  Minot  can  u  observe
among  them  also,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  figures  most  likely
to  be  drawn."  Twenty-two  reproductions  are  given  in  Part  III.  ;
of  these  five  were  with  contact.  Concerning  the  others,  Prof.  Stanle}'
Hall  writes:  "With  the  record  of  these  seventeen  reproductions,
without  contact,  of  the  most  unconventional  diagrams,  we  confess  our-
selves more  deeply  impressed  than  with  an)7  other  work  of  the  Soci-
ety." Nor  would  this  opinion  be  altered  for  the  worse  by  a  study  of
our  diagram-returns.  Jn  my  own  case  at  least,  such  examination  as
I  have  been  able  to  make  of  these  returns  seems  to  me  to  strengthen
the  conclusion  of  the  English  committee  to  which  Professor  Minot
objects,  that  "  here  obviously  an  incalculable  number  of  trials  might
be  made,  at  any  rate  in  the  case  of  the  more  random  and  eccen-
tric figures,  before  pure  guess-wrork  [aided  by  Professor  Minot's
knowledge  of  the  diagram-habit]  would  hit  upon  a  resemblance  as
near  as  that  obtained  in  almost  every  case  by  Mr.  G-.  A.  Smith."

In  closing  this  portion  of  my  paper  let  me  again  remind  the  reader
that  the  experiments  with  diagrams  form  but  a  fragment  of  the  evi-
dence upon  which  Telepathy  depends,  and  that  Professor  Minot  has
referred  to  but  a  portion  of  thi3  fragment.  Whether  he  has  been  un-
duly biassed  in  the  presentation  of  this  portion,  and  whether  the
diagram-returns  justify  the  application  which  he  has  made  of  them,  may
safely  be  left  to  the  student  of  the  records  published  in  the  English
Proceedings,  and  in    Phantasms  of   the    Living.      I    have    written


540        On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

rather  for  those  who  are  unfamiliar  with  those  records,  and  I  trust
that  one  result  of  this  discussion  may  be  to  stimulate  our  readers  both
to  the  careful  perusal  of  the  records  themselves,  and  to  similar  in-
vestigations among  their  friends.  Few,  in  truth,  are  the  persons  who
have  experimented  in  this  direction,  not  merely  lightly  and  casually,
but  seriously  and  persistently,  as  described  in  the  article  by  Herr
Schmoll.  It  is  in  the  lack  of  patient  endeavor,  rather  than  in  the
rarity  of  telepathic  sensitiveness,  that  I  incline  to  think  the  real  defi-
ciency lies.

I  pass  now  to  some  considerations  of  a  very  different  sort,  consid-
erations which  I  wish  to  be  regarded  not  so  much  the  expression  of  a
disagreement  as  the  outcome  of  a  desire  to  assist  in  the  elucidation
of  a  comparatively  obscure  class  of  mental  processes.  I  refer  to
the  spontaneous  experiences  grouped  by  Prof.  Royce  in  the  cate-
gory of  Pseudo- Presentiments.  Prof.  Royce  quotes  at  length  from
a  letter  which  he  wrote  to  Mind  on  this  subject,  in  which  he  ap-
plied the  Pseudo- Presentiment  hypothesis  to  a"  very  large  propor-
tion "  of  a  certain  class  of  cases  published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living.
I  m:iy  fitly  quote,  therefore,  a  part  of  Mr.  Gurney's  reply,  which  the
reader  will  find  in  Mind  of  July,  1888.  After  remarking  that  he  had
in  various  places  suggested  that  portions  of  the  experience  might  be
read  back,  Mr.  Gurney  saj-s :  u  The  reason  whjT  I  did  not  bring  for-
ward the  hypothesis  that  the  whole  experience  was  a  delusion  of
memory,  is  simply  that  to  hardly  any  of  the  cases  on  which  stress  is
laid  docs  it  appear  to  me  that  that  hypothesis  is  at  all  applicable  ;  "
and  finally  he  writes  as  follows :  —

I  am  quite  content  to  accept  Prof.  Royce's  view  as  to  the  com-
parative unimportance  of  cases,  not  supported  by  documentary
evidence,  which  occurred  more  than  ten  years  ago.  But  as  regards
the  third  class  of  cases  which  he  mentions  —  cases  of  recent  date
where  we  have  no  record  of  the  percipient's  experience  put  into
writing  before  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  the  corresponding  event —
he  seems  to  have  ignored  the  support  which  is  afforded  to  a  large
number  of  the  amounts  by  the  testimony  of  other  persons  that  the
percipient's  experience  was  orally  described  before  the  arrival  of  the
news.  He  says,  "  Members  of  the  same  family  would  be  especially
apt  to  be  similarly  subject  to  this  form  of  delusion ; "  but  though
this  might  account,  in  some  cases,  for  two  or  more  members  of  a
family,  say  A  and  B,  having  the  same  delusive  memory  that  they
had  shortly  before  received  an  impression  relating  to  C,  it  surely
cannot  commend  itself  as  an  explanation  of  their  having  quite  differ-
ent delusive  memories  — A  having  the  memory  that  he  had  received


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy,       541

an  impression  relating  to  C,  and  B  the  memory  that  A  had  described
to  him  such  an  impression.

But  my  chief  objection  to  Prof.  Royce's  hypothesis  is  of  a  more
general  kind,  and  relates  not  to  points  of  evidence  as  such,  but  to  the
actual  nature  of  the  phenomena  on  which  the  proof  of  '  telepathy 1  de-
pends. We  have  seen  that  he  omits  all  mention  of  sensory  hallucina-
tions; and  it  seems  impossible  that  he  can  have  duly  recognized  their
importance  in  the  argument.  However  much  it  were  proved  that
the  news  of  an  exciting  event  had  a  tendency  to  produce  the  impres-
sion that  one  had  known  of  it  before,  we  should  have  got  a  very
little  way  towards  proving  that  the  receipt  of  existing  news  about
X  had  a  tendency  to  produce  in  a  sane  mind  the  impression  of  hav-
ing recently  seen  X  in  a  place  where  he  was  not,  not  announcing,
often  not  even  suggesting,  his  actual  condition,  and  without  any
exciting  concomitants.  Phenomena  of  this  sort  may  be  very  hard  to
account  for  completely  on  any  simple  theory  of  thought-transference,
but  if  the  coincidences  happen  too  frequently  to  be  accounted  for  by
chance,  they  form  a  complete  proof  of  telepathy.

It  is  worth  adding  that  the  assignment  of  the  experience  in
memory  to  a  particular  time  constitutes  a  further  most  vital  difference
from  the  familiar  illusions  of  "  double  memory,"  where  "  the  feel-
ing that  one  has  been  here  before  "  is  quite  unlocalized  in  past  time.

I  think,  indeed,  that  the  considerations  which  Prof.  Royce  has  ad-
duced, though  highly  important  in  their  application  to  a  certain  class
of  cases,  do  not  appreciably  affect  our  views  of  the  accounts  of  spon-
taneous experiences  on  which  the  proof  of  telepathy  depends.  The
comparative  method  of  study,  to  which  Prof.  Royce  has  referred,
led  —  in  the  grouping  of  narratives  received  by  the  English  Society
—  to  two,  among  other,  distinct  classes,  which  I  may  here  call  for
convenience  the  telepathic  and  premonitory  groups.  Thus  Mr.  Myers
writes  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I.,  p.  lxiii)  :  —

When  we  began  ...  to  collect  accounts  of  experiences  which
our  informants  regarded  as  inexplicable  by  ordinary  laws,  we  were
of  course  ignorant  as  to  what  forms  these  experiences  would  mainly
take.  But  after  printing  and  considering  over  two  thousand  depo-
sitions which  seemed  prima  facie  to  deserve  attention,  we  find  that
more  than  half  of  them  are  narratives  of  appearances  or  other  im-
pressions coincident  either  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen  or
with  some  critical  moment  in  his  life-history.

,  And  it  is  to  this  group,  the  telepathic,  that  Phantasms  of  the  Liv-
ing is  devoted.  For  some  cases,  of  course,  it  would  be  difficult  at
first  sight  to  assign  the  class.  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  in  the  article  On  the
Evidence  for  Premonitions  in  the  current  number  (Part  XIII.)  of  the
Proceedings  of   the    English  S.  P.  R.,  observes  "  that   not  a   few


542        On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

cases  which  are  commonly  spoken  of  as  premonitions  or  presen-
timents may  be  explained,  without  assuming  more  than  clairvoyance
of  the  present.  This  is  true  of  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  cases  which
have  been  provisionally  classed  as  premonitions,  and  printed  or
type-written  by  the  Literary  Committee ; "  and  she  explains  on
the  preceding  page  that  by  Premonition  she  means  "  predictions
or  foreshadowings  or  warnings  of  coming  events  which  afford,  if
believed,  a  knowledge  of  the  future  greater  than  that  which
human  beings  could  obtain  by  exercising  their  normal  faculties
on  the  facts  before  them."  Her  opinion  is  that  the  evidence  at
present  collected  by  the  English  Society  "  does  not  seem  to  me
sufficient  to  warrant  a  conclusion  in  favour  of  the  reality  of  pre-
monitions."

Now  it  appears  to  me  that  it  is  to  the  premonitory  and  not  to  the
telepathic  group  that  the  hypothesis  brought  forward  by  Prof.  Royce
primarily  applies.  The  case  cited  from  Krafft-Ebing  belongs  ob-
viously to  the  type  of  Premonition,  though  we  might  here  accept  the
patient's  account  of  his  experiences  without  supposing  any  super-
normal occurrence,  since  his  dreams  might  well  have  been  governed
to  a  certain  extent  by  his  auditory  hallucinations.  Similarly,  the
cases  quoted  from  Kraepelin  belong  also  to  the  type  of  Premoni-
tion ;  certain  events  coming  to  the  notice  of  the  patients  have  been
prophesied  to  them,  directly  or  indirectly,  long  before.  The  special
interest  of  these  cases,  Kraepelin  suggests,  lies  in  the  fact  that  the
patients  regarded  the  events  as  the  -fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and
not  as  the  duplication  of  actual  previous  experience.  It  is,  however,
especially  noteworthy,  as  regards  these  patients,  that  there  appears
to  be  no  indication  of  any  tendencj'  in  their  experiences  to  simulate
a  telepathic  order ;  and  we  need  a  much  fuller  and  wider  acquaint-
ance with  such  cases  before  classing  them  definitively  apart  from  the
so-called  "  double  memory  "  experiences,  of  which  they  may  prove
to  be  merely  varieties,  differentiated  from  the  common  type  by  the
patients'  other  and  peculiar  delusions.  The  feeling  that  some  ex-
perience, whether  a  comparatively  simple  and  single  specific  event,
or  a  complex  group  of  perceptions,  has  appeared  before  in  the
threads  of  "entangled  circumstance"  that  life  has  woven  into  our
past  history,  sleeping  and  waking,  lies  at  the  bottom  of  them  all.
To  one  it  may  seem  to  recur  as  the  representation  of  a  waking  ex-
perience, to  another  as  the  actuality  of  a  previous  dream,  to  another
as  the  real  occurrence  of  an  incident  which  was  once  imagined  and
the  conception  of  which  was  caused  by  a  reading  or  a  conversation
that  constituted  the  prediction.  It  would  not  be  surprising  if  the
feeling   in  question,  which   the  ordinary  sane   man  almost   sponta-


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.        543

neously  seeks  to  explain  b}'  reminiscences  of  his  own  shadowy  land
of  dreams,  should  connect  itself  occasionally  in  the  insane  with
their  peculiar  forms  of  delusion,  and,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  cases  described
by  Kraepelin,  be  referred  to  the  realm  of  imaginary  readings  or  audi-
tory hallucinations,  or  the  transcendent  care  of  the  princely  lover.

Prof.  Royce  goes  so  far  as  to  admit  that  to  verify  his  hypothesis,
"  even  remotely,  requires  more  than  such  a  priori  suggestions''  as
he  puts  forward,  and  my  contention  here  is,  that  the  cases  which
he  cites  from  KrarTt-Ebing  and  Kraepelin  do  not  warrant  such  a  wide
application  as  he  has  made  of  his  hypothesis,  important  as  it  possi-
bly may  be.  I  think,  for  example,  that  cases  19  and  20,  accepting
the  evidence  for  no  more  than  Prof.  Royce  apparently  is  willing  to
accept  it,  belong  not  to  the  group  of  pseudo- presentiments,  but  to  that
of"  actual  coincidences,"  and  (as  I  have  been  convinced  that  in  certain
groups  of  such  coincidences  there  is  a  causal  relation  between  the  two
coincident  events)  I  should  describe  them  as  cases  of  telepathy.  In
case  19,  the  "  check  put  upon  the  narration  "  —  to  quote  from  one  of
our  correspondents  who  has  objected  to  Prof.  Royce's  interpretation  of
this  particular  case  —  which  Prof.  Royce  regards  as  illustrating  the
liveliness  of  his  typical  hallucination,  "  shuts  out  the  theory  of  hallu-
cination of  the  memory."  In  case  20,  the  details  of  Miss  Watkins'
remembrance,  especially  those  concerning  her  state  on  waking  and
her  prolonged  distress  during  the  morning,  —

Just  then  I  awoke,  weeping  bitterly.  All  that  morning  I  was
oppressed  by  a  feeling  of  impending  evil,  a  feeling  that  I  struggled
unsuccessfully  to  throw  off,  as  having  its  source  in  the  unreal  expe-
rience of  a  few  hours  previous,  —

appear  to  me  to  be  entirely  remote  in  character  from  the  pseudo-
presentiments  of  Kraepelin's  cases.

I  may  here  remind  the  reader  of  some  of  the  different  hypotheses
which  have  been  advanced  in  explanation  of  the  illusion  of  the  so-
called  "double-memory."  One  of  the  first  in  recent  times  to  attempt
an  explanation  of  this,  apart  from  the  fascinating  suggestion  of
genuine  premonition  or  the  fantastic  notion  of  "  pre-existence,"
was  Wigan,  in  his  Duality  of  the  Mind,  and  he  used  it  in  support
of  his  hypothesis  that  "each  cerebrum  is  a  distinct  and  perfect
whole,  as  an  organ  of  thought."  He  describes  a  delusion  of  his
own  on  the  occasion  of  the  funeral  of  the  Princess  Charlotte.  After
giving  the  details  of  the  actual  occurrence,  he  writes  :  —

I  had  fallen  into  a  sort  of  torpid  reverie,  when  I  was  recalled  to
consciousness  by  a  paroxysm  of  violent  grief  on  the  part  of  the
bereaved  husband,  as  his  eye  suddenly  caught  the  coffin  sinking


544        On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.

into  its  black  grave,  formed  by  the  inverted  covering  of  the  altar.
In  an  instant  I  felt  not  merely  an  impression,  but  a  conviction,  that
I  had  seen  the  whole  scene  before  on  some  former  occasion,  and
had  heard  even  the  very  words  addressed  to  myself  by  Sir  George

Naylor.

His  explanation  is  :  —

Only  one  brain  has  been  used  in  the  immediately  preceding  part
of  the  scene,  —  the  other  brain  has  been  asleep,  or  in  an  analogous
state  nearly  approaching  it.  When  the  attention  of  both  brains  is
roused  to  the  topic,  there  is  the  same  vague  consciousness  that
the  ideas  have  passed  through  the  mind  before,  which  takes  place
on  re-perusing  the  page  we  had  read  while  thinking  on  some  other
subject.  The  ideas  have  passed  through  the  mind  before,  and  as
there  was  not  sufficient  consciousness  to  fix  them  in  the  memory
without  a  renewal,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  the  length  of
time  that  had  elapsed  between  the  faint  impression  received  by  the
single  brain,  and  the  distinct  impression  received  by  the  double
brain.     It  may  seem  to  have  been  many  years.

Another  explanation1  of  this  class  of  cases  is  that  "  the  received
impression  evokes  analogous  impressions  in  the  past,  vague,  con-
fused, and  scarcely  tangible,  but  sufficiently  distinct  to  induce  the
belief  that  the  new  state  is  a  repetition.  There  is  a  basis  of
resemblance  between  two  states  of  consciousness  which  is  readily
perceived  and  which  leads  to  an  imaginary  identification.  It  is  an
error,  but  only  in  part,  since  there  is  really  in  the  recorded  impres-
sions of  the  past  something  resembling  a  first  experience  "  (Ribot,
Diseases  of  Memory,  p.  187).  That  an  explanation  of  this  kind
covers  at  least  some  of  the  cases  has  been  established  by  Radestock,
as  Mr.  Sully  points  out  in  his  book  on  Illusions,  from  which  I  take
the  following  passage  quoted  by  him  from  Radestock's  Schlof  und
Traum  : 2 —

When  I  have  been  taking  a  walk  with  my  thoughts  quite  unfet-
tered, the  idea  has  often  occurred  to  me  that  I  had  seen,  heard,  or
thought  of  this  or  that  thing  once  before,  without  being  able  to  re-
call when,  where,  and  in  what  circumstances.  This  happened  at
the  time  when,  with  a  view  to  the  publication  of  the  present  work,
I  was  in  the  habit  of  keeping  an  exact  record  of  my  dreams.  Con-
sequently I  was  able  to  turn  to  this  after  these  impressions,  and  on
doing  so  I  generally  found  the  conjecture  confirmed  that  I  had  pre-
viously dreamt  something  like  it.

1  Mentioned  by  Sander,  in  Archiv  fur  Psych.,  IV.,  p.  252.

2  See  also  Archiv  fur  Psych.,  VI.,  p.  573,  for  some  interesting  observations  concerning  the  rela-
tion of  dreams  to  this  illusion.


On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy.        545

We  must  not  forget  how  multitudinous  the  past  experiences  are,
besides  the  dreams  which  we  recall  from  sleep,  in  which  we  may  find
some  points  of  special  similarity  to  the  event  or  scene  which  now
seems  so  familiar.  All  our  perceptions  ;  all  the  mental  picturings
suggested  by  reading  and  conversation ;  all  the  imaginings,  involun-
tary or  constructive,  of  our  waking  life  ;  every  whim  and  phantasy,
every  change,  in  short,  of  external  and  internal  waking  experience,
go  to  swell  the  accumulation.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  that  larger
domain  still  to  which  the  fleeting  resemblances  may  be  traced,
that

"  ocean  of  dreams  without  a  sound,
Whose  waves  never  mark,  though  they  ever  impress
The  light  sand  which  paves  it,  consciousness"?

Few,  indeed,  of  the  doubtless  nryriad  nightly  dreams  leave  marks
discernible  by  the  ordinary  waking  self  ;  but  it  may  well  be  that  here
and  there  the  light  of  a  new  event  may  startle  into  shadowy  form
the  subtle  impression  of  some  dream  of  ours  that  never  merged  into
the  recollections  of  the  daytime,  —  that  we  never  consciously  knew.
Presentiments  which  are  thus  explicable  should  be  classed  as  Illu-
sions, and  not  as  Hallucinations  of  Memory.  Just  as  in  a  darkening
room,  by  a  common  Illusion  of  Perception,  we  may  glimpse  the  edge
of  a  table  and  interpret  it  as  a  chair,  under  the  influence  of  the  more
vivid  associations  of  the  moment ;  so,  of  the  foregone  fugitive  dream
o.  cverie,  or  experience  of  whatever  kind,  only  those  fragments  which
resemble  the  present  fact  are  brought  into  view  ;  the  rest  of  the  shad-
owy experience  is  too  dim  in  its  difference  to  obtain  any  recognition
at  all,  and  the  other  elements  of  the  perception  before  us  take  their
place  and  complete  the  shadowy  picture.

I  do  not  suppose,  however,  that  this  explanation  covers  all  the  cases
which  primd  facie  might  seem  to  belong  to  the  general  type  of  delu-
sive memory  which  we  are  considering.  Yet  another  view,  perhaps
applicable  in  some  cases,  is,  that  after  the  actual  event  happens,  it
is  recalled  in  detail,  and  we  pass  through  it  once  more  in  imagination  ;
this  imagining,  if  very  vivid,  may  simulate  and  take  the  place,  in
memory,  of  the  actual  event,  which  then  becomes  retrojected  as  a
foreshadowing.1  The  reproduction  may  also  occur  in  the  form  of  a
dream,  which  takes  the  place  of  the  actual  event,  or  may  even  itself
be  thenceforward  wrongly  localized  in  time,  and  regarded  as  a  pre-
monitory experience.  Such  an  illusion  as  this  last,  it  appears  to  me,
might  easily  arise,  since  the  dream  might  be  associated  during  its
process  with  other  dreams  of  long  prior  actual  events,  and  thus  be-


iSee  Ribot,  Diseases  of  Memory,  pp.  189-190.


546         On  Some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy,

come  erroneously  remembered  as  occurring  at  the  same  time  as  the
prior  events  themselves.

Yet  another  view  is  worth  mentioning,  restricted  to  the  cases  where,
upon  the  occurrence  of  some  event,  the  feeling  that  it  has  been
experienced  before  arises  apparently  instantaneously.  This  view,
which  has  a  certain  kinship  to  the  psychological  aspect  of  Wigan's
hypothesis,  is  that  the  impression  of  the  event  is  first  received  only
semi-consciously,  owing  to  a  temporar}*  diversion  of  attention,  —  it
is  perceived,  but  not  apperceived,  and  a  comparatively  long  interval
elapses  between  the  perception  and  the  apperception  ;  then  follows
the  significance  of  the  event  in  full  consciousness,  —  it  is  apperceived,
but  the  apperception  (perhaps  involving  a  re-perception)  is  dis-
located, as  it  were,  from  the  prior  perception,  which  then  wears  the
appearance  of  a  dream  or  the  fading  memory  of  some  remote  but
actual  previous  waking  experience.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be
that  the  apperception  itself  appears  as  the  memory.1

For  a  discussion  of  some  of  the  difficulties  attending  such
hypotheses  as  the  foregoing,  or  variations  of  them,  the  reader  may
turn  to  the  latter  part  of  Kraepelin's  article.  Lack  of  time2  prevents
my  dealing  with  the  subject  further  in  the  present  number  of  Pro-
ceedings.

I  add  merely  a  few  words  as  to  the  classification  of  Pseudo-
presentiments.  The  reader  will  rightly  infer,  from  what  I  have
already  said,  that  some  of  the  cases  which  Professor  Royce  classes
as  pseudo-presentiments,  I  would  class  as  genuine  telepathic  expe-
riences ;  others  as  possibly  telepathic  ;  while  some  I  would  class  as
memory- illusions,  and  perhaps  a  few  as  memory-hallucinations.
The  two  last- mentioned  groups  I  would  include  under  the  name
pseudo-presentiments.  The  word  "  presentiment "  is  ambiguous,
but  has  its  merits,  if  we  regard  it  as  implying  a  feeling  anticipative
either  of  the  event  itself  or  of  the  receipt  of  news  of  the  event.
Pseudo-presentiments  might  then  be  divided  into  two  classes,  pseudo-
premonitory  and  pseudo-telepathic.  I  venture  to  think  that  the
large  majority  of  pseudo-presentiments  will  prove  to  belong  to  the
pseudo-premonitory  group.

RICHARD  HODGSON.

1  Archiv  fur  Psych.,  XVIII.,  p.  414.

2  The  delusions  of  "  double-memory,"  I  incline  to  think,  may  be  partial  or  complete,  and
they  may  arise  immediately  or  even  after  the  interval  of  some  days.  Probably  the  explanations
•will  be  different  for  different  cases,  and  how  far  we  shall  group  the  cases  under  one  general  class
will  depend  upon  our  view  rather  of  the  genesis  of  the  illusion  than  of  its  superficial  appearance
or  its  immediacy.  These  are  among  the  points  I  should  like  to  have  discussed,  did  time  permit,
referring  to  special  cases  in  illustration.


Open  Letter  Concerning  Telepathy,  547


OPEN  LETTER  CONCERNING  TELEPATHY.

BY   PROF.    C.    S.    MINOT.

My  dear  Mr.  Hodgson  :  —  I  find  nothing  in  Professor  James'  criti-
cisms [pp.  317-319]  which  seems  to  me  to  call  for  any  further  answer
than  my  report  itself  affords.

In  regard  to  your  own  criticisms  [pp.  532-539],  may  I  say  that  as
to  whether  my  report  justifies  or  not  your  impression  that  I  have  made
only  "  a  very  cursory  examination  of  the  evidence  brought  forward
in  favor  of  telepathy  "  others  must  judge,  but  in  reality  I  have  been
minutely  and  carefully  over  the  whole  of  that  evidence  and  over  the
important  parts  several  times.  When  I  began  I  had  a  very  strong
bias  in  favor  of  telepathy,  and  it  is  the  patient  and  repeated  exami-
nation of  that  evidence  which  has  obliged  me  to  conclude  that  tele-
pathy has  not  been  rendered  even  a  probability.  Since,  however,  in  so
difficult  a  discussion  caution  is  indispensable,  I  have  expressed  my-
self in  a  very  guarded  manner  in  my  report,  merely  affirming  none  of
the  experiments  "  afford  conclusive  evidence  of  thought-transfer-
ence." It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  you  have  invalidated  my  posi-
tion.

One  of  your  criticisms  is  based  solely  upon  a  misunderstanding.
I  showed  that  the  English  investigators  had  not  taken  into  account
the  relative  frequency  of  ideas.  Of  course  they  mentioned  the  pos-
sibility of  unknown  sources  of  error,  as  you  indicate,  but  that  nowise
proves  that  they  knew  the  particular  source  of  error  to  which  I  have
called  attention.  In  regard  to  the  card  experiments,  }Tou  will  find  in
my  article  on  the  very  p.  315  which  you  quote  from,  that  my  criti-
cism is  expressly  limited  to  the  cases  when  the  card  is  "  selected  by
some  person  thinking  of  it ;  "  your  strictures  therefore  are,  if  you  will
excuse  me  for  saying  it,  without  foundation.

In  regard  to  the  probabilities,  I  have  shown  that  there  was  an  im-
portant source  of  error.  I  did  not  think  it,  and  do  not  think  it,  my
part  to  go  into  the  calculation  of  the  exact  degree  of  that  error,  for
it  suffices  to  show  that  it  is  great  and  neglected,  as  is  the  case.

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  upon  a  detailed  criticism  of  the
evidence  for  telepathy,  but  you  oblige  me  to  make  one  general  com-
ment. The  reason  why  the  English  estimate  of  the  probabilities,
which  read  astounding  enough  no  doubt  to  those  not  accustomed  to
such  reckonings,  is  fundamentally  erroneous  is  that  they  have  not


548  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

considered  the  probable  error,  which  alone  is  the  correct  guide  ;  the
probability  of  a  particular  result  is  always  enormously  small  in  such
experiments  as  have  been  made,  but  that  probability  is  almost  worth-
less as  a  measure  of  the  value  of  the  evidence  until  the  probable
error  is  known.  In  this  respect  the  English  Society  have  not  yet
given  the  demonstration  of  the  value  of  their  tests,  which  alone
would  justify  the  decided  opinions  they  have  published.  The  same
requirement  must  be  put  upon  the  estimate  of  probabilities  which  you
have  made.  In  addition,  you  must  remember  that  when  two  persons
are  experimenting  with  the  thought-transference  of  diagrams,  they
both  supply  diagrams  and  exclude  from  repetition  more  diagrams
than  one  person  ;  your  calculation  needs  to  be  rectified  accordingly.

I  am  afraid  this  is  not  a  very  cordial  letter  in  appearance  ;  let  me
add  that  I  appreciate  }'our  remarks  and  the  manner  in  which  you
have  made  them.  In  replying,  I  hope  to  appear  equally  courteous  in
spite  of  being  so  very  explicit.  Will  you  excuse  me  if  I  do  not
enter  into  more  detail?  I  think  the  readers  of  our  Proceedings  will
have  the  material  for  decision  so  far  as  it  is  possible  at  present.
The  final  judgment  as  to  the  reality  of  thought-transference  will  come
when  the  future  evidence  is  in.      With  cordial  esteem,  I  remain.

Yours  faithfully,

CHARLES   SEDGWICK   MINOT.

Boston,  Feb.  28,  1889.


NOTES   ON   AUTOMATIC   WRITING.

Many  communications  concerning  experiences  in  automatic  writing
have  been  sent  in  to  the  Secretary  during  the  past  two  years,  and
both  he  and  the  undersigned  have  witnessed  the  phenomenon  in  a
number  of  instances.  It  is  unquestionably  a  field  from  which  a  rich
harvest  of  instruction  may  be  hoped  ;  but  as  professional  occupa-
tions have  prevented  that  steady  experimental  study  of  the  matter
which  it  deserves,  I  will  content  myself  with  jotting  down  a  few
points  which  may  serve  to  stimulate  the  interest  of  the  Society,
postponing  a  more  systematic  paper  to  some  later  date.  I  must  refer
the  reader  to  the  important  papers  by  Mr.  Myers  in  Nos.  VII.,  VIII.,
and  XI.  of  the  London  Society's  Proceedings,  for  a  general  intro-
duction to  the  subject.  I  regret  that  the  appeal  to  experiment  with
the  planchette,  which  was  made  at  the  public  meeting  in  the  spring
of  1887,  was  followed  by  insignificant  results.  Planchettes  can  be
obtained  at  the  toy- shops,  or  (at  cost)  by  writing  to  the  Secretary  of


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing,  549

the  Society  ;  and,  possibly,  the  remainder  of  this  paper  may  lead  to
a  little  wider  trial  amongst  associates  and  members.

One  phenomenon  of  which  Mr.  Hodgson  and  I  have  been  wit-
nesses is  both  new  and  important.  The  hand  and  the  arm  of  the
automatic  writer  are  (in  certain  instances,  at  least)  anaesthetic.  As
soon  as  I  read  M.  Pierre  Janet's  admirable  account  of  the  double
personality  of  his  somnambulist,  L.,1 1  resolved  to  look  for  this  symp-
tom in  ordinary  planchette  writers.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the
skin  of  the  hysteric  L.  had  been  for  many  years  entirely  insensible  to
contact,  but  that  when  she  took  to  writing  automatically  on  being
waked  from  the  hypnotic  trance,  the  hnnd  which  wrote  (and  which
signed  all  its  communications  by  the  name  of  Adrienne)  expressed
an  intelligence  perfectly  perceptive  of  those  skin-sensations  of  which
the  usual  intelligence,  expressing  itself  by  word  of  mouth,  was  igno-
rant. Might  not,  conversely,  the  usual  intelligence  of  ordinary  non-
hysteric  automatic  writers  be  transiently  ignorant  of  the  sensations
of  the  writing  hand  and  arm?

Persons  who  have  written  with  a  planchette  are  apt  to  speak  of  a
tingling  or  prickling  in  the  hands.  I  have  actually  tested  three  auto-
matic writers  for  anaesthesia.  In  one  of  them,  examined  between
the  acts  of  writing,  no  anaesthesia  was  observed,  but  the  examination
was  superficial.  In  the  two  others,  both  of  them  men,  the  anaesthesia
to  pricking  and  pinching,  and  possibly  to  touch,  seemed  complete.
The  second  of  these  cases  is  so  interesting  that  I  subjoin  the  facts  in
detail.

William  L.  Smith,  of  Concord,  Mass.,  student  at  the  Massachu-
setts Institute  of  Technology,  age  21,  perfectly  healthy  and  excep-
tionally intelligent,  whose  sincerity  it  is  impossible  to  suspect,  has
amused  himself  on  various  occasions  during  the  past  two  years  with
planchette  writing.  Of  his  previous  performances  more  anon.  On
Jan.  24,  1889,  he  sat  with  Mr.  Hodgson  and  myself,  with  his  right
hand  extended  on  the  instrument,  and  his  face  averted  and  buried  in
the  hollow  of  his  left  arm,  which  lay  along  the  table.  Care  was
taken  not  to  suggest  to  him  the  aim  of  the  inquiry.

The  planchette  began  by  illegible  scrawling.  After  ten  minutes  I
pricked  the  back  of  the  right  hand  several  times  with  a  pin  —  no
indication  of  feeling.  Two  pricks  on  the  left  hand  were  followed  by
withdrawal,  and  the  question,  "  What  did  you  do  that  for?" — to
which  I  replied,  '•  To  find  whether  j7ou  were  going  to  sleep."  The
first  legible  words  which  were  written  after  this  were,  You  hurt  me.

1  Revue  Philosophique,  XXII.,  577  ;  XXIIL,  449.  Mr.  Myers  gives  an  abstract  of  the  case  is
the  third  of  his  articles  above  referred  to,  pp.  237-249.


550  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

A  pencil  in  the  right  hand  was  then  tried  instead  of  the  planchette.
Here  again  the  first  legible  words  were,  No  use  \  ?]  in  trying  to  spel
when  you  hurt  me  so.  Next :  Its  no  use  trying  to  stop  me  writing
by  pricking.  These  writings  were  deciphered  aloud  in  the  hearing  of
S.,  who  seemed  slow  to  connect  them  with  the  two  pin-pricks  on  his
left  hand,  which  alone  he  had  felt.

After  some  more  or  less  illegible  writing  (some  of  it  in  Greek
characters)  and  questions  asked  and  answered,1  I  pricked  the  right
wrist  and  fingers  several  times  again  quite  severely,  with  no  sign  of
reaction  on  S.'s  part.  After  an  interval,  however,  the  pencil  wrote  :
Don't  you  prick  me  any  more.  S.  then  said,  "  My  right  hand  is  pretty
well  asleep."  I  tested  the  two  hands  immediately  by  pinching  and
pricking,  but  found  no  difference  between  them,  both  apparently
normal.  S.  then  said  that  what  he  meant  by  "  asleep  "  was  the
feeling  of  '  pins  and  needles '  [which  an  insensible  limb  has  when
4  waking  up '].

The  last  written  sentence  was  then  deciphered  aloud.  S.  laughed,
having  been  conscious  only  of  the  pricks  on  his  left  hand,  and
said,  "  It's  working  those  two  pin-pricks  for  all  they  are  worth."

I  then  asked,  "  What  have  I  been  excited  about  to-day?"  Ans.
Possibly  examining.  "No,  that  was  yesterday;  try  again."  Ans.
May  be  correct  clont  know  possibly  sleepin.2  "  What  do  you  mean
by  sleeping?"  Ans.  / don't  know  (really?)  You  [distinct  figure  of
a pin\  me  19  times2  and  think  I'll  write  for  you.

The  sitting  here  ended.  It  was  very  inferior  in  legibility  and
variety  to  sittings  of  the  same  Subject  a  year  previous.  Two  evenr
ings  later  we  had  another  sitting.  S.  had  been  most  of  the  day  in
the  open  air,  and  had  paddled  a  canoe  ten  miles.  I  immediately
asked,  "Are  you  still  offended  at  my  having  pricked  you  ? "  Ans.
Fm(?).  "Where  did  I  prick  you  the  other  night?"  Ans.  On
the  side  of  my  hand.  "Didn't  I  prick  you  anywhere  else?"  Ans.
No.  "Which  hand?"  Ans.  This  hand.  "Which  hand?"  Ans.
Right.

After  some  remote  questions  and  answers  the  pencil  was  changed
to  the  left  hand,  to  see  if  that  also  would  write.  It  spontane-
ously wrote  a  good  deal,  quite  unintelligibly.  "Are  you  angry?"
Ans.      Yes.     "Who  pricked  you?     How  many  times?     Tell  us  all

1  Q.  "  Who  is  writing?    Is  it  Smith  himself  ?  "    A.    YES.    Pencil  cant  go  alone.

3  What  I  had  in  mind  was  "  building-plane."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  I  had  been
acutely  suffering  all  day  from  loss  of  sleep,  and  had  vainly  sought  to  get  a  nap  in  the  afternoon.
There  are  claims  of  lucidity  for  Mr.  Smith's  past  planchette  writing,  and  this  answer  may  (possi-
bly) not  have  been  a  mere  coincidence.  It  is  true  that  I  am  a  chronically  bad  Bleeper,  and  Mr.
8.  may  have  heard  of  the  fact.

8  I  unfortunately  hadn't  counted  the  times.    Nineteen  is  a  plausible  number.


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  551

about  it."  Ans.  19  times  on  the  other  hand.  No  further  writing
came  on  this  evening.  Shortly  after  the  last  answer  I  pinched
four  times,  severely,  the  skin  of  the  left  hand  between  my  nails.
8.'s  eyes  were  closed,  but  his  face  was  visible,  and  I  thought  I
detected  a  very  subtle  facial  and  respiratory  reaction  upon  the
pinching.  He,  however,  on  being  questioned  some  minutes  later,
denied  that  he  had  been  pricked  or  pinched  during  this  evening.
Later  still,  whilst  the  left  hand  still  held  the  pencil,  I  pinched  his
right  hand  once,  whereupon  he  started  and  said  he  didn't  "  need  to
be  waked  up."  No  more  writing  taking  place  after  a  quarter  of  an
hour  or  more,  I  compared  the  two  hands  and  found  that  they  had
equal  and  normal  sensibility.  S.  is  still  ignorant  of  what  interested
us  in  these  sittings.  He  is,  unfortunately,  too  busy  to  sit  again  for
many  weeks.

Here,  as  the  reader  will  perceive,  we  have  the  consciousness  of  a
subject  split  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  expresses  itself  through
the  mouth,  and  the  other  through  the  hand,  whilst  both  are  in  com-
munication with  the  ear.  The  mouth- consciousness  is  ignorant  of  all
that  the  hand  suffers  or  does  ;  the  hand- consciousness  is  ignorant  of
pin-pricks  inflicted  upon  other  parts  of  the  body  —  and  of  what
more  remains  to  be  ascertained.  If  we  call  this  hand-consciousness
the  automatic  consciousness,  then  we  also  perceive  that  the  automatic
consciousness  may  transfer  itself  from  the  right  hand  to  the  left,  and
carry  its  own  peculiar  store  of  memories  with  it.  The  left  hand,
writing  automatically  on  the  second  evening,  remembered  the  right
hand's  experiences  on  the  first,  and  very  likely  (though  this  was  not
ascertained)  knew  nothing  of  its  own.

These  phenomena  remind  us  of  what  the  lamented  Gurney  de-
scribed in  his  important  paper  "  Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-
hypnotic States,"  in  Part  XI.  of  the  London  Society's  Proceedings.
The  facts  there,  it  will  be  remembered,  were  these  :  An  order  to  do
something  after  waking  was  given  to  the  subject  during  the  trance.
Of  this  order  no  apparent  consciousness  remained  when  the  trance
was  over.  But  if,  before  the  time  of  execution  arrived,  the  subject's
hand  was  placed  upon  a  planchette,  the  writing  which  came  was  all
about  the  order,  showing  that  the  latter  was  retained  in  a  split-off
portion  of  the  consciousness,  which  was  able  to  express  itself  auto-
matically through  the  hand.  This  dissociation  of  the  consciousness
into  mutually  exclusive  parts  is  evidently  a  phenomenon  destined,
when  understood,  to  cast  a  light  into  the  abysses  of  Psychology.

We  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  C.  W.  Fillmore,  of  Providence,  the
report  of  a  case  of  hystero-epilepsy  which  illustrates  the  same  phe«


552  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

nomenon  in  an  even  more  extraordinary  manner.1  The  record  begins
in  the  nineteenth  year  of  the  patient's  age,  and  continues  for  several
years.  It  is  filled  with  every  conceivable  species  of  suffering  and
disorder,  but  the  entries  which  interest  us  in  the  present  connection
are  the  following  :  —

September  17, 1860.  —  Wild  with  delirium.  Tears  her  hair,  pillow-cases,
bedclothes,  both  sheets,  night-dress,  all  to  pieces.  Her  right  hand  pre-
vents her  left  hand,  by  seizing  and  holding  it,  from  tearing  out  her  hair,
but  she  tears  her  clothes  with  her  left  hand  and  teeth.     .     .     .

29th. — Complains  of  great  pain  in  right  arm,  more  and  more  intense,
when  suddenly  it  falls  down  by  her  side.  She  looks  at  it  in  amazement.
Thinks  it  belongs  to  some  one  else ;  positive  it  is  not  hers.  Sees  her  right
arm  drawn  around  upon  her  spine.  Cut  it,  prick  it,  do  what  you  please  to
it,  she  takes  no  notice  of  it.  Complains  of  great  pain  in  the  neck  and
back,  which  she  now  calls  her  shoulder  and  arm  ;  no  process  of  reasoning
can  convince  her  of  the  contrary.  [To  the  present  time,  now  nearly  five
years,  the  hallucination  remains  firm.  She  believes  her  spine  is  her  right
arm,  and  that  her  right  arm  is  a  foreign  object  and  a  nuisance.  She  be-
lieves it  to  be  an  arm  and  a  hand,  but  treats  it  as  if  it  had  intelligence  and
might  keep  away  from  her.  She  bites  it,  pounds  it,  pricks  it,  and  in  many
ways  seeks  to  drive  it  from  her.  She  calls  it '  Stump  ;  Old  Stump.'  Some-
times she  is  in  great  excitement  and  tears,  pounding  '  Old  Stump.1  Says
'  Stump '  has  got  this,  that,  or  the  other,  that  belongs  to  her.]  The  his-
tory of  September  is  her  daily  and  nightly  history  till  October  25th.    .    .    .

November  12.  —  From  eleven  to  twelve  at  night  sits  up,  apparently
asleep,  and  writes,  with  her  paper  against  the  wall.  After  she  awakes,
seems  to  be  unconscious  of  what  she  has  written.     .     .     .

From  November  20  to  January  1,  1861,  raving  delirium;  pulls  her  hair
nearly  all  out  from  the  top  of  her  head.  .  .  .  The  right  hand  protects
her  against  the  left  as  much  as  possible.     .     .     .

February  1  to  11. — Under  the  influence  of  magnetism  writes  poetry;
personates  different  persons,  mostly  those  who  have  long  since  passed
away.  When  in  the  magnetic  state,  whatever  she  does  and  says  is  not
remembered  when  she  comes  out  of  it.  Commences  a  series  of  drawings
with  her  right  paralyzed  hand,  *  Old  Stump.'  Also  writes  poetry  with  it.
Whatever  '  Stump '  writes,  or  draws,  or  does,  she  appears  to  take  no
interest  in  ;  says  it  is  none  of  hers,  and  that  she  wants  nothing  to  do  with
'  Stump1  or  '  Stump^s.'  I  have  sat  by  her  bed  and  engaged  her  in  con-
versation, and  drawn  her  attention  in  various  ways,  while  the  writing  and
drawing  has  been  uninterrupted.  As  she  had  never  exhibited  any  taste  for
nor  taken  any  lessons  in  drawing  I  exhibit  here  some  specimens  of  her
first  attempt.2

March,  1861.  —  She  became  blind.     .     .     .

1  The  report  is  by  the  late  Dr.  Ira  Barrows,  of  Providence.  The  patient  was  Miss  Anna
"Winsor.  Her  mother,  brother,  and  Dr.  Wilcox,  Dr.  B.'s  former  partner,  bear  corroborative  tes-
timony.

2  These  specimens  we  have  never  received.  —  W.  J.


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing,  553

January  4, 1862.  — Is  still  blind ;  sees  as  well  with  eyes  closed  as  open  ;
keeps  them  closed  much  of  the  time ;  reads  and  draws  with  them  closed.
Draws  in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light ;  is  clairvoyant.  Writes  poetry,
chiefly  with  the  right  hand,  and  often  .  .  .  while  it  is  dark.  The
hand-writing  differs  greatly  in  different  pieces.     .     .     .

January  10.  —  When  her  delirium  is  at  its  height,  as  well  as  at  all
other  times,  her  right  hand  is  rational,  asking  and  answering  questions  in
writing ;  giving  directions ;  trying  to  prevent  her  tearing  her  clothes ;
when  she  pulls  out  her  hair  it  seizes  and  holds  her  left  hand.  When  she  is
asleep,  it  carries  on  conversation  the  same ;  writes  poetry ;  never  sleeps ;
acts  the  part  of  a  nurse  as  far  it  can  ;  pulls  the  bedclothes  over  the  patient,
if  it  can  reach  them,  when  uncovered ;  raps  on  the  head-board  to  awaken
her  mother  (who  always  sleeps  in  the  room)  if  anything  occurs,  as
spasms,  etc.

January,  1863,  —  At  night,  and  during  her  sleep,  '  Stump  '  writes  letters,
some  of  them  very  amusing ;  writes  poetry,  some  pieces  original!  Writes
4  Hasty  Pudding,1  by  Barlow,  in  several  cantos,  which  she  had  never
read  ;  all  correctly  written,  but  queerly  arranged,  as,  e.g  ,  one  line  belong-
ing in  one  canto  would  be  transposed  with  another  line  in  another  canto.
She  has  no  knowledge  of  Latin  or  French,  yet  *  Stump1  produces  the  fol-
lowing rhyme  of  Latin  and  English  : 1  —

Sed  tempus  recessit,  and  this  was  all  over,
Cum  illi  successit,  another  gay  rover ;
Nam  cum  navigaret  in  his  own  cutter,
Portentum  apparet,  which  made  them  all  flutter.

Est  horridus  anguis  which  they  behold,
Haud  dubio  sanguis  within  them  ran  cold.
Tringinta  pedes  his  head  was  upraised,
Et  corporis  sedes  in  secret  was  placed.

Sic  serpens  manebat,  so  says  the  same  joker,
Et  sese  ferebat  as  stiff  as  a  poker ;
Tergura  fricabat  against  the  old  light-house,
Et  sese  liberabat  of  scaly  detritus .

Tunc  plumbo  percussit  thinking  he  hath  him,
At  serpens  exsiluit  full  thirty  fathom,
Exsiluit  mare  with  pain  and  affright,
Conatus  abnare  as  fast  as  he  might.

Neque  illi  secuti  ?  no,  nothing  so  rash,
Terrore  sunt  muti  he'd  mad«  such  a  splash ;
Sed  nunc  adierunt  the  place  to  inspect,
Et  squamas  viderunt,  the  which  they  collect.

Quicumque  non  credat  and  doubtfully  rails,
Ad  locum  accedat,  they'll  show  him  the  scales ;
Quas,  sola  trophea,  they  brought  to  the  shore ;
Et  causa  est  ea,  they  couldn't  get  more.

iDoes  any  reader  recognize  these  verses?  If  so,  will  he  please  send  them  to  the  Secretary?
It  is  important  to  ascertain  whether  their  origin  were  not  in  the  patient's  memory.


554  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

1  Stump '  writes  both  asleep  and  awake,  and  the  writing  goes  on  while
she  is  occupied  with  her  left  hand  in  other  matters.  Ask  her  what  she  is
writing,  she  replies,  "  /am  not  writing;  that  is  'Stump'  writing.  I  don't
know  what  he  is  writing.  I  don't  trouble  myself  with  '  Stump's'  doings.'1
Reads  with  her  book  upside  down,  and  sometimes  when  covered  with  the
sheet.     '  Stump '  produces  two  bills  of  fare  in  French.     .     .     .

Upon  this  one  subject  of  her  right  arm,  she  is  monomaniac.  Her  right
hand  and  arm  are  not  hers.  Attempt  to  reason  with  her  and  she  holds  up
her  left  arm  and  says,  **  This  is  my  left  arm.  I  see  and  feel  my  right  arm
drawn  behind  me.  You  say  this  *  Stump1  is  my  right  arm.  Then  I  have
three  arms  and  hands."  In  this  arm  the  nerves  of  sensation  are  paralyzed,
but  the  nerves  of  motion  preserved.  She  has  no  will  to  move  it.  She  has
no  knowledge  of  its  motion.  This  arm  appears  to  have  a  separate  intelli-
gence. When  she  sleeps,  it  writes  or  converses  by  signs.  It  never  sleeps ;
watches  over  her  when  she  sleeps ;  endeavors  to  prevent  her  from  injuring
herself  or  her  clothing  when  she  is  raving.  It  seems  to  possess  an  inde-
pendent life  and,  to  some  extent,  foreknowledge.

Miss  W.  died  in  January,  1873.  The  record  of  her  last  ten  years
is  not  given.  It  would  appear,  from  certain  passages  of  the  record
in  our  possession,  that  '  old  Stump '  used  to  write  of  Miss  W.  in  the
third  person,  as  Anna.  This  seems  to  be  the  rule  in  automatic
utterances.

Certain  other  peculiarities  which  I  have  never  seen  quoted  together
deserve  mention.  Thus  the  planchette-writer  often  tends  to  fall
into  a  drowsy  condition  whilst  writing,  and  to  become  abstracted
from  the  outer  world.  Sometimes  he  even  passes  into  a  state  of
genuine  sleep  or  trance — I  have  no  data  thus  far  for  distinguishing
which.  The  writing  is  often  preceded  by  peculiar  sensations  in  the
arm,  and  the  latter  is  apt  to  be  animated  by  involuntary  spasmodic
movements  before  the  writing  regularly  begins.

I  was  witness  a  year  ago,  in  Mr.  Smith's  case,  of  a  phenomenon
which  has  been  described  since  Braid's  time  as  '  exaltation  of  the
muscular  sense,'  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  only  recorded  of  hypnotic
subjects.1  Mr.  Smith  wrote  on  large  sheets  of  brown  wrapping-
paper,  his  right  arm  extended,  his  face  on  a  level  with  the  table,
buried  in  the  hollow  of  his  left  elbow,  —  a  position  which  made  vision
of  the  surface  of  the  paper  a  physical  impossibility.  Nevertheless,
two  or  three  times  in  my  presence  on  one  evening,  after  covering  a
sheet  with  writing  (the  pencil  never  being  raised,  so  that  the  words
ran  into  each  other),  he  returned  to  the  top  of  the  sheet  and
proceeded    downwards,    dotting   each   i   and    crossing   each   t   with


See,  for  example,  Carpenter's  Mental  Physiology,  §  128.


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  555

absolute  precision  and  great  rapidity.  On  another  evening,  whilst
sitting  in  the  same  position,  he  drew  the  entire  outline  of  a  grotesque
human  figure  in  such  a  way  that  the  pencil  ended  at  the  point  where
it  began,  and  that  it  is  now  impossible  to  tell,  from  inspection  of  the
perfectly  continuous  outline,  just  where  the  point  in  question  lay.
Such  feats  would  seem  quite  impossible  to  one  in  the  normal  waking
state.

Another  often  noted  idiosyncrasy  of  these  writings  is  the  freakiness
of  their  execution.  Mirror-script,  spelling  backwards,  writing  from
right  to  left,  and  even  beginning  at  the  right-hand  lower  corner  of  the
page  and  inscribing  every  word  with  its  last  letter  first,  etc.,  till  the
top  is  reached,  are  among  the  peculiarities  of  the  automatic  pencil.
Mr.  Myers  has  tried  to  assimilate  some  of  these  traits  to  what  is  ob-
served in  aphasia  —  with  what  success,  later  inquiry  alone  can  show.

Another  remarkable  point  is  that  two  persons  can  often  make  a
planchette  or  a  bare  pencil  write  automatically  when  neither  can
succeed  alone.  The  explanation  of  this  is  hard  to  find.  The
individuals  themselves  will  sometimes  say,  u  One  of  us  gives  the  force,
the  other  the  intelligence."  Certain  it  is  that  perfectly  determinate
combinations  of  individuals  are  often  required  for  success.  The
more  physiological  explanation  is  that  the  automatic  freedom  is
interfered  with  b}*  conscious  attention  to  the  performance,  and  that
when  two  persons  work  together  each  thinks  that  the  other  is  the
source  of  movement,  and  lets  his  own  hand  freely  go.  We  sadly  need
more  discriminating  observations  on  this  as  well  as  other  points.

Of  course,  the  great  theoretic  interest  of  these  automatic  perform
ances,  whether  speech  or  writing,  consists  in  the  questions  they
awaken  as  to  the  boundaries  of  our  individuality.  One  of  their  most
constant  peculiarities  is  that  the  writing  and  speech  announce  them-
selves as  from  a  personality  other  than  the  natural  one  of  the  writer,
and  often  convince  /urn,  at  any  rate,  that  his  organs  are  played  upon
by  some  one  not  himself.  This  foreignness  in  the  personality  reaches
its  climax  in  the  demoniacal  possession  which  has  played  so  great  a
part  in  history,  and  which,  in  our  country,  seems  replaced  by  the
humaner  phenomenon  of  trance-mediumship,  with  its  Indian  or  other
outlandish  c  control,'  giving  more  or  less  optimistic  messages  from  the
'  summer-land. '  So  marked  is  it  in  all  the  extreme  instances  that
we  may  say  that  the  natural  and  presumptive  explanation  of  the
phenomenon  is  unquestionably  the  popular  or  '  spiritualistic '  one,
of  'control'  by  another  intelligence.  It  is  only  when  we  put  the
cases  into  a  series,  and  see  how  insensibly  those  at  the  upper  extreme
shade  down  at  the  lower  extreme  into  what  is  unquestionably  the


556  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

work  of  the  individual's  own  mind  in  an  abstracted  state,  tbat  more
complex  and  would-be  4  scientific  '  ways  of  conceiving  the  matter  force
themselves  upon  us.  The  whole  subject  is  at  present  a  perfect
puzzle  on  the  theoretic  side.  And  even  on  the  phenomenal  side  we
need  more  abundant  proof  than  we  have  yet  received  that  the
content  of  the  automatic  communications  may  transcend  the  possible
information  of  the  individual  through  whose  hand  they  come.  To
interest  the  reader  in  these  more  difficult  phases  of  the  subject  I  will
append  as  illustrations  some  of  the  cases  which  we  have  received.
The  first  is  from  Mr.  Sidney  Dean,  of  Warren,  R.I.,  member  of  Con-
gress from  Connecticut  from  1855  to  1859,  who  has  been  all  his  life  a
robust  and  active  journalist,  author,  and  man  of  affairs.  He  has  for
many  years  been  a  writing  subject,  and  has  a  large  collection  of
manuscript  automatically  produced.

"  Some  of  it,"  he  writes  us,  "  is  in  hieroglyph,  or  strange  compounded
arbitrary  characters,  each  series  possessing  a  seeming  unity  in  general
design  or  character,  followed  by  what  purports  to  be  a  translation  or  ren-
dering into  mother  English.  I  never  attempted  the  seemingly  impossible
feat  of  copying  the  characters.  They  were  cut  with  the  precision  of  a
graver's  tool,  and  generally  with  a  single  rapid  stroke  of  the  pencil.
Many  languages,  some  obsolete  and  passed  from  history,  are  professedly
given.  To  see  them  would  satisfy  you  that  no  one  could  copy  them  except
by  tracing.1

"These,  however,  are  but  a  small  part  of  the  phenomena.  The  'auto-
matic '  has  given  place  to  the  impressional,  and  when  the  work  is  in  progress
I  am  in  the  normal  condition,  and  seemingly  two  minds,  intelligences,  per-
sons, are  practically  engaged.  The  writing  is  in  my  own  hand  but  the
dictation  not  of  my  own  mind  and  will,  but  that  of  another,  upon  subjects
of  which  I  can  have  no  knowledge  and  hardly  a  theory ;  and  I,  myself,
consciously  criticise  the  thought,  fact,  mode  of  expressing  it,  etc.,  while
the  hand  is  recording  the  subject-matter  and  even  the  words  impressed  to
be  written.  If  /refuse  to  write  the  sentence,  or  even  the  word,  the  im-
pression instantly  ceases,  and  my  willingness  must  be  mentally  expressed
before  the  work  is  resumed,  and  it  is  resumed  at  the  point  of  cessation,
even  if  it  should  be  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence.  Sentences  are  commenced
without  knowledge  of  mine  as  to  their  subject  or  ending.  In  fact,  I  have
never  known  in  advance  the  subject  of  disquisition.

"  There  is  in  progress  now,  at  uncertain  times,  not  subject  to  my  will,
a  series  of  twenty-four  chapters  upon  the  scientific  features  of  life,  moral,
spiritual,  eternal.     Seven  have  already  been  written  in  the  manner  indi-

1 1  should  say  that  I  have  seen  some  of  these  curious  hieroglyphs  by  Mr.  D.,  which  professed
to  be  Chinese.  They  bore  no  outward  resemblance  to  what  I  have  learned  to  know  as  Chinese
characters.  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Colonel  Bundy  some  four  or  five  other  soi-disant  specimens
of  ancient  languages,  automatically  written,  which  I  have  had  examined  by  my  colleagues  con-
versant with  Sanscrit,  Hebrew,  Assyrian,  Arabic,  and  Persian,  as  well  as  by  a  Japanese  student
who  knew  Chinese.    None  of  the  characters  were  in  any  instance  recognized.  —  W.  J.


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing,  557

cated.  These  were  preceded  by  twenty-four  chapters  relating  generally  to
the  life  beyond  material  death,  its  characteristics,  etc.  Each  chapter  is
signed  by  the  name  of  some  person  who  has  lived  on  earth,  —  some  with
whom  I  have  been  personally  acquainted,  others  known  in  history.  .  .  .
I  know  nothing  of  the  alleged  authorship  of  any  chapter  until  it  is  com-
pleted and  the  name  impressed  and  appended.1  ...  I  am  interested
not  only  in  the  reputed  authorship,  —  of  which  I  have  nothing  corroborative,
—  but  in  the  philosophy  taught,  of  which  I  was  in  ignorance  until  these
chapters  appeared.  From  my  standpoint  of  life  —  which  has  been  that  of
biblical  orthodoxy  —  the  philosophy  is  new,  seems  to  be  reasonable,  and
is  logically  put.  I  confess  to  an  inability  to  successfully  controvert  it  to
my  own  satisfaction.

"  It  is  an  intelligent  ego  who  writes,  or  else  the  influence  assumes  individ-
uality, which  practically  makes  of  the  influence  a  personality.  It  is  not
myself ;  of  that  I  am  conscious  at  every  step  of  the  process.  I  have  also
traversed  the  whole  field  of  the  claims  of  '  unconscious  cerebration,'  so
called,  so  far  as  I  am  competent  to  critically  examine  it,  and  it  fails,  as  a
theory,  in  numberless  points,  when  applied  to  this  strange  work  through
me.  It  would  be  far  more  reasonable  and  satisfactory  for  me  to  accept  the
silly  hypothesis  of  re -incarnation,  —  the  old  doctrine  of  metempsychosis, —
as  taught  by  some  spiritualists  to-day,  and  to  believe  that  I  lived  a  former
life  here,  and  that  once  in  a  while  it  dominates  my  intellectual  powers,  and
writes  chapters  upon  the  philosophy  of  life,  or  opens  a  post-office  for  spirits
to  drop  their  effusions,  and  have  them  put  into  English  script.  No ;  the
easiest  and  most  natural  solution  to  me  is  to  admit  the  claim  made,  i.e.,
that  it  is  a  decarnated  intelligence  who  writes.  But  whot  that  is  the  ques-
tion. The  names  of  scholars  and  thinkers  who  once  lived  are  affixed  to
the  most  un grammatical  and  weakest  of  bosh.     .     .     .

"  It  seems  reasonable  to  me,  —  upon  the  hypothesis  that  it  is  a  person
using  another's  mind  or  brain,  —  that  there  must  be  more  or  less  of  that
other's  style  or  tone  incorporated  in  the  message,  and  that  to  the  unseen
personality,  i.e.,  the  power  which  impresses,  the  thought,  the  fact,  or  the
philosophy,  and  not  the  style  or  tone,  belongs.  For  instance,  while  the
influence  is  impressing  my  brain  with  the  greatest  force  and  rapidity,  so
that  my  pencil  fairly  flies  over  the  paper  to  record  the  thoughts,  I  am
conscious  that,  in  many  cases,  the  vehicle  of  the  thought,  i.e.,  the  lan-
guage, is  very  natural  and  familiar  to  me,  as  if,  somehow,  my  personality
as  a  writer  was  getting  mixed  up  with  the  message.  And,  again,  the
style,  language,  everything,  is  entirely  foreign  to  my  own  style."

Another  gentleman,  Mr.  John  N.  Arnold,  of  19  College  street,
Providence,  R.  I.,  describes  his  experience  as  follows :  —

I  make  my  mind  as  negative  as  possible,  place  myself  in  the  attitude  of

I I  have  seen  and  read  three  of  these  chapters.  They  are  fluent,  scholarly,  and  philosophical
enough,  but  to  ray  mind  have  a  curious  resemblance  in  style  to  other  inspirational  productions
which  I  have  read,  and  doubtfully  attain  to  real  originality.  One  of  them,  signed  Louis  Agassiz,
was,  both  in  thought  and  diction,  wholly  unlike  the  utterances  during  life  of  my  lamented
teacher.  —  W.  J.


558  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

writing,  with  pencil  and  paper,  and  in  about  two  or  three  minutes  I  feel  a
sensation  at  the  elbow  as  if  a  galvanic  battery  had  touched  it.  The  thrill
continues  down  the  forearm  till  it  reaches  the  hand,  which  quickly  doubles
over  towards  the  thumb,  and  then  back,  with  a  strong  tension,  several
times.  When  quiet,  it  begins  to  write.  The  power  that  writes  sometimes
tells  the  truth,  but  oftener  lies.  For  instance,  an  influence  which  called
itself  Lydia,  my  wife's  sister,  wrote  that  Rose  (my  wife)  had  been  raising
blood.  I  replied  I  thought  not.  Lydia  insisted,  and,  upon  reaching  home,
I  found  she  was  correct.  Again,  she  wrote  that  a  lady  friend  was  dead.  I
contradicted  the  Automat,  as  I  had  seen  the  lady  but  a  few  hours  before.
Lydia  seemed  hurt  to  think  I  doubted  her,  and  strongly  asserted  that  the
lady  was  dead.  In  a  few  hours  I  ascertained  the  falsity  of  Lydia's
vehement  assertion  by  meeting  the  lady  in  question.  I  got  so  little  satis-
faction from  the  power  that  I  gave  it  up,  and  of  late  can  only  get  names,
but  no  communications,  except  yes  or  no,  in  answer  to  my  questions.

In  a  second  communication  Mr.  Arnold  adds  :  —

The  pencil  was  always  held  in  my  right  hand.  I  never  had  any  mirror-
writing.  I  sometimes  guessed  what  was  coming,  but  never  knew.  For
instance,  many  words  begin  with  the  first  two  or  three  letters  the  same,  as
"presuming,"  "prefix.1'  I  would  sometimes  guess,  after  the  Automat
finished  the  e  in  such  a  word ;  but  generally  was  mistaken,  even  when  the
context  would  indicate  my  word  to  be  the  proper  one.

It  is  at  least  ten  years  (and  it  may  be  more)  since  the  writing  about  my
wife.  I  had  no  reason  to  think  my  wife  had  had  haemoptysis.  She  had
had  an  attack  in  1860,  when  we  went  to  Macon,  Ga.,  but  not  since ;  so  that
I  was  surprised  when  the  Automat  wrote  with  such  confidence  and  persist-
ency, and  said  that  when  I  got  home  I  should  see  that  it  was  telling  the
truth.  When  I  reached  home  I  questioned  my  wife  about  it.  She  seemed
very  much  astonished,  and  wanted  to  know  how  I  got  my  information,  as
she  had  taken  pains  to  conceal  it  from  me,  fearing  it  would  cause  me
alarm.  I  have  just  asked  my  wife  about  this  affair,  and  she  seems  to
remember  it  substantially  as  I  do.  I  have  never  tried  answering  mental
questions  put  by  another ;  in  fact,  the  Automat  and  I  got  disgusted  with
one  another  years  ago.  We  had  a  falling  out,  and  haven't  been  on  good
terms  since.  The  Auto  got  tired  with  my  lack  of  patience,  and  I  got  tired
with  the  Auto's  lack  of  truthfulness.

I  am  glad  to  answer  any  questions  about  this  matter,  and  when  you
get  a  theory  that  will  fit  this  problem,  please  write  me.  I  don't  mean
unconscious  cerebration,  astral  light,  or  spirit  friends  ;  but  something  new,
something  that  will  fit  tight  and  snug  all  around  and  won't  have  to  be  taken
in  at  the  back,  or  let  out  in  the  arm-size,  and  won't  go  all  to  pieces  like
Don  Quixote's  pasteboard  helmet  when  the  Damascus  blade  of  logic,  reason,
and  common-sense  descends  upon  it.

An  isolated  case  of  apparent  clairvoyance,  like  that  which  this
gentleman  reports,  had  of  course  better  be  treated  as  an  accidental


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  559

coincidence.  But  there  are  other  cases  harder  so  to  treat,  —  cases
where  some  sort  of  telepathy  appears  to  be  involved.  But  telepathy
seems  always  doomed  to  be  baffling.  The  telepathic  explanation  of
the  cases  I  have  in  mind  is  neither  disproved  nor  established  with  the
fulness  that  is  desirable.  As  an  illustration  of  what  I  mean,  take
Mr.  W.  L.  Smith's  case  again.     It  was  first  made  known  to  us  in

November,  1887,  by  a  letter  from  one  of  his  neighbors,  Miss ,  who

wrote  as  follows  :  —

After  reading  the  reports  on  Automatic  Writing  published  by  the  Eng-
lish S.  P.  R.  .  .  .  I  determined  to  try  my  own  power  and  those  of
my  friends.  Accordingly  my  friend  W.  L.  S.  and  I  each  made  a  plan-
chette.  .  .  .  The  successful  writer  was  S.  himself,  and  with  him  we
have  obtained  more  remarkable  results  than  I  have  ever  seen  reported.
It  is  worth  while  to  notice  that  he  had  never  seen  a  planchette  before  he
made  his  according  to  my  direction,  and  had  never  seen  writing  done  with
one  until  he  made  his  first  attempt  in  my  presence,  so  that  the  possibility  of
unconscious  deception,  which  might  have  existed  in  the  case  of  a  person
who  had  already  amused  himself  with  a  planchette,  was  out  of  the  question
with  him.  The  question  of  conscious  deception  may  be  set  aside  at  once  ;
yet,  appreciating  that  experiments  whose  fairness  depends  on  the  honesty
of  any  person  lose  their  scientific  value,  we  took  pains  so  far  as  possible  to
avoid  everything  which  might  have  been  suspicious  with  unknown  writers.

Our  first  attempt,  though  only  partially  successful,  so  far  exceeded  our
expectations,  that  we  were  much  encouraged.

After  relating  three  attempts  at  answering  mental  questions
which  seem  to  have  been  failures  the  account  goes  on  : —

At  the  fourth  experiment,  a  repetition  of  the  third,  with  a  different
card,  the  suit  and  number  were  immediately  and  correctly  written.  As  in
these  cases  there  had  been  a  possibility  of  thought- transfer,  the  next
experiment  was  differently  arranged.

The  pack  was  carefully  shuffled  by  me,  and  held  under  a  table,  both
my  hand  and  W.'s  being  in  contact  with  it ;  neither  of  us  could  see  the
pack.  I  then  faced  the  top  card,  again  asking  mentally  for  the  suit  and
number  of  the  card  faced.  The  planchette  immediately  wrote  the  word
which.  We  were  about  to  consider  the  trial  a  failure  when  it  occurred  to
me  that  I  might  have  faced  two  cards.  I  found,  on  examining  the  pack,
that  this  was  not  so  ;  but,  still  without  suggestion  from  W.,  I  looked  further,
and  found  a  second  card  in  the  middle  of  the  pack,  which  I  had  un-
consciously faced  in  shuffling.

I  mention  this  in  detail  because  it  was  the  first  instance  of  a  writing
unexpected  by  either  W.  or  myself.  At  several  succeeding  experiments
the  planchette  correctly  wrote  suit  and  number  of  cards  turned  up  out  of
sight  of  every  one,  until  we  became  tired  of  that  test  and  gave  it  up.

A  series  of    questions,  the  answers  to  which  were  unknown  to  any  one


560  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

present,  seemed  to  furnish  a  fair  test  for  the  powers  of  the  planchette.  At
first  the  questions  were  asked  aloud ;  in  all  cases  they  were  put  without
suggestion  by  W.

I  will  describe  .two  experiments  as  instances  of  trials  of  this  kind.
During  these  two  experiments  we  sat  in  the  dark,  and  yet  the  answers
were  legibly  written.

My  first  question  was,  "  What  is  the  name  on  the  visiting  card  which
lies  at  the  top  of  the  cards  in  the  hall  ?  "

The  planchette  did  not  write  immediately ;  during  the  time  while  we
waited  for  an  answer  I  involuntarily  formed  an  idea  of  the  name  which  I
expected,  and  feared  that  thought-transfer  would  come  in  for  a  share  of
consideration  if  the  answer  should  be  correctly  written.  At  last  I  heard  the
motion  of  the  pencil ;  when  it  ceased  we  took  the  paper  to  the  light  and
found  the  words  Upside  down.  After  reading  this,  we  examined  the  card-
plate,  and  found  as  an  explanation  of  planchette's  answer,  the  top  card
turned  upside  down  on  the  pile.

Now,  not  only  had  S.  no  means  of  knowing  that  the  top  card  was  upside
down,  but  no  one  else  in  the  house  knew  it  until  after  the  writing  by
planchette ;  I  had  even  a  distinct  idea  of  a  certain  name  in  my  mind  during
the  whole  of  the  experiment.  Furthermore,  and  most  remarkable  of  all,
the  hall  where  the  card-plate  stood  was  unlighted,  so  that  when  we  went  to
examine  the  card  we  were  quite  unable  to  say  whether  or  not  there  was  a
name  upon  the  card  until  we  had  carried  the  plate  into  the  next  room.

This  fact  reminded  us  of  the  power  we  had  already  seen  in  planchette
to  read  the  suit  and  number  of  playing-cards,  held  under  the  table  so  as  to
be  out  of  the  range  of  possible,  as  well  as  actual,  vision.

We  put  the  same  question,  "  What  is  the  name  on  the  card  which  lies  at
the  top  on  the  card-plate  ? "  a  second  time,  the  cards  having  been  re-
arranged by  a  third  person,  who  himself  did  not  know  what  card  he  had

placed  at  the  top.     The  planchette  wrote,  "  Miss  L.  P.  H ",•  the  name  on

the  card  proved  to  be  Miss  Lillian  C.  H .      This  partial  mistake  struck  us

as  interesting,  but  we  could  find  no  explanation  for  it,  as  the  card-plate
stood  in  a  lighted  room  during  this  experiment,  where  it  would  have
seemed  much  easier  for  planchette  to  see  it  than  in  the  first  trial.

Although  these  questions  were  put  without  the  slightest  suggestion  from
W.,  he  had  been  told  before  each  experiment  what  inquiry  had  been  made.
From  this  time  on  we  took  pains  to  keep  from  him  all  knowledge,  not  only
of  the  answer,  but  of  the  question  asked.  The  question  was  either  asked
mentally  or  written  on  paper,  and  kept,  with  great  care,  out  of  his  sight,
except  in  a  few  instances,  which  I  will  mark  with  an  asterisk  in  the  follow-
ing descriptions.  Although  deception  was  out  of  the  question,  we  tried  to
perform  all  experiments  with  as  great  strictness  as  if  the  writer  had  been
unknown  to  us,  and  it  is  only  in  the  starred  cases  that  there  existed  the
possibility  of  W.'s  seeing  the  question.

In  the  following  four  experiments  the  answers  to  the  questions  asked
were  known  to  one  or  more  persons  in  the  room,  but  not  to  S. :  —

1.     Q.   Is  Miss  H.  going  away  Tuesday?

A.   Miss  H.  is  no  consequence  to  me.     I  don't  know.


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  561

2.  Q.   What  did  her  uncle  do  in  Paris  ?

A.   How  should  I  know  you  or  he  did  in  Paris,  or  all  France  (sic),  I
wasnt  there.

(Mr.  F.  said  he  had  been  thinking,  when  the  question  was  asked,  of  a
friend  who  had  been  with  him  in  Paris.)

3.  Q.   What  sort  of  a  voyage  home  did  he  have  ?

A.   Fair.     If  you  keep  that  question  to  yourself  there  is  no  chance
for  thought  transfer.

(This  was  not  written  at  once,  which  was  explained  by  the  planchette  as
due  to  the  fact  that  the  question  had  been  asked  mentally,  and  by  only  one
person.     It  was  one  of  a  few  cases  of  mirror-writing.)

4.  Q.   On  what  steamer  did  J.  A.  come  home  ?

A.   J.  A.  has  been  way  off  like  Mr.  F.     I  am  not  everywhere.

(This  was  interesting,  as  W.'s  acquaintance  with  Mr.  F.  was  limited  to
the  evening  in  which  the  latter  had  been  present  at  a  planchette  writing,
and  during  which,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  second  and  third  questions
above,  Mr.  F.'s  visit  to  Paris  was  mentioned.)

In  the  following  six  experiments  the  answers  to  the  questions  asked
were  known  to  persons  present  at  the  writing,  and  would  have  been  known
to  W.  if  he  had  known  what  question  was  proposed.  Accordingly,  our
care  was  exceedingly  great  in  all  these  cases  to  keep  the  question  out  of
sight.  It  is  worth  notice  that  in  no  case  was  the  answer  exactly  what  was
expected  by  those  who  knew  what  inquiry  had  been  made.

1.  Q.   Who  wrote  the  play  of  •  Hamlet'  ?

A.   Td  give  a  good  deal  to  know  that  myself.

2.  Q.   Can  Mr.  F.  make  planchette  write?

A.   He  can  if  he  tries  hard  enough  old  man  Bacon  and  gets  some  one
to  Ivlp  at  first.

(Before  and  after  the  words  *  old  man  Bacon '  were  what  might  have
been  meant  for  parentheses.  As  the  words  had  no  meaning  where  they  were
written,  we  naturally  referred  them  to  the  question  immediately  preceding,
"  Who  wrote  the  play  of  '  Hamlet'?  "  where  they  certainly  seemed  appro-

priate")  Oil  „    ■  o

*3.     Q.   What  letters  correspond  to  the  notes    d*     -1  —J    ?         '    f
A.    Oace.  Zp=±=$=±=l  I

*4.     Q.   Add  4905,  3641  and  9831.
A.   17377.
(Planchette  first  copied  the  quantities  to  be  added,  making,  by  the  way,
a  mistake  in   copying;    this   mistake,   however,   did    not  appear  in  the
addition,  though  a  mistake  does  appear  in  a  column  where  the  copy  was
correct.)

5.  Q.   How  far  is  the  earth  from  the  sun?
A.  192,310,009  kill.

(This  is  curious,  as  every  one  who  had  known  what  question  had  been
asked  was  expecting  the  answer  in  miles.  W.,  however,  always  uses  the
metric  system.)

6.  Q.    Who  wrote  '  Childe  Harold '  ?
A.   Byron,  not  drunk  when  he  did  it.


562  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing,

Here  would  seem  to  be  excellent  evidence  of  mental  questions
answered  and  of  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  replies  given.  Sometime
after  this  account  was  received  I  had  the  opportunity  to  sit  with  Mr.
S.  and  the  friends  with  whom  the  former  successes  had  occurred.
There  were  several  other  persons  present  as  well.  Writing  came  in
profusion,  bold  and  legible,  but  nothing  that  could  be  construed  as
telepathic.  Many  questions  were  written  by  the  ladies  with  whom  the
former  successes  had  occurred,  out  of  S.'s  sight,  but  were  either  not
answered,  or  answered  so  vaguely  that  it  was  not  certain  that  the
particular  question  had  been  grasped.  The  questions  were  written
across  the  table  from  Mr.  S.  Considering  various  hyperaesthetic
possibilities,  such  questions  should  always  be  prepared  outside  of  the
room.  Twice,  early  in  1888,  Mr.  S.  sat  for  the  Secretary  and  myself,
when  questions  were  secretly  written,  but  in  no  instance  pertinently
answered.  These  negative  results  are,  of  course,  not  incompatible
with  the  positive  ones  previously  obtained,  for  if  telepathy  exist,  it
is  certainly  of  fitful  occurrence,  even  in  a  given  individual.  But  they
lend,  at  least,  no  strength  to  the  first  report ;  and,  as  hick  will  always
have  it,  farther  sittings  with  us  (except  the  two  recorded  at  the
outset  of  this  paper)  have  been  made  impossible  to  the  subject  by
family  wishes  and  his  busy  life.

Another  similarly  baffling  case  is  given  me  by  Mr.  C,  who  gradu-
ated in  1888  at  Harvard  College,  whom  I  know  intimately,  and
whose  sincerity  I  cannot  doubt.  Mr.  C,  it  should  be  said,  is  himself
the  subject  of  certain  automatic  phenomena,  with  which,  however,
this  narrative  has  naught  to  do.  He  told  me  of  the  following  ex-
perience, either  one  or  two  days  after  it  happened,  and  then  wrote
out  the  account  which  follows  :  —

It  was  on  the  evening  of  November  2.  The  company  consisted  of  four
ladies  and  two  gentlemen.  In  the  course  of  conversation  a  chance  remark
turned  our  thoughts  upon  psychological  matters.  Almost  every  one  had
some  strange  thing  to  relate,  but  no  one  would  acknowledge  belief  in  any
supernatural  power.

After  speaking  of  various  reports  of  mind-reading  and  hypnotic  ex-
periments I  said,  in  a  half -serious,  half-joking  way,  "  Suppose  we  try
something  of  the  sort."

The  suggestion  being  favored,  the  daughter  of  the  house,  a  girl  of  nine-
teen or  twenty  years  of  age,  seated  herself  by  a  table,  with  pencil  and
paper.  She  seemed  to  think  it  was  all  foolery,  but  was  amiable  enough  to
contribute  all  she  could  to  possible  success,  and,  shading  her  eyes  with  her
hand,  she  made  herself  as  passive  as  possible.

On  my  part,  I  stood  up  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  table,  about  three  feet
removed,  and  fixed  my  mind  upon  a  certain  word,  and  (wishing  to  select


Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.  563

one  that  would  be  most  remote  from  her  mind)  I  took  *  hell.'  With
almost  no  hesitation  in  beginning,  the  girl  made  the  letters,  one  after
another,  with  easy  legibleness  (though  the  handwriting  was  neither  hers
nor  mine) .

Surprised  at  the  success  of  the  experiment,  I  felt  interested  to  continue,
and  now  determined  to  test  it  to  the  satisfaction  of  others.  Accordingly,  I
went  for  a  moment  into  the  hall  with  one  of  the  company,  and  there  said
to  her  that  my  next  word  should  be  '  omen.'  Returning  to  the  room,  the
same  success  attended  as  before,  except  that  the  '  e '  was,  in  its  smallness,
out  of  proportion  to  the  other  letters,  and  the  line  between  '  o '  and  '  m '
was  too  long,  because  of  a  slip  of  the  hand.

The  experiment  continued  in  like  manner  till  some  ten  or  a  dozen  words
were  written,  of  which  I  now  remember  (besides  the  above  two,  '  hell '
and  'omen1)  'word,'  'four,'  'moon.1

The  person  to  whom  each  time  I  announced  my  intended  word  was  of  a
disposition  entirely  to  be  relied  on  as  free  from  either  serious  or  facetious
tricks,  though,  for  that  matter,  I  do  not  see  how  collusion  with  the
1  Subject '  was  possible  without  being  noticed.

The  paper  on  which  the  words  were  written  I  wanted  to  take,  but  as  the
young  lady  wished  to  keep  it  I  said  nothing.  On  inquiring  for  it  a  few
days  later,  it  could  not  be  found.

On  the  third  day  after  (November  5) ,  I  again  went  to  the  house  to  see  if
more  might  not  be  done.  Certain  other  interests,  however,  being  empha-
sized in  my  mind,  I  did  not  find  myself  able  to  exert  so  strong  a  will  as  on
the  previous  occasion.  Whether  because  of  this  or  not,  I  cannot  judge ;
but  the  results  were  more  meagre,  but  two  words  being  successfully  writ-
ten, 'music1  and  'girl.1  Upon  my  thinking  of  one  word,  'orange,1  my
*  subject1  wrote  all  the  letters,  but  in  wrong  order,  thus:  'georan.1*

An  additional  fact  that  I  noticed  this  time  (and  I  think  it  was  true  of  the
first  evening's  experiments)  was,  that  when  I  stood  at  the  right  side  of
the  girl  she  wrote  downwards,  and  when  I  stood  opposite  her  she  wrote
upwards.

The  rest  of  the  trials,  which  were  of  lines  and  diagrams  imagined  by
me,  resulted  in  nothing  but  undecipherable  scrawls.

Concerning  the  feelings  of  myself  and  of  the  '  Subject 1  there  is  but
this  to  say :  that  the  girl  had  a  headache  the  next  day  after  the  experiment
(to  which,  being  unaccustomed  to  headaches,  she  ascribed  it),  and  no
effect  after  the  second.  Upon  me  there  was  no  after  effect  either  time,
except  that  after  the  first  experiment,  and  on  the  same  night,  I  felt  as  one
does  after  giving  strained  attention  to  one  thing.

The  lady  who  did  the  writing,  three  other  ladies,  and  a  gentleman
who  witnessed  the  first  evening's  performance,  endorsed,  on  Nov.  16,
Mr.  C.\s  statement  as  a  *  true  report' ;  but  I  am  not  at  liberty  in  this
case  to  publish  any  names.  On  Dec.  2,  Mr.  C.  added  this  post-
script :  —

I  omitted  to  say  with  regard  to  the  second  series  of  trials,  that  *  music,1


564  Notes  on  Automatic  Writing.

'girl,'  and  'orange'  (the  three  words  which  the  girl  wrote)  were  the
only  words  that  I  tried.

Concerning  the  first  evening's  experiments,  my  memory  enables  me
to  add,  that  besides  the  words  already  mentioned  as  being  successfully
written,  my  subject  wrote  with  remarkable  plainness  this  figure  [a  spiral],
and  also  its  reverse  (though  not  so  promptly) .

Yet  one  further  fact,  perhaps  worth  noting:  On  this  first  evening  I
twice  (possibly  three  times)  let  my  thoughts  stray  whithersoever  they
would,  while  my  subject  and  the  onlookers  supposed  that  I  was  exercising
ray  intent  upon  some  particular  word.  The  results  in  these  instances  were
nothing ;  unrelated  pencil-marks  as  rambling  as  my  thoughts,  though,  of
course,  in  no  way  resembling  them.

A  few  days  after  this  I  spent  an  evening  at  the  subject's  house
with  C.  Nothing  of  interest  occurred,  though  we  tried  to  get  results
similar  to  those  of  the  first  occasion.  The  subject  wrote  a  very
little,  automatically  ;  but  no  sign  whatever  of  telepathy  appeared.
C,  I  found,  had  stood  (on  the  successful  occasion)  where  he  could
see  the  movement  of  the  young  lady's  hand  as  it  wrote.  The
hypothesis  must  of  course  be  considered,  that  he  may  have  guided  it
by  unconscious  indications,  like  those  given  in  the  4  willing  game  '  to
the  blindfold  subject.  The  indications  must  in  this  instance  have
been  reduced  to  changes  in  his  respiration.  If  such  indications  were
given,  they  were  at  any  rate  ineffectual  when  I  was  there,  and  also
on  three  later  occasions,  on  which,  with  the  same  modus  operandi,
Mr.  C.  reports  that  he  only  got  total  or  partial  failure.  The  sitting
first  reported  remains  thus  a  unique  occurrence,  not  to  be  distinctly
classified  as  yet.

The  great  desideratum  is  to  get  cases  which  can  be  examined
continuously.  Little  can  be  done  without  the  help  of  associates  of
the  Society.  I  publish  these  incomplete  notes,  making  no  mention
of  much  of  our  collected  material,  in  order  to  show  how  important  is
the  field,  and  how  great  the  need  of  its  assiduous  cultivation.

WILLIAM  JAMES.


Note  on  Two  Recently  Reported  Cases.  565


NOTE  ON  TWO  RECENTLY  REPORTED  CASES  OF
PATHOLOGICAL  AND  OTHER  PSEUDO-PRESENTI-
MENTS.

While  I  cannot  doubt  that  readers  of  my  Report  and  of  its  Supple-
ment will  be  already  sufficiently  weary  of  my  favorite  hypothesis  for
explaining  a  large  number  of  our  narratives,  I  do  not  wish  to  let
pass  an  opportunity  for  calling  attention  to  two  more  proofs  that
pseudo- presentiments  are  actual  mental  phenomena,  and  that  my
hypothesis  suggests,  at  all  events,  a  vera  causa.  In  the  Archiv  fiLr
Psychiatrie  for  the  present  year  I  find,  just  as  this  number  of  our
Transactions  goes  to  press,  a  new  case  reported,  in  an  article  by
Doctor  J.  Orschansky,  Docent  in  Charkow,  in  Russia.  (See  Arch.  f.
Psych.,  Bd.  xx,  Hft.  2,  p.  337.)  The  case  is  one  of  a  Russian
student,  twenty-three  years  old,  with  hereditary  predisposition  to
nervous  disorders.  An  early  and  not  precisely  happy  marriage,
occurring  while  he  was  still  a  student,  brought  him  ioto  much  trouble.
In  December,  1887,  a  student  insurrection  at  the  Moscow  University
led  to  his  expulsion  from  the  city  by  the  police,  along  with  many
other  students.  Meanwhile,  his  wife  bore  him  a  child.  After  spend-
ing a  short  time  in  the  country  with  her  he  returned  to  his  mother's
house  in  Charkow,  manifested  much  disturbance  of  mind,  had  delu-
sions of  persecution,  and  finally  was  brought  under  Orschansky's
care  in  the  Charkow  Asylum.  His  delusions  related  mostly  to  the
police  ;  hallucinations  of  sense  were,  at  the  time  of  examination,
lacking ;  his  consciousness  was,  as  a  whole,  deeply  depressed,
dreamy,  confused.  In  so  far  as  this  cloudiness  of  mind  permitted,
however,  he  showed  a  tendency,  even  in  this  early  stage  of  his
disease,  to  fairly  systematized  delusions,  so  that  the  case  is  diagnosed
as  paranoia.

On  being  questioned  by  the  physician,  he  is  cool,  smiling,  stupid  in
appearance,  passive,  unresisting,  generally  apathetic,  but  not  inco-
herent. He  confesses  to  a  dread  about  his  treatment,  as  he  is  sure
that  criminals  are  always  poisoned  with  mysterious  drugs.  u  Do  you
fear  me?"  the  physician  in  effect  asks. — "  Yes.  Three  years  ago  it
was  prophesied  to  me  that  after  three  years  Doctor  Orschansky  would
treat  me  with  electricity,  but  without  success." — "  But  how,  then,  if
I  don't  treat  you  with  electricity?" — "  Oh,  that,  I  think,  was  prophe-
sied me  too."      In    narrating  his  adventures  the  patient  goes  on :


566  Note  on  Two  Recently  Reported  Cases,

"  In  the  railway  car,  too,  everybody  was  talking  about  me.  They
prophesied  everything  that  is  to  happen  to  me ;  how,  for  in-
stance, at  the  station  in  Kursk,  I  should  see  the  clerk  at  the  Buffet
handing  out  tea  to  the  passengers  ;  and  how  this  clerk  would  be  no-
body else  but  Aliouschka,  the  executioner  of  Moscow.  On  the  waj',
too,  I  saw  a  veiled  woman.  I  think  it  was  my  wife.  That,  too,
had  been  prophesied  to  me.  And  here  I  am  being  watched  by  the
Princess  T.  She  is  disguised  as  servant-girl.  It  is  the  same  person
always  following  me  about;  sometimes  she's  blonde,  sometimes  bru-
nette, sometimes  young,  and  sometimes  old.  And  that,  too,  they
prophesied  to  me." —  "  And  have  people  prophesied  anything  else  to
you?"  —  "  Oh,  yes  ;  it  was  said  that  the  doctors  in  Charkow  would
declare  me  mad,  and  then  quarrel  over  me  with  the  doctors  in
Moscow,  who  would  declare  me  sane,  and  would  finally  win  the
day."

Closely  associated  with  these  delusions  was  a  confused  feeling  of
the  power,  the  mysteriousness,  or,  in  cases,  the  vast  age  of  the
patient's  friends  and  companions.  "  Are  you  married?"  asks  the
doctor. —  "  I  think  so."  —  "  But  you  must  surely  know  that." — u  How
can  one  know?"  —  "  But  who  is  your  wife?"  —  UA  midwife."
(This  was  true.)  —  M  How  old  is  she  ?  "  —  "I  don't  know.  She  says
she's  twenty-five  years  old;  but  it's  possible  she's  1,500  years  old,
or  perhaps  more  ;  for  she's  everlasting  "  (denn  sie  ist  ewig) .  As  for
what  Orschansky  calls  u  the  persuasion  of  the  patient  that  all  his  fate
has  been  prophesied  to  him,"  our  author  directh7  denies  that  this  has
here  anything  to  do  with  ordinary  Dyppettdenken,  the  "  double  mem-
ory" illusion  of  daily  life.  u  Probably,"  says  Orschansky,  "this
persuasion  depends  on  his  feeling  of  submission  to  his  fate,  on  the
idea  of  the  mysterious  power  that  oppresses  his  life,  an  idea  not
uncommon  in  cases  of  primary  hypochondriac  paranoia."  The  con-
nection of  the  pseudo-presentiments  with  the  patient's  general  con-
dition of  confused  surprise  seems  to  me  also  noteworthy.

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  pathological  case,  I  have  just  received,
in  consequence  of  a  recent  discussion  of  this  topic,  the  instance  re-
ported in  the  following  letter,  which  speaks  for  itself,  being  from  one
of  our  most  frequent  and  useful  correspondents.  The  experience,
although  not  a  typical  pseudo-presentiment,  is  a  near  relative  of  the
class.

Boston,  Feb.  24,  1889.
Dear  Mr.  Hodgson  :  —

If  I  remember  right,  Professor  Royce  concluded  that  most  of  the  cases
where  persons  feel  sure,  after  some  striking  event,  that  they  had  distinctly
prophesied  it  before  its  occurrence,  were  cases  of  honest  hallucination,  and


Note  on  Two  Recently  Reported  Cases.  567

where  the  feeling  that  the  event  had  been  clearly  foretold  was  really  the
product  of  the  mind  after  the  event.  I  will  tell  you  of  a  dream  which  I
had  a  few  nights  ago,  which  possibly  may  be  of  interest  in  connection  with
these  questions.  My  friend,  C.  W.  B.,  visited  us  recently,  and  spoke  with
Mrs.  A.  and  me  repeatedly  about  his  several  trips  to  Europe,  describing
especially  his  experiences  in  Spain  during  his  last  trip.

A  few  nights  later  I  dreamed  of  looking  over  with  him  a  lot  of  large
photographs  of  scenes  in  Scotland,  which  he  took  when  we  were  in  Scot-
land together,  many  of  the  photographs  showing  me  very  plainly  in  various
attitudes  and  with  different  groups  of  people.  Now,  Mr.  B.  and  I  were
never  in  Europe  together,  and  I  was  never  in  Scotland  in  my  life.  Yet  a3
each  photograph  was  shown  I  felt  all  the  keen  delight  of  recognition  of
well-remembered  scenes,  and  frequently  exclaimed,  "  How  well  I  remem-
ber that !  "  or  "  Don't  you  remember  the  day  we  were  there,11  etc.  I  can
still  remember  the  features  of  several  of  the  pictures,  parks,  grounds,  etc.,
as  they  appeared  in  these  photographs,  and  my  keen  interest  in  seeing
them  again,  and  my  memory  of  many  incidents  and  particulars  of  our
being  at  these  places  together  at  some  former  time.  I  then  dreamed,  with
the  well-known  inconsistency  of  a  dream,  that  in  the  case  of  one  place,
Mrs.  A.  had  been  with  me,  and  I  turned  and  asked  her  if  she  didn't  re-
member the  day  we  were  there,  and  what  the  old  lady  in  charge  of  the
place  had  said  to  us.

If  I  could  in  this  dream  have  so  strong  a  sense  of  having  been  in  the
photographed  places  before  that  each  brought  up  a  flood  of  remembered
experiences,  all  of  which  were —  pictures  and  remembrances —  the  coinage
of  the  dream  at  that  moment,  is  it  not  likely  that  this  is  a  power  which  the
mind  sometimes  exercises  in  waking  hours  ?  Yours,  C.  H.  A.

I  may  add  the  repeated  expression  of  my  hope  that  some  of  the
alienists  of  our  asylums  in  this  country  may  find  time  to  make  note
of  any  analogous  cases  that  come  under  their  attention.  Pseudo-
presentiments,  once  distinguished,  might  prove  to  be  anomalies  worthy
of  even  a  more  serious  consideration.

JOSIAH  ROYCE.


CONSTITUTION.


Article  I.  —  Name  and  Objects.

Section  1 .  This  Association  shall  be  called  the  American  Societi
for  Psychical  Research.

Sect.  2.  The  object  of  the  Society  shall  be  the  systematic  study
of  the  laws  of  mental  action.

Article  II.  —  Government.

Section  1.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Society  a  Council  shall  be
chosen,  consisting  of  twenty-one  members,  —  seven  to  hold  office  for
one  year,  seven  for  two  years,  and  seven  for  three  years ;  and  there-
after seven  shall  be  chosen  by  the  members  at  each  annual  meeting,
to  serve  for  three  years.

Sect.  2.  The  Council  shall  elect,  each  year,  at  its  first  meeting
after  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Society,  the  following  officers  of
the  Society :  a  President,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Treasurer,  who  shall
discharge  the  duties  usually  assigned  to  these  respective  officers.
The  Council  shall  elect  as  many  Vice-Presidents  as  shall  be  deemed
advisable.

Sect.  3.  The  Council  shall  exercise  general  supervision  of  the
investigations  of  the  Society,  and  shall  appoint  the  investigating
committees.

Sect.  4.  Vacancies  in  the  Council,  caused  by  death  or  resigna-
tion, shall  be  filled  by  the  Council.

Sect.  5.     The  President  shall  be  a  member  of  the  Council.

Article  III. — Members  and  Associates.

Section  1.  Any  person  of  respectable  character  and  attainments
is  eligible  to  the  Society  as  an  associate.  Associates  shall  receive
all  the  publications  of  the  Society,  may  participate  in  all  the  meetings,
present  communications,  and  join  in  the  debates.

Sect.  2.  Members,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  num-
ber, may  be  elected  by  the  Council  from  the  body  of  associates.
Members  have  all  the  privileges  of  associates,  are  entitled  to  vote,
and  are  eligible  to  the  Council.


Constitution.  569

Sect.  3.  Associates  may  be  elected  either  by  the  Council  or  by
the  Executive  Committee  of  any  branch,  after  nomination  in  writing
by  two  members  or  associates.

Sect.  4.  Each  member  and  associate  shall  pay  to  the  Treasurer
an  annual  assessment  of  three  dollars.  The  name  of  any  member  or
associate  two  years  in  arrears  for  annual  assessments  shall  be  erased
from  the  list  of  the  Society  ;  and  no  such  person  shall  be  restored
until  he  has  paid  his  arrearages  or  has  been  reelected.

Sect.  5.  Any  member  or  associate  may  be  dropped  from  the  rolls
of  the  Society  on  recommendation  of  the  Council  and  a  two-thirds
vote  at  any  meeting  of  the  Society,  notice  of  such  recommendation
having  been  given  at  least  two  weeks  previously.

Article  IV.  —  Meetings.

Section  1.  The  Annual  Meeting  shall  be  held  the  second  Tuesday
in  January.

Sect.  2.     Other  meetings  may  be  held  at  the  call  of  the  Council.

Article  V.  —  Quorum.

Ten  members  shall  constitute  a  quorum  of  the  Society,  and  five  a
quorum  of  the  Council.

Article  VI.  — Accounts.

A  committee  of  two  shall  be  appointed  at  each  annual  meeting  to
audit  the  accounts  of  the  Treasurer  for  the  year  closing  with  that
meeting.

Article  VII.  —  Similar  Societies.

It  shall  be  the  policy  of  this  Society,  by  correspondence  and  other-
wise, to  cooperate  with  societies  of  similar  object  elsewhere.

Article  VIII. — Branch  Societies.

Section  1 .  A  Branch  of  the  Society  may  be  established  in  any
place  by  the  Council,  on  written  application  from  not  less  than  five
members  resident  in  that  place.

Sect.  2.  The  members  of  the  Society  on  whose  application  a
Branch  is  established  shall  constitute  an  Executive  Committee  to
arrange  the  affairs  of  that  Branch.  The  Executive  Committee  shall
have  power  to  add  to  their  numbers  by  the  election  of  other  members
of  the  Society  belonging  to  that  Branch.  They  shall  also  have  power
to  choose  from  their  own  members  officers  of  the  Branch,  to  frame


570  Constitution,

by-laws  for  its  government,  and  to  elect  persons,  resident  in  their
immediate  vicinity,  as  associates  of  the  Societ}^  and  members  of  the^
Branch.

Article  IX.  —  By-Laws.

Section  1.  By-Laws  recommended  by  the  Council  maybe  adopted
at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Sect.  2.  By-Laws  may  be  rescinded  or  changed  upon  recommen-
dation of  the  Council  at  any  meeting  by  a  majority  vote.

Article  X.  —  Amendments.

Amendments  to  the  Constitution,  recommended  by  the  Council,
may  be  adopted  at  any  annual  meeting  by  a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the
members  present.


PROCEEDINGS,  ETC.,  OF  THE  ENGLISH  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH.

Members  and  associates  may  purchase  the  back  numbers  of  the  Proceedings
of  the  English  Society.  Parts  I. -VIII.,  40  cents  each;  Part  IX.,  80  cents;
Part  X.,  60  cents  ;  Part  XL,  80  cents ;  Part  XII. ,  80  cents.  Under  no  circum-
stances is  a  member  or  associate  entitled  to  more  than  one  copy  of  each  part.

Members  and  associates,  on  payment  of  their  assessments,  may  have  any
future  parts  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  English  Society  which  are  issued  during
the  period  of  their  membership.  But  the  Proceedings  will  not  be  sent  except
to  those  who  may  so  request.

Members  and  associates  may  subscribe  for  the  Journal  of  the  English
S.  P.  R.,  published  monthly  (Oct.,  1888-July,  1889),  price  one  dollar  ($1.00)
per  annum,  post  free.

"Phantasms  op  the  Living"  (2  vols.,  demy  8vo,  by  Edmund  Gurney,
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  and  Frank  Podmore,  published  by  the  English  S.  P.  R.,
price  one  guinea)  will  be  sent,  post  free,  to  any  member  or  associate  of  the
American  Society,  on  payment  of  $5.00.

Application  should  be  made  to

RICHARD  HODGSON,  Secretary,

5  Boylston  place,  Boston,  Mass.


LIST    OF


Members  and   Associates.


(FEBRUARY,    1889.)


President


Professor  S.  P.  LAH&LEY,


Washington.


Utce-^resttientg.


Professor  C.  R.  CROSS,

Mass.  Inst,  of  Techn.

Professor  GEORGE  S.  FDLLERTOfl,

University  of  Pennsylvania.


Professor  WILLIAM  JAMES,


Cambridge.


Professor  JOSIAH  ROYCE,


Cambridge.


Council


Dr.  W.  S.  BIGELOW,

Boston.
Prof.  HENRY  P.  BOWDITCH,

Boston.
Mr.  C.  B.  CORY,

Boston.
Dr.  E.  COWLES,

Somerville.
Prof.  C.  R.  CROSS,

Boston.
Prof.  G.  S.  FULLERTON,

Philadelphia.
Dr.  E.  G.  GARDINER,

Boston.
Prof.  WILLIAM  JAMES,

Cambridge.
Prof.  JOSEPH  JASTROW,

Madison.
Prof.  S.  P.  LANGLEY,

Washington.


Prof.  CHARLES  S.  MINOT,

Boston.
Prof.  SIMON  NEWCOMB,

"Washington.
Prof.  E.  C.   PICKERING,

Cambridge.
Mr.  W.  H.  PICKERING,

Cambridge.
Dr.  MORTON  PRINCE,

Boston.
Prof.  JOSIAH  ROYCE,

Cambridge.
Rev.  M.  J.   SAVAGE,

Boston.
Prof.  COLEMAN  SELLERS,

Philadelphia.
Mr.  R.  PEARSALL  SMITH,

Philadelphia.
Dr.  J.  W.  WARREN,

Boston.


Prof.  WILLIAM   WATSON,

Boston.


Ereagurer*

Dr.  J.  W.  WARREN,        -        Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston.


Secretarg  attrj  Assistant  treasurer.

RICHARD  HODGSON,        -        5  Boylston  Place,  Boston.


572


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


MEMBERS.


Dr.FRANCis  E.  Abbot,  Larch  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Dr.  S.  L.  Abbot, 90  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

Joseph  Albree,  20  Market  St.,  Allegheny,
Pa.

Frakcis  Almy,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Charles  H.  Ames,  Woodside  Cottage,  New-
tonville,  Mass.

Dr.  J.  B.  Andrews,  Buffalo  State  Asylum  for
Insane,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Pres.F.A.P.  Barnard,  Columbia  Coll.,  N.Y.

James  W.  Bartlett,  Dover,  N.  H.

Dr.  W.  S.  Bigelow,  60  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  W.  R.  Birds  all,  144  East  74th  St.,  N.Y.

Francis  Blake,  Keewaydin,  Weston,  Mass.

Prof.  H.  P.  Bowditch,  Harv.  Med.  Sch.,  Bos-
ton.

Dr.  E.  C.  Briggs,  125  Marlborough  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  233  Clarendon  St.,
Boston.

John  F.  Brown,  16  Baldwin  St.,  Newton.

Mrs.  J.F.  Brown,  16  Baldwin  St., Newton.

Dr.  W.  1ST.  Bullard,  89  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  Frank  E.  Bundy,  402  Columbus  Ave.,
Boston.

Col.  John  C.  Bundy,  92  La  Salle  St.,  Chicago.

Gouverneur  M.  Carnochan,  1  Nassau  St.,
New  York.

Lucien  Carr,  346  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  E.  W.  Claypole  Akron,  Ohio.

Prof.  Edward  D.  Copu,  2102  Pine  St.,Phila.

C.  B.  Cory,  8  Arlington  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  Cowles,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,
Mass.

Chas.  R.  Crane,  297  S.  Ashland  Avenue,
Chicago.

Prof.  W.  O.  Crosby,  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  R.  Cross,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Prof.  John  G.  Curtis,  127  East  35th  St.,  N.Y.

Thomas  Davidson,  Orange,  N.J.

George  Dimmock,  61  Sacramento  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Ave.,
Boston.

Prof.  T.  M.  Drown,  Inst,  of  Tech.,  Boston.

Dr.  Theodore  Dunham,  53  E.  30th  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  W.  R.  Dunham,  Keene,  N.H.

Prof.  William  B.  Dwight,  Poughkeepsie,
Vassar  College,  N.Y.

Dr.  Robert  T.  Edes,  1216  Eighteenth  St.,
Washington,  D.  C.

S.  F.  Emmons,  U.S.  Geol.  Survey,  Box  591,
Washington,  D.C.

Prof.  C.  C.  Everett,  53  Garden  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

John  M.  Forbes,  Milton,  Mass.


Mrs.  C.  L.  Franklin,  Baltimore,  Md.

Prof.  George  S.  Fullerton,  Univ.  of  Penn.,
Phila.

Harlow  S.  Gale,  44  S.  Middle,  New  Haven,
Conn.

Dr.  Edward  G.  Gardiner,  289  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Dr.  F.  H.  Gerrish,  Portland,  Me.

G.  K.  Gilbert,  Washington,  D.C.

Albert  Hale,  5  Otis  Place,  Boston.

George  S.  Hale,  10  Tremont  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  H.  Hall,  5  Avon  St., Cambridge,  Mass.

Prof.  James  Hall,  Albany,  N.Y.

Dr.  Allan  McLane  Hamilton,  New  York.

Judge  Wm.D.  Harden,  Savannah,  Ga.

William  T.  Harris,  LL.D.,  Concord,  Mass.

John  Heard,  Jr.,  Medford,  Mass.

Angelo  Heilprin,  Acad,  of  Nat.  Sci.,  Phila.

Augustus  Hemenway,  Readville,  Mass.

Col.  T.  W.  Higginson,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.,  5  Boylston  Place,
Boston.

Dr.  J.  B.  Holder,  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,
Central  Park,  New  York.

Henry  Holt,  29  W.  23d  St.,  New  York.

Dr.  Samuel  A.  Hopkins,  235  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Gardiner  G.  Hubbard,  Washington,  D.C.

Woodward  Hudson,  Concord,  Mass.

Dr.  Mahlon  Hutchinson,  103  State  St.,  Chi-
cago, 111.

C.  C.  Jackson,  181  Commonwealth  Avenue,
Boston.

Prof.  William  James,  18  Garden  St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Dr.  Joseph  Jastrow,  Univ.  of  Wisconsin,
Madison,  Wis.

Prof.  H.  Jayne,  1826  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

J.  H.  Kidder,  Smithsonian  Inst.,  Washing-
ton.

Miss  Hannah  P.    Kimball,   325   Common-
wealth Ave.,  Boston.

Roland  King,  Newport,  R.I.

Prof.    S.    P.    Langley,  Smithsonian     Inst.,
Washington.

Dr.  Albert  Lefeingwell,  Dansville,  N.Y.

Col.   J.    S.    Lockwood,    146     Franklin    St.,
Boston.

Geo.   E.   Long,   Jos.  Dixon   Crucible   Co.,
Jersey  City,  N.J.

Dr.  Anna  Lukens,  1068  Lexington  Ave.,  N.Y.

Prof.  John  P.  Marshall,  College  Hill,  Mass.

W.  J.  McGee,  U.S.  Geol.  Survey,  Washing-
ton.

Josiah  B.  Millet,  150  Charles  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  K.  Mills,  1909  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

Prof.  Charles  Sedgwick  Minot,  22  Marl
borough  St.,  Boston.


List  of  Members  and  Associates*


573


Prof.  Simon  Newcomb,  Washington,  D.C.

Dr.  William  Notes,  McLean  Asylum,  Som-
erville,  Mass.

Dr.  Richard  J.  Nunn,  119£  York  St.,  Savan-
nah, Ga.

Gen.  F.  A.  Osborn,  236  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  F.  W.  Page,  Hotel  Cluny,  Boylston  St.,
Boston.

Prof.  G.  H.  Palmer,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dr.  Roswell  Park,  510  Delaware  Ave.,  Buf-
falo, N.Y.

Wm.  L.Parker,  339  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Francis  Parkman,  50  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  G.  T.  W.  Patrick,  Iowa  City,  Iowa.

Prof.  J.  M.  Peirce,  Cambridge,  Mass.

George  Pellew,  Katonah,  N.Y.

Prof.  Edward  C.  Pickering,  Cambridge,
Mass.

W.  H.  Pickering,  Harvard  Observatory,
Cambridge.

W.  P.  Preble,  Jr.,  237  Broadway,  N.Y.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  71  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Raphael  Pumpellt,  Newport,  R.I.

Dr.  Charles  P.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Dr.  James  J.  Putnam,  106  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Josiah  Quinct,  66  State  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Edward  T.  Reichert,  Univ.  of  Penn.,
Phila.

Dr.  W.  L.  Richardson,  225  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Prof.  C.  V.  Riley,  1700  13th  St.,  N.W.,  Wash-
ington, D.C.


John  Ritchie,  Jr.,  Box  2725,  Boston.
John  C.  Ropes,  40  State  St.,  Boston.
Prof.  Josiah  Rotce,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Prof.  C.  S.  Sargent,  Brookline,  Mass.
Rev.  M.  J.  Savage,  25  Concord  Sq.,  Boston.
G.  C.  Sawyer,  Utica,  N.Y.
Samuel  H.  Scudder,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Dr.  E.  C.  Seguin,  419  Madison  Ave.,  New

York.
Prof.  Coleman   Sellers,  3301   Baring   St.,

Phila.
Dr.    R.  W.    Shuteldt,    Smithsonian   Inst.,

Washington,  D.C.
Philip  Sherwood  Smith,  261  Georgia  St.,

Buffalo,  N.  Y.
R.  Pearsall  Smith,    44    Grosvenor    Road,

Westminster  Embankment,  London,  S.W.
Dr.  W.  Thomson,  1426  Walnut  St.,  Phila.
Prof.  C.  H.  Toy,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Frederick  William  True,  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,

Washington.
Edmund  Tweedy,  Newport,  R.I.
Dr.  O.  F.  Wadsworth,  139    Boylston    St.,

Boston.
Dr.  J.  W.  Warren,  241  Boylston  St.,  Bos-

ton.
Sereno  Watson,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Prof  .William  Watson,  107  Marlborough  St.,

Boston.
H.  M.  Watts,  "  The  Press,"  Phila.,  Pa.
Samuel  Wells,  155  Boylston  St.,  Boston.
Harold   Whiting,  9  Waterham    St.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.
John  G.  Whittier,  Danvers,  Mass.
Rev.  Edward  J.  Young,  D.D.,  519  Main  St.,

Waltham,  Mass.


ASSOCIATE   MEMBERS.


Brooks  Adams,  23  Court  St.,  Boston.

Geo.  R.  Agassiz,  14  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

John  Albree,  Jr.,  122  Concord  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  T.  B.  Aldrich,  59  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  Philip  Allen,  97  George  St.,  Provi-
dence, R.  I.

Miss  Elizabeth  L.  Andrew,  110  Charles
St.,  Boston.

John  F.  Andrew,  cor.  Gloucester  and  Com-
monwealth Ave.,  Boston.

Charles  L.  Andrews,  Milton,  Mass.

Mrs.  J.  A.  Andrews,  307  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

C.  F.  Atkinson,  46  Mason  Building,  Boston.

Prof.  Peter  T.  Austin,  New  Brunswick,
N.J.

George  D.  Ayers,  Maiden,  Mass.

Dr.  Pallas  Bache,  Fort  Adams,  Newport,
R.I.

Mrs.  John  C.  Bancroft,  61  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  James  M.  Barnard,  Milton,  Mass.


Thurlow  Weed  Barnes,  Messrs.  Houghton,
Mifflin,  &Co.,  4  Park  St.,  Boston.

Clarence  W.  Barron,  121  Beacon  St.,  Bos.
ton.

S.  J.  Barrows,  141  Franklin  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  C.  S.  Bartlett,  176  Commonwealth  Ave.,
Boston.

Bernard  Berenson,  Harvard  Coll.,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Wesley  Bigelow,  Studio  Building,  Tremont
St.,  Boston.

John  H.  Blake,  53  Devonshire  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  S.  P.  Blake,  Jr.,  20  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

James  B.  Bond,  230  W.  59th  St.,  N.Y.

Francis  Boott,  Cambridge,  Mass.

C.  P.  Bowditch,  28  State  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  H.  I.  Bowditch,  113  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  J.  T.  Bowen,  14  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Richard  Bower,  Poste  Restante,  Chicago,
111.

Isidore  Braggiotti,  208  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Martin  Brimmer,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.


574


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Frederick  G-.  Bromberg,  Mobile,  Ala.

Mrs.  H.  H.  Brown,  269  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  S.  Brown,  Hotel  Normandie,  Broadway
and  38th  St.,  New  York.

G-.  II.  Browne,  8  Garden  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Mrs.  Bruen,  79  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

.\lbert  H.  Buck,  19  East  3Sth  St.,  N.Y.

Dr.  Howard  M.  Buck,  Hotel  Guilford,  New-
bury  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  E.  P.  Buffett,  520  Bergen  Ave.,  Jersey
City  Heights,  N.J.

John  B.  Burnet,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Tucker  Burr,  410  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  A.  E.  Bursley,  96  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Virginia  Butler,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Edward  T.  Cabot,  Clyde  St.,  Brookline,
Mass.

Mrs.  Mason  Campbell,  1826  Delancy  Place,
Phila.

A.  A.  Caret,  100  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Capt.  R.  Catlin,  Soldiers'  Home,  Washing-
ton.

R.  W.  Chadbourn,  First  National  Bank,  Co-
lumbus, Wis.

Horace  P.  Chandler,  47  Devonshire  St.,
Boston.

G.  B.  Chase,  234  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  E.  D.  CnENET,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Mrs.  A.  P.  Cochran,  120  West  Ormsby  Ave.,
Louisville,  Ky.

Charles  A.  Coffin,  178  Devonshire  St.,  Bos-
ton.

C.  P.  Coffin,  209  Washington  St.,  Room  3,
Boston.

Mrs.  M.  S.  Corning,  37|  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Robert  Craven,  Ridley  Park,  Penn.

Edward  Cummings,  29  Thayer  Hall,  Cam-
bridge, Mass.

Allen  Curtis,  54  Devonshire  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Greelt  S.  Curtis,  28  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

W.  E.  Curtis,  14  W.  20th  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Livingston  Cushing,  Weston,  Mass.

Arthur  H.  Cutler,  20  West  43d  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  E.  W.  Dale,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston.

Wm.  Franklin  Dana,  311  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Cora  Linn  Daniels,  Grand  Central
Hotel,  N.Y.  City.

Hon.  David  F.  Day,  Buffalo/N.Y.

Mrs.  Lewis  Livingston  Delafield,  20  North
Washington  Square,  N.Y.  City.

Miss  Lucy  Derby,  160  Charles  St.,  Boston.

Arthur  Dexter,  Somerset  Club,  Boston.

Dr.  Ella  L.  Dexter,  68  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  Albert  Dibbles,  86  Buckingham  St.,
Cambridge,  Mass.

Mrs.  Chas.  Dickinson,  care  Messrs.  Hayden
and  Dickinson,  Bankers,  Denver,  Col.

Mrs.  C.  H.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Ave.,
Boston.


Edward  S.  Drown,  Episcopal  Theological
School,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Mrs.  F.  A.  B.  Dunning,  804  E.  Gorham  St.,
Madison,  Wis.

Mrs.  Mary  H.  Edwards,  Keene,  N.H.

Miss  Lucy  Ellis,  111  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  H.  C.  Ernst,  Harv.  Med.  Sch.,  Bo.-ton.

Mrs.  Edwin  T.  Evans,  189 North  St.,  Buffalo,
N.Y.

Miss  Ella  K.  Evans,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Glendower  Evans,  12  Otis  Place,  Bos-
ton.

Dr.  Orpheus  Everts,  Supt.  Cincinnati  Sani-
tarium, College  Hill,  Ohio.

Miss  May  M.  Fay,  East  Orange,  N.J.

Thomas  C.  Felton,  4  Louisburg  Sq.,  Boston.

J.  B.  Fletcher,  31  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Prof.  George  Forman,  230  South  6th  St.,
Newark,  N.J.

O.  B.  Frothingham,  118  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Miss  Eugenia  Gardiner,  289  Marlborough
St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  L.  Gardner,  152  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Dr.  Gforge  W.  Gay,  589  Tremont  St. ,  Boston.

Jos.  M.  Gibbens,  153  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Benj.  I.  Gilman,  202  Cascade  Ave.,  Colorado
Springs,  Col.

J.  Brodley  Oilman,  Concord,  N.H.

James  Frazer  Gluck,  775  Front  Ave.,  Buf-
falo, N.Y.

Mrs.  J.  H.  Goodrich,  17  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Frederic  Goodridge,  250  5th  Ave.,
N.Y.

Rev.  Dr.  G.  Zabriskie  Gray,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Prof.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  John  C.  Gray,  176  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Dr.  Wm.  H.  Greene,  204  North  36th  St.,
Phila.,  Pa.

David  S.  Greenough,  91  Franklin  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  D.  S.  Greenough,  Jr.,  Jamaica  Plain.

Edward  Stetson  Griffing,  11  Stoughton,
Harvard  College,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Geo.  G.  Grower,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper
Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Miss  Harriet  M.  Hall,  54  College  St.,  Provi-
dence, R.I.

Prof.  T.  P.  Hall,  Woodstock,  Ontario,  Can.

Oliver  B.  Harden,  Room  18,  4th  Floor  P.O.
Building,  Phila.

Emory  Adams  Hartwell,  36  Chestnut  St.,
Fitchburg,  Mass.

C.  H.  Harwood,  Harvard  Med.  Sch.,  Boston.

Dr.  Henry  C.  Haven,  200  Beacon  St.,  Bopton.

Henry  W.  Haynes,  239  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Sidney  M.  Hedges,  76  Highland  St.,
Roxbury,  Mass.

Mrs.  Alfred  Hemenway,  17  Beacon  St.,
Boston.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


575


Rev.  R.  A.  Holland,  St.   George's  Rectory,

2918  Pine  St.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Ernest  Hollenbeck,  Davison  Station,  Mich.
Rev.     Samuel    V.   V.    Holmes,    Richfield

Springs,  X.Y.
Mrs.  C  D.  Homans,  1S4   Marlborough    St.,

Boston.
Miss  E.  R.  Hooper,  141  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
N.  L.  Hooper,  56  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.    Louisa   P.  Hopkins,  9  Newbury  St.,

Boston.
Miss  Cornelia  C.  F.  Horsford,  27  Craigie

St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Prof.  E.  J.  Houston,  1521  Mt.  Vernon  St.,

Phila.
William  A.  Hovet,  American  Bell  Telephone

Company,  95  Milk  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.  Richard  S.  Howland,  75  Angell  St.,

Providence,  R.I.
Mrs.  Geo.  C.  Hull,  1012  Francis  St.,  St.  Jos-
eph, Mo.
F.  C.  Hunt,  The  Winfield  Mortgage  &  Trust

Co.,  "Winfield,  Kansas.
Col.  Leavitt  Hunt,  Elmsholme,  Weathers-
field,  Vt.
Mrs.  G.  A.  James,  8  Mt.  Vernon  PL,  Boston.
H.  La  Barre  Jatne,  203  South  Fifth  St.,

Phila.
Charles  R.  Johnson,  Box  492,  Worcester,

Mass.
Miss    Charlotte   H.   Johnson,   123   Marl-
borough St.,  Boston.
Miss  Cornelia  F.  Johnson,  123  Marlborough

St.,  Boston.
Mrs.   William  B.  Kehew,  317  Beacon  St.,

Boston.
W.  A.  Kelsoe,  City  Editor  "  Republican,"

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Mrs.  Caroline  A.    Kennard,  Walnut  St.,

Brook  line,  Mass.
Max   Alexander  Kilvert.    11  Stoughton,

Harvard  College,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Benjamin  Kimball,  8  Congress  St.,  Boston."
Miss  H.  L.  Lane,  1408  H  St.,  Washington,

D.C.
B.  J.  Lang,  Chickering  &  Sons,  Boston.
John  Lathrop,  10  Gloucester  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.   Amort  A.     Lawrence,    59  Common-
wealth Ave,,  Boston.
Miss  Anna  H.  Lewis,    82  Montgomery  St.,

Boston.
Prof.  William  Libbey,  Jr.,  Princeton,  N.J.
Mrs.  John    S.  Lockwood,  "The  Puritan,"

Burgess  St.,  Dorchester.
Mrs.  H.  C.  Lodge,  1211  Conn.  Ave.,  Washing-
ton, D.C,
Mrs.  John  E.  Lodge,  31  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
W.  S.  Logan,  54  William  St.,  N.Y.
Dr.  Raphael  Lorini,  814  17th  St.,  Washing-
ton, D.C.
Dr.  R.  C.  Macdonald,  34  Parmenter  St.,  Bos-
ton.
Rev.  Howard  MacQueary,  Canton,  O.


Charles  MacVeagh,  45  William  St.,  N.Y.
Mrs.  Arthur  Macy,  17  Beacon  St.,  Boston.
Miss  Abby  F.  Manning,  129  Commonwealth

Ave.,  Boston.
F.  H.  Manning,  138  Federal  St.,  Boston.
Mrs.  John  Markoe,  2001  Pine  St.,  Phila.
Prof.  Allan  Marquand,  Princeton,  N.J.
Charles  Marseilles,  Exeter,  N.H.
Henry   Rutgers   Marshall,  74  Wall  St.,

N.Y.
Miss  Ellen  F.  Mason,  1  Walnut  St.,  Boston.
Miss  Ida  Mason,  1  Walnut  St.,  Boston.
N.  Matthews,  Jr.,  23  Court  St.,  Boston.
Dr.  Nereus  Mendenhall,  Jamestown,  Guil-
ford Co.,  N.C
Mrs.  Merriman,  Worcester,  Mass.
John  George  Milburn,  1168  Delaware  Ave.,

Buffalo,  N.Y.
Mrs.  G.  S.  Miller,  Geneva,  N.Y.
George  Milliken,  3614  Walnut  St.,  Phila.,

Pa.
Mrs.    James   Morris,    31   Washington    Sq.,

WeBt,  New  York.
Mrs.  John  A.  Morris,  Westchester,  N.Y.
Mrs.  Marian  Longfellow  Morris,  5  Tre-

mont  Place,  Boston.
James  G.  Mumford,  14  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Bos-
ton.
Pres.  P.  V.  N.  Myers,  Belmont  College,  Col-
lege Hill,  O.
Miss  Lavinia  II.  Newell,  255   Marlborough

St..  Mass.
Rev.  John  F.  Nichols,  15  Newbury  St.,  Bos-
ton.
John  Hawks  Noble,  312  No.  22d  St.,  Omaha,

Neb.
John  M.  Norris,  Diamond  City,  Meagher  Co.,

Montana.
Lieut.  Charles  R.  Noyes,  West  Point,  N.Y.
Mrs.    Howard    Okie,    192   Dartmouth    St.,

Boston.
Capt.  Carl  F.  Palfrey,  Oswego.  N.Y.
Edmund    M.   Parker,    5  Craigie  St.,    Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Henry  Parkman,  15  Charles  St.,  Boston.
Miss  Mary  R.  Parkman,  31  Mt.  Vernon  St.,

Boston.
Miss  Fanny  Peabody,  247  Berkeley  St.,  Bos-
ton.
John  E.  Peabody,  183  Marlborough  St.,  Bos-
ton.
Dr.    Grace    Peckham,    25     Madison    Ave.,

NY.
Miss  Pendleton,  1522  Locust  St.,  Phila.
Miss  Elizabeth  Perkins,  Hotel  Hamilton,

Clnrendon  St.,  Boston.
Miss  Mary  Perkins,  79 Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Bos-
ton.
Miss  Mary  E.  Perkins,  care  of  Col.  Geo.  L.

Perkins, Norwich,  Conn.
Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps,  Andover,  Mass.
Miss  Anna  D.  Phillips,  23  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.


576


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


Mrs.  J.  C.  Phillips,  Jr.,  cor.  Berkeley  and
Marlborough  Sts.,  Boston.

Miss  Katharine  Pierce,  339  Beacon  St.,
Boston.

Harry  P.  Place,  Franklin  Savings  Bank,
20  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Miss  M.  O.  Porter,  22  Brimmer  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Maria  S.  Porter,  286  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Fred  Pbrrt  Powers,  1213  K  St.,  Washing-
ton, D.C.

Mrs.  "William.  G.  Preston,  Hotel  Berkeley*
Boston.

Charles  Prince,  44  Mt.  Vernon  St.,  Boston.

F.  O.  Prince,  311  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Gordon  Prince,  290  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Annie  C.  Putnam,  63  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

George  Putnam,  24  Quincy  St.,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Frank  H.  Ransom,  8  Mercer  Circle,  Cam-
bridge.

Paul  C.  Ransom,  33  Hilton,  Cambridge,  Mass.

James  W.  Ricker,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,
Boston.

W.  H.  Rideing,  172  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.

Rev.  Dr.  S.  Riopel,  Valcartier  Village,  Quebec
Co.,  Can.

Miss  Mart  Rivers,  Milton,  Mass.

Miss  A.  M.  Robbins,  7  Pemberton  Sq.,  Boston.

Miss  H.  L.  Robbins,  116  West  21st  St.,  New
York.

Mrs.  Moncure  Robinson,  Jr.,  Airdrie,  Paoli,
Chester  Co.,  Penn.

Miss  Emma  Rodman,  174  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Joanna  Rotch,  Milton,  Mass.

Robert  A.  Rowlinski,  Savannah,  Ga.

Samuel  H.  Russell,  13  Doane  St.,  Boston.

Charles  E.  Sampson,  193  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Mrs.  Turner  Sargent,  296  Beacon  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  Winthrop  Sargent,  207  Common-
wealth  Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Marion  J.  Scott,  128  5th  Ave.,  New
York.

Miss  Vida  D.  Scudder,  250  Newbury  St.,
Boston.

Joseph  H.  Sears,  5  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,
Mass.

Pres.  Julius  H.  Seeltx,  Amherst,  Mass.

Miss  Emma  G.  Shaw,  37|  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Miss  Helen  S.  Shaw,  28  Marlborough  St.,
Boston.

Miss  Blanche  Shimmin,  229  Beacon  St.,
Boston.

H.  W.  Smith,  4th  and  Walnut  Sts.,  Phila.

L.  Logan  Smith,  Oxford,  England.

R.  Morris  Smith,  3715  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.

Francis  P.  Stearns,  College  Hill,  Mass.

Dr.  C.  G.  Stockton,  Buffalo,  N.Y.


Frank  R.  Stoddard,  Box  5083,  Boston.

Chas.  W.  Stone,  68  Chestnut  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Richard  Stone,  Jr.,  73  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Col.  W.  L.  Stone,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Stanley  Stoner,  3810  Delmar  Ave.,  St.  Louis,
Mo.

Albert  Storer,  40  State  St.,  Boston.

Malcolm  Storer,  182  Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Prof.  G.  F.  Swain,  198  West  Brookline  St.,
Boston.

Miss  Tappan,  44  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

S.  Lothrop  Thorndike,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Joseph  G.  Thorp,  5  Concord  Ave.,  Cam-
bridge.

Miss  Timmins,  47  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

S.  Edwin  Tobey,  10  Tremont  St.,  Boston.

MiBS  Katherine  E.  Turnbull,  113  E.  39th
St.,  New  York.

Mrs.  J.  B.  Turner,  111  Boylston  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  George  Tyson,  314  Dartmouth  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Rev.  C.  Van  Norden,  D.D.,  Suffield,  Conn.

Sheldon  T.  Viele,  409  Jersey  St.,  Buffalo,
N.Y.

Henshaw  Bates  Walley,  40  State  St.,  Bos-
ton.

Mrs.  C.  Walsh,  121  W.  44th  St.,  N.Y.

Mrs.  George  Waring,  Newport,  R.I.

Joseph  B.  Warner,  39  Court  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  C.  H.  Washburn,  Columbia  St.,  Dor-
chester, Mass.

Dr.  Wm.  H.  Watson,  Utica,  N.Y.

Mrs.  Webb,  Salem,  Mass.

David  L.  Webster,  332  Beacon  St.,  Boston.

Rev.  D.  C.  Weston,  2  Rutherford  PI.,  N.Y.

William  Wheeler,  Concord,  Mass.

Miss  Alice  B.  White,  213  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Miss  Amy  White,  Jamaica  Plain.

Mrs.  Charles  T.  White,  213  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Dr.  Frances  Emily  White,  1423  N.  16th  St.,
Phila.,  Pa.

Miss  Lilian  Whiting,  Hotel  Brunswick,
Boylston  St.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Henry  Whitman,  77  Mt.  Vernon  St.,
Boston.

Russell  Whitman,  380  Chicago  Ave.,  Chi-
cago.

Miss  Frances  E.  Willard,  Evanston,  111.

Rev.  W.  H.  Williams,  Wakefield,  Maps.

Mrs.  John  L.  Wilson,  Box  19,  Framingham,
Mass.

Jos.  M.  Wilson,  435  Chestnut  S't.,  Phila.,  Pa.

Mrs.  Nathaniel  Wilson,  912  Farragut  Sq.,
Washington,  D.C.

Mrs.  Roger  Wolcott,  173  Commonwealth
Ave.,  Boston.

Mrs.  Wynne,  63  Marlborough  St.,  Boston.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any  change  of  address
to  the  Secretary,  Richard  Hodgson,  5  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


I  Psjl


INDEX    TO    VOL.    I.

A.,  Miss,  experiences  of  Mary  B 417

A.,  C.  H.,  experience  of 567

A.,  Miss  M.  0.,  case  contributed  by 433,  518

Abbot,  F.  E 131

Abbot,  Dr.  S.  L.,  case  contributed  by        ......  401

Agassiz,  Louis     ............  557

Anaesthesia,  in  hypnotism 95-97,  241,  243

Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  265

Preliminary  Report  of  the  Committee  on          .         .         .         .         .  128

Report  of  the  Committee  on      .......         .  223

(See  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.}

Argelander 35

Arnold,  John  N.,  automatic  writing  of        ......  557

Associates.     See  Constitution  and  Members  and  Associates.

Aubert         . 98

Automatic  Writing,  Notes  on 548

B.,  Miss  C,  experience  of 355

B.,  Mrs.  J.  W.,     "  " 384

B.,  Miss  M.,  "  " 361

Baltzar 246

Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F 3,  118

Barrows,  Dr.  Ira,  report  of  case  by   .         . 552

Bell,  Sir  Charles 530

Bernheim,  Dr 119

Berry,  Helen 102

Bigelow,  Dr.  W.  S ,         .         .         .         .         .         .       215

Binet,  A 96,  119

Black,  R.  W 96

Blackburn,  Douglas .    75,  78,  315,  316,  318

Blanchard,  Charles  H 7

Blanchard,  Miss  Grace 7

Blanks 14,  16,  269,  270

Boram,  Robert,  experiences  of  ,         .         ,         ,         ....       439,  520


578


Index  to   Vol.  I.


Bowditch,  Prof.  H.  P 1,  5,  12,  112,  218,  265,  268,  402

Report  of  Committee  on  Thought-Transference        ....  6

t<  (<  if  (<  (t  106

(<  <<  u  c<  (<  215

Braid,  Dr.  .............       554

Branch  Societies.    (See  Constitution)         .         .         .         .         .         .         .     1,  61

Brown,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  F.,  Some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,       322

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N 236,  266

The  Basis  of  Investigation  of  Mediumistic  Phenomena  .         .         .       231

C,  Miss,  experience  of       .........         .       385

C,  Mrs.  C.  L.,  experience  of 416

C,  Prof.  E.  W.,  cases  sent  by    .         .         .  395,  462,  463,  475,  478,  480,  522

C,  R.,  experiments  with,  in  Thought-Transference    .         .         .         .110,  216
C,  R.  B.,  experience  of     ....*...         .       456,  521

C.,  W.  B.,  "  " 493,  524

Cambria 437,  520

Card- face  test 46,  107,  108,  113

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism       .         .         95
Carpenter,  Dr.     ............       554

Chase,  Miss  H.  K 7

Chase,  Prof.  Pliny  E 7

Circulars 2,  5,  6,  10,  45,  129,  259

Clairvoyance 3,  100,  257,  266,  408,  558

Coincidences 226,  227,  393

Color-test 7,  11,  12,  17,  113

Consciousness  of  lost  Limbs       .........       249

Constitution  of  the  Society  .......    50,  55,  275,  568

Constitution,  Amendments  of      .......         .  61,  62,  134

Cory,  C.  B 95,  245,  266

Deductions  suggested  by  the  study  of  Hypnotic  Phenomena     .         .       236

Council  of  the  Society 4,  57,  61,  278,  571

Crans,  Mrs.,  experience  of  ........       446,  520

Creery,  Rev.  A.  M 76

Criswell,  R.  W 430-433,  518


D.,  Mrs.  E.,  experience  of

D.,  Mrs.  F.  A.  B.,  experience  of

D.,  S.  C,

D.,  T.  L.  "

Darwin         .....

Dean,  Sidney,  automatic  writing  of

Deane,  Dr.  S.  F.,  experience  of

Dessoir,  Max

Diagrams     .

Diagram-test

Die-test

Digit-test     .

Drawing-test,  Free

Dreams.     (See  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.)


.       402

469,  524

495,  524

.       377

257

.       556

471,  527

.       317

44,  47,  75,  316-317

47,  113,  302,  317,  534

7,  11,  13,  33

7,  11,  15,  24

48

85,  140,  141,  184,  271


Index  to   Vol.  I.  579

E.,  Dr.  B.,  case  contributed  by 459,521

E.,  C.  W.,  experiences  of  . 379

E.,  Mrs.  L.  P.,  experiences  of 483,  524

Experimental  Psychology 266,  269,  270

First  report  of  the  Committee  on  218

Second  report  on       ...  302

Eubule-Evans,  A 9

Evans,  Glendower 7,  102

Evans,  P.  Norman 7

F.,  M.  V.,  experience  of 381

F.,  Robert,  "  " 458,  521

Faires,  T.  W 7

Fere,  M.  Ch 97,  119

Field,  Mrs.  Anne  J.,  experiences  of 408,  527

Fillmore,  Dr.  C.  W.,  case  contributed  by 551

Fletcher,  Alice  C,  On  the  Supernatural  among  the  Omahas      .         .         .       135
Formation  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research       ...  1

Francois-Franck 253

Frazer,  Dr.  Persifor 7

Frazer,  Mrs.  Persifor  ..........  7

Frazer,  Jr.,  Persifor   ...........  7

Friday,  beginning  a  voyage  on 218-223,  269

Fry,  George  W.,  experience  of 429,  518

Fullerton,  Prof.  G.  S.     (See  Council) 1

G.,  Mrs.  C.  S.,  experience  of 450,  521

G.,  F.,  experience  of 383

[G.,  P.],      "  " 422

Gallagher,  Nellie 322

Game-test    .............         49

Gardiner,  Dr.  E.  G.    .         . 57,  268

Ghost.     (See  Apparitions,  Phantasms,  etc.     Among  the  Omahas.)  .         .       142
Gibbons,  Henry  ............  7

Gilbert 116

Gilbert,  Prof.  G.  K 7

Gray,  Miss  Alice 7

Gurney,  Edmund         .         .         .         .   150,  180,  300,  367,  370,  530,  531,  540,  551

Remarks  on  Professor  Peirce's  Paper        ......       157

Remarks  on  Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder  ......       286

Guthrie,  Malcolm 75,  317

H.,  Mrs.,  experiences  of 483-490,  524

H.,  A.  V.,  experience  of 389

H.,  C.  H.,  "  " 362

H.,  E.  F.,  "  " 500

H.,  Mrs.  N.  W.  C,  experience  of 401,527

H.,  W.  S.,  experience  of 435,519,527

Ha-hea-ga,  story  of     ..........  136

Hale,  Rev.  E.  E 394

Hall,  Dr.  E.  H 62,  112


580  Index  to   Vol.  I.

Hall,  Prof.  G.  Stanley         .         .         .         .1,  229,  246,  247,  248,  529-532,  539
Hallett,  Constance       ...........  7

Hallett,  Laura  L.         .         .         . 7

Hallucinations     ...        85,  98,  150,  156,  183,  184,  273,  352,  367,  524,  531

Of  Memory 366,  545

Census  of  156,  174-179,  182,  214,  270,  288,  300

Haunted  Houses.     (See  Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses.)      .         218-223.  269
Haynes,  Gideon,  case  contributed  by  .......       445

Helmholtz 529

Higginson,  T.  W 331

Hodgson,  Richard 134)  215,  426,  517,  526,  547,  549

On  some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Telepathy       ....       528
Hollenbeck,  Ernest,  experience  of  .         .         .         .         .         .         .415

Holmes,  Dr.  O.  W .         .        509,511,513

Hudson,  Woodward     ...........       131

Hypnoscope         .         .         ..........       119

Hypnotism 3,  5,  68,  104,  265

Report  of  Committee  on 95

Deductions  suggested  by  the  study  of  hypnotic  phenomena      .         .       236
Reaction-time  in  hypnotic  trance       .......       246

Hyperesthesia  in  hypnotic  trance 97-99,  239

Illusions 85,  184,  249,  367,  544,  545

J.,  Mrs.  F.,  experience  of  .........         .       454

J.,  Lewis  E.,         "  "  449

J.,  Mrs.  P.,  "  " 448,  521

Jackson,  C.  C 12,  112

Jacob,  Julius,  experience  of       .......         .       482,  524

James,  J.  Mc.  A.,  experience  of         ........       502

James,  Prof.  W 5,  8,  102,  106,  248,  258,  319,  474,  528

Report  of  Committee  on  Hypnotism        • .         .         .         .         .         .         95

"  "  "  Mediumistic  Phenomena     ....       102

Reaction-time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance      ......       246

The  Consciousness  of  Lost  Limbs    .......       249

Note  to  the  Foregoing  Report  (on  Experimental  Psychology)  .         .       317
Notes  on  Automatic  Writing     ........       548

Janet,  Pierre       ............       549

Jastrow,  Prof.  Joseph,  on  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense     .         .         .116
Journal  of  the  English  S.  P.  R 570

Ka-hea-num-ba's  mother,  story  of       .......  146

Kaudinsky  .............       356

Kernochan,  C.  A.,  experience  of         .......  448

Kircher        .............       116

Kraepelin 368,  369,  370,  374,  542,  543

Krafft-Ebing 368,  542,  543

Krebs,  F.  H.,  experience  of         .......         •       474,  524

L.,  H.  D.,  case  contributed  by    .....'..«.       470
Laurent,  H.  ............         33


Index  to    Vol.  I.


581


Lehman,  A.  E.    .

Lodge,  Professor

Lost  Limbs,  the  Consciousness

Lowell,  James  Kussell        «


of


102,  230,  321
.       147


on


144,  169


368,


370,


8

102,  230,  321

.       231

1,  49,  61,  133,  285

.  52,  58,  279,  572

378,  541,  542,  543-546

.       116


M. ,  case  contributed  by       .

M.,  Miss  F.,  experience  of

M.,  Mrs.  M.  L.,  experiences  of

Ma-chu-num-ba,  story  of     .

Magnetic  sense,  on  the  existence  of

Marshall,  H.  E.  .

Materializing  mediums

Ma-wa-da-ne  Society,  origin  of

McCauley,  Admiral  E.  Y.   .

McGee,  W.  J.      .

Mediumistic  Phenomena,  reports  of  Committee
The  Basis  of  Investigation  of

Meetings  of  the  Society

Members  and  Associates

Memory,  double

Mesmer

Mesmerism.     (See  Hypnotism.}

Millet,  J.  B.,  experience  of

Millet,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  experiences  of

Mind-Reading.     (See  Thought- Transference.}

Minot,  Prof.  C.  S.  1,  12,  112,  223,  267,  268,  317,  528,  532-540

On  the  Number-Habit .         .        86

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Experimental  Psychology  .  .  218
Second  Report  on  Experimental  Psychology  .  .  .  .  .  302
Open  Letter  concerning  Telepathy    .......       547

Mitchell,  Dr.  S.  Weir  .         .         .         .  101,  249,  251,  252,  253,  254,  258

Mitchell,  Dr.  W.  K 101

Moon,  seeing  the  new  moon  over  the  left  shoulder     .         .         .         218-223,  269

Mott,  H.  H 8

Miiller,  Johannes 251,  529

Myers,  F.  W.  H 150,  370,  541,  548,  549,  555

Postscript  to  Mr.  Gurney's  Reply  to  Professor  Peirce       .         .         .       300

Myths  among  the  Omahas .         .       135


8
75,  318
.  249
.   373


.  397
.  437
467,  468,  524
.  143
.   116


461,  521
460,  462,  521


N.,  experience  of         ...         .

Nelson,  Prof.  A.  B

Newcomb,  Prof.  Simon

Address  of  President

Nowell,  G.  W

Noyes,  Dr.  W.,  case  contributed  by   .


.       398

.       502

1

63

8

435,  519,  527


Num-ba-dou-ba,  story  of  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .       146

Number-Habit,  on  the 86

Nuttall,  Dr.  G.  F.  H.,  on  the  Existence  of  a  Magnetic  Sense     .         .         .116


Ochorowicz

Officers  of  the  Society


119,  530
1,  57,  278,  571


582  Index  to    Vol.  I.

Oil  City 429

Oliver,  Dr.  C.  A •  8

Omaha  Tribe  of  Indians,  the  Supernatural  among 135

Omens  among  the  Omahas  ••••.....       142

Orschansky,  Dr.  J 565,  566

Otter  among  the  Omahas    ..........       136

P.,  Mrs.,  medium 95,  ioo,  102-205

P.,  E.  C,  experience  of      .........  371

Palmer,  Professor       .         .         •••••....       110

Paracelsus  ,         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .116

Passes,  effect  of  in  hypnotism     ........        101,238

Peirce,  Prof.  C.  S 157,  28(5,  300

Criticism  on  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living"  .....       150

Mr.  Peirce's  Rejoinder 180

Peirce,  Prof.  J.  M 9,  12,  34,  112

Discussion  of  the  Returns  in  Response  to  Circular  No.  4  .         .         17

Pellew,  George 527

Phantasms  and  Presentiments :

Report  of  Committee  on 350

Appendix  to  Report 429

Comments  on  cases  in  Appendix       .......       516

Addenda  to  cases       ..........       527

(See  Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses.)
"Phantasms  of  the  Living"        .         .  226,  286,  288,  289,  294,  297,  300,  370,

530,  531,  532,  539,  541,  570

Criticism  on,  by  C.  S.  Peirce 150

Pickering,  Mrs.  C.       ..........         .  8

Pickering,  Prof.  E.  C 8,  12,  34,  43,  112,  115

Discussion  of  the  Returns  in  Response  to  Circular  No.  4         .         .         17

Pickering,  Mrs.  E.  C. 8

Pickering,  W.  H 8

On  Thought-Transference 9,44,110,113,116

Research  on  the  Reality  of  Reichenbach's  Flames     ....       127
Planchettes  ...........       548,  549

Podmore,  Frank 150,  530

Post-hypnotic  suggestion     ..........       243

Preyer,  Professor         ...........       370

Preble,  Jr.,  W.  P 8

Premonitions        ...........        541,  542

Presentiments.     (See  Phantasms  and  Presentiments.')       ....       224

President,  address  of .63

(See  Officers  of  the  Society.)

Prince,  Dr.  Morton 131,  529

Proceedings  of  the  English  S.  P.  R 6,  277,  570

Pseudo-premonitory    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .       546

Pseudo-Presentiments 366,  516,  524,  540,  565

Pseudo-telepathic         ...........       546

Psychical  Research,  object  of      ........         .       259

R.,  J.,  experience  of 371

Radestock,  on  dreams  ..........       544


Index  to   Vol,  I,  583

Reaction-time  in  the  Hypnotic  Trance 246

Reiehenbach,  Baron 117

Reichenbach's  Elames,  a  Research  on  the  Reality  of  ....       127

Ribot,  Th 544,  545

Richet,  Prof.  Charles 7,10,35,45,243

Ropes,  J.  C 131

Royce,  Prof.  Josiah 131,  229,  265,  540-546

Preliminary   Report   of  Committee   on    Apparitions   and   Haunted

Houses 128

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Apparitions  and  Haunted  Houses  .       223

Report  of  the  Committee  on  Phantasms  and  Presentiments       .         .       350
Comments  on  cases  in  Appendix       .......       516

Note   on   two   recently  reported  cases  of  Pathological   and   other

Pseudo-Presentiments    .         .         . 565

S.,  Col.  A.  v.,  case  contributed  by 363

S.,  W.,  experience  of 365

S.,  Dr.  W.  O.,  experience  of 442

Sander 544

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J 102

Sayles,  Ira,  case  contributed  by .         .       442

Schmoll,  Anton 317,  534,  535,  538

Schiile 525

Sellers,  Prof.  Coleman,  experiences  of 357

Sharp,  Benjamin  ...........  8

Sidgwick,  Mrs .       541

Smith,  G.  A 75,  78,  315,  316,  318,  534,  539

Smith,  J.  W 318

Smith,  William  L.,  automatic  writing  of    .         .  549-551,  554,  555,  559-562

Sparks,  W.  E 8

Spiritualism.     (See  Mediumistic  Phenomena,  etc.)

Sternberg 256

Stewart,  Mrs.,  experience  of 443

Suggestion,  in  hypnotism    . 96,  241

Post-hypnotic    ...........       243

Sully,  James 544

Supernatural  among  the  Omahas         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .       135

Superstitions 218

T.,  Mrs.,  experiments  with,  in  Thought-Transference         .         .         .110,  216

T.,  J.,  experience  of 395

Taber,  Florence  .         . '8

Telepathy  ....         64,  67,  81,  150,  179,  187,  227,  229,  257,  286,  393,

427,  516,  533,  559,  562

On  some  Objections  to  the  Theory  of 528

Open  Letter  concerning .         .       547

(See  also  Thought- Transference,  Apparitions,  Phantasms,  eta.)

Thales 116

Thaxter,  Roland 131

Thompson,  Sir  William       .         .         . .118

Thought-Transference        .         .        2,  5,  10,  12,  17,  35,  44,  45,  64,  77-79,  82-86.

94,  105,  113,  260,  314-319,  322,  528,  532


584  Index  to   Vol.  L

Thought-Transference,  continued.

Pirections  for  making  experiments  in  .         .         .         .12,  46,  261

Possibility  of  Errors  in  Scientific  Researches,  due  to        .         .         •         35
By  means  of  pictures         .........         44

Reports  of  Committee  on 6,  106,  215

Some  Experiments  in        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .       322

(See  also  Telepathy.)

Trance-medium  .         . 102,  320

Transfer  of  sensations,  etc.  .........       118

Traubel,  Emile  G.,  case  contributed  by 411

Traubel,  Mrs.,  testimony  of 411

Travis,  Judge,  experiences  of 496,  525

Trowbridge,  Prof.  John 8

Trowbridge,  Mrs.  John 8

Turner,  S.  W.,  testimony  of 431-433

Tuttle,  Hudson  . 471

Unconscious  Cerebration 352,  356

Um-ba-gthe  . 143

Valentin 252

W.,  Misses,  case  of 454,  521

W.,  Mr.,  experiences  of 373

W.,  C.  H.,  experience  of 353

W.,  Miss  E.  T.,  case  contributed  by 493

W.,  F.  C,  experience  of 375

W.,  Mrs.  J.  G.5  experiences  of 509,  513,  515,  526

Wa-na-he,  ghost  among  the  Omahas   ........       142

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena,       320

Watkins,  Miss  Mary  H.,  experience  of 386,  543

Watson,  Prof.  W. 1,  12,  112

Watts,  H.  M. 412

Westphal 378

Wetmore,  G.  C. 8

•Wigan,  Dr.  . .         .       543,  546

Wilcox,  Dr. 552

Williston,  Miss  Helen 8

Wingfield,  Misses 532

Winsor,  Miss  Anna,  case  of 552

Wright,  Mrs.  Helen  M.  C 8

Wright,  M.  St.  C 8

Work,  committee  on 2,  5

X.,  Mrs.,  experience  of ,.         .         .       382

X.,  N.,  cases  contributed  by        .........       506

X.,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  experience  of 403

— ,  E.  M.,  experience  of 491,  524

— ,  Miss  H.,  492,  526

Z.,  Mrs.  L.,  experiences  of 464,  524,  526

Z.,  Mrs.  A.,  experience  of 505


1 .


iM


ibarvarfc  IHniverelt?

3Lfbrar£  of

Ube  ZlDeMcal  Scbool


Cbe  (31ft  of


■  .■  '-


Jnfc
