The Assemblies of Al-Hariri, Vol. 2 (Al-Hariri (trans. F. Steingass), 1898)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1898 Oriental Translation Fund edition (https://archive.org/details/TheAssembliesOfAlHaririVolII). Completes Chenery's translation: Steingass's vol. 2 of the Maqamat.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE

ASSEMBLIES OF AL HARIRI


ORIENTAL TRANSLATION FUND.

NEW SERIES.

III.


THE

ASSEMBLIES OF AL HARIRI,

‘grctnslafeb from ffyc Arabic,

WITH NOTES,

HISTORICAL 4M-pl~<lRAMMATICAL.


BY

DR. E^STETNGASS,

Editor of the latest Arabic texfrof JTai4ri’s Assemblies, and Author of
English, Arabic and Persian Dictionaries.


•Pt-cfttccb nnb ittb.ex|i)

BY

F. AEBUTHNOT, M.E.A.S.


YOL. II.

CONTAINING THE LAST TWENTY-FOUR ASSEMBLIES.


FEINTED AND PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OE TEE
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY;

AND SOLD AT

22, ALBEMARLE STREET, LONDON.

1898.


THOMAS CHENERY, M.A.,

Born 1826 ; Died 1884.


We 'know not what happens to us spiritually after
death , and can only repeat in the words of the Koran ,
“ We belong to God , and unto Him we shall surely return”-
Still , if there be such a thing as continuation , should you
(ivherever you may be) happen to learn that your great
work here has been completed and indexed , the fact luill
not , 1 trust , displease you.


Admiringly yours ,

F . J?. ABBUTHNOT .


PREFACE.


The great work of Hariri consists of fifty Makamat, or
Assemblies. Of these the late Mr. Thomas Chenery
translated and published the first twenty-six, with
copious and valuable notes, in 1867. He had fully
intended to complete the translation of the remaining
twenty-four, and also to prepare an Index to the two
volumes. But called away to the editorship of the
Times in 1877, his hopes and expectations "were never
fulfilled, and he died in 1884, leaving his task un¬
finished.

In 1891 the Oriental Translation Fund, which had
existed from 1828 to 1878, was I’evived under the same
name, but as a new series. Among the works that
came under the consideration of the committee appointed
by the Council of the Royal Asiatic Society, the trans¬
lation and annotation of the remaining twenty-four
Assemblies of Hariri, proposed by Dr. F. Steingass,
held an important place, and was accepted.

By the courtesy of the executors of the late Mr.


Vlll


PREFACE.


Chenery, two hundred and fifty unbound copies of his
work were obtained and purchased, and during these
negotiations, with zeal and ability Pr. F. Steingass
translated the remaining twenty-four Assemblies, and
explained them with important and valuable notes.
To the above a complete descriptive index has been
added, and these two volumes, bound with the covers
of the Oriental Translation Fund New Series, form
the issue for 1898 in continuation of the works
which have been annually published by the Fund since
1891.

Mr. Chenery’s introduction to the first volume
(extending from pages 1 to 102) contains such a com¬
plete survey of the whole work that it is hardly neces¬
sary to add to it. But the contents of the second
volume continue to show the wonderful subtleties,
liabilities, fertilities, boundless resources and extra¬
ordinary richness of the Arabic language. A careful
perusal of the two volumes will fully bear out the
generally-expressed opinion that, next to the I^oran,
the Assemblies of Hariri are the most celebrated pro¬
duction of Arabic literature.

Throughout these Assemblies, as. Chenery says in his
notes at page 278, “ Not only are verses of the Koran
freely introduced, but the whole language is tinged
with allusions to it, which are almost imperceptible to


PREFACE.


IX


the European, but which are readily caught by a Moslem
who knows the sacred work by heai’t.” In the same
way there are many and constant allusions to Arab
proverbs, ■which form a very valuable and instructive
addition to the work. Every mention of them, and
every allusion to the Koran, have been carefully noted
in the index, and, though the references are numerous,
it will enable the student or the enthusiast to go through
the details of them without any difficulty. This also
applies to other subjects, such as Traditions, Legends,
Arab manners and customs, etc.

Dr. Steingass has completed his portion of the work
under great physical difficulties. For some part of the
time he was actually blind, and even after his recovery
was obliged to be extremely cautious so as not to over¬
strain his eyesight. His Student’s Edition of the
Arabic text of the Assemblies of Hariri was published
by Sampson Low, Marston and Co. in 1897, while his
translation of the last twenty-four Assemblies follows
in 1898.

One word about the transliteration from the Arabic
of the second volume, regarding which Dr. Steingass
was much concerned. Since 1867 considerable pro-

4 »

gress has been made in this subject, and he was
naturally anxious that the names of the people and the
places as spelt by Mr. Cbenery should be spelt in the


X


PREFACE.


style now generally in use. Consequently there was
some difference between the transliteration of Mr.
Chenery and Dr. Steingass, and it was necessary to
decide how this matter should be dealt with.

For the sake of uniformity, it seemed both advisable
and desirable that the names of people, places and
things should be spelt in the second volume as in the
first, and I insisted, much against Dr. Steingass’s wish,
that this should be done. In this, then, the translitera¬
tion of the two volumes will be found to agree, and as
regards the rest, Dr. Steingass has had a free hand.
The difference between the spelling of the two transla-*
tors will be found in Appendix B at the end of the
second volume.

The Index to the whole work is rather long, but it
was absolutely necessary to give a short description of
the various people who appear upon the scene, so that
it might be understood at a glance who and what they
were. This has been curtailed as much as possible, but
further information about them can be obtained from
the following works, translated for the Oriental Transla¬
tion Fund Old and New Series :

(1) Ibn Khallikdn’s Biographical Dictionary (O.S.).

(2) Hajji Ivhalfeh’s Lexicon (0!S.).

(3) Mas’udi’s Historical Encyclopaedia (O.S.)

(4) Tabari’s Chronicles (O.S.).


FEE FACE.


xi


(5) Mirkhond’s “ Rauzat-us-safa,” or “Garden of
Purity” (N.S.).

The following .works will also be found useful for
reference.

(6) Hughes’ “Dictionary of Isl&m” (W. H. Allen
and Co., London, 1885).

(7) Sale, Rodwell, and Palmer’s Translations of the
Koran.

(8) Freytag’s Translation of Arab Proverbs into
Latin, in three volumes.

(9) Burton’s “ Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and
Meccah” (Tylston and Edwards, London, 1893).

(10) “ Arabic Authors ” (William Heinemann, 1896).

Although thirty years have elapsed since Mr. Chenery

published his valuable translation of the first twenty-
six Assemblies of Hariri, it is a matter of congratula¬
tion that the whole work has now been completed and
indexed, and that it has been done into English and in
England.

F. F. ARBUTHNOT.

22, Albemarle Street,

London, W.


THE ASSEMBLIES OF AL HARIRI


THE TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF THE TENT-DWELLERS.”

In this Assembly, which Hariri himself marks out as of some
importance from a philological point of view by attaching to it a
short commentary of his own, Al Harith records another of his early
reminiscences. In his youth he cherished a strong,desire to mingle
with Arabs of the desert, in order to make himself familiar with
their manners and idioms. After having acquired, by strenuous
exertion, a live-stock of camels and sheep, he settles amongst a
Bedouin tribe of genuine descent, who willingly accord him their
protection. One night a valuable milch camel went astray, and he
sets out on horseback in search of her. During the night and the
ensuing forenoon his ciforts to find her are unavailing, and when
mid-day grows high [approaches] with its oppressive heat, he feels
compelled to scok shelter and rest under a shady tree. Scarcely has
he done so, when he porceivos a solitary wanderer nearing his
resting-place. With mingled feelings of annoyance at the intrusion
of a stranger, and of hope that he might hear through him news of
his strayed camel, he awaits his coming. On his closer approach,
however, ho recognises in him Ab(i Zayd, whose welcome companion¬
ship makes him almost oblivious of his loss. In reply to his
affoctionato inquiries, Abft Zayd improvises some beautiful verses,
in which ho describes in raCy language his Bohemian way of living,
which renders him independent of favours that would have to be
courted by self-abasement, more hateful to him than death itself.
After having questioned on his part Al Harith as to the reason of
his presence in this lonely spot, and being told about the lost beast,
and the hitherto fruitless search for her, he begs leave to take his

VOL. II. 1


9


TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY..


noon-day sleep, and is soon deeply drowned in it. A1 Harith. tries
to keep awake, but the lull in their conversation makes him succumb
to his drowsiness, and when he rouses himself at night-fall he finds
to his dismay that Abh Zayd is gone together with the horse. In
sore distress he awaits the morning, when he sees a rider on a camel
travelling in the desert, to whom he waves his garment, to attract
his attention, but the signal remains unheeded, and he has'to run
after the man, intending to ask him for a lift, however grudgingly it
might be granted. Having reached him, he perceives on closer
scrutiny that the man is seated on the lost camel. He drags him
down from her back, and a violent altercation takes place, in the
midst of which Abh Zayd again appears on the scene, and his
coming, after yesterday’s experience, at first fills A1 Harith with
misgivings as to his further intentions. Abu Zayd, however, at
once sets his mind at rest, and addressing his antagonist in stern
and threatening terms, soon puts him to flight. Then, guessing at
the struggle between resentment and gratitude in A1 Harith's breast,
he recites some pithy lines, in which he advises him to make the
best of a losing bargain and to forbear both thanks and rebuke. So
they separate as fairly good friends, and A1 Harith returns home,
having recovered his camel, but lost his horse.

A1 Harith, son of Hamm&m, related : In the prime
of my life that has fleeted, I had a leaning towards
intercourse with the people of the hair-tents, so that I
might take after their high-mettled spirits and their
Arab tongues. So I bestirred myself with the alertness
of one not lacking in industry, and began to roam
through low-lands and high-lands, until I had got
together a string of those that groan camels],

along with a flock of those that bleat [ie., sheep]. Then
I betook myself to some Arabs, [fit to be] lieutenants
of kings, sons of speech [saws]. They gave me a home
with them in safest vicinity, and burned [blunted] from
me the edge of any [hostile] tooth. No care alighted
upon me while I was with them, no arrow struck [the
smoothness] of my rock, until one night, bright with


TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


3


full-moon-sheen, there strayed from me a she-camel
profuse of milk-flow. Then my heart suffered me not
to forbear the quest of her, and to throw her halter
upon her hump [allowing her to wander at will]. So
I sprang upon a swift-paced steed, planting a toembling
lance between thigh and stirrup, and fared forth all the
night, scouring the desert, and exploring every copse
and treeless place, until the morning dawn unfurled its
ensigns, when the crier calls to prayer and to salvation.
Then I alighted from my beast for the acquittance of
the written ordinance, after which I bestrode him again,
trying his mettle to the utmost. While I was coursing
along, I saw no trace but I tracked it, no ridge but I
mounted it, no valley but I fared across it, no rider but
I questioned him ; but withal my toil was bootless, and
its gang to the watering-place found no [way of] return,
until the heat waxed blinding, and the scorching noon¬
day sun would have distracted Grha.ylan from his
[beloved] Mayyah.

Now the day was longer than the shadow of the
spear, and hotter than the tears of the bereft mother,
and I made sure that, unless I sought shelter from
the glow, and rested myself with slumber, excessive
weariness would throw me prostrate with sickness—nay,
Sha'ub [the severer] would cling to me. Hence I bent
my way towards a Sarliah tree, abounding in branches,
with boughs thickly leaved, that I might sleep my
noon-tide, till to the brink of sun-down ; but by Allah,
scarcely had my breath fetched air and my horse rested,
when I beheld one coming from the left, in the garb of
a w r ayfarer, who resorted to my place of resort, making
straight for the spot I had chosen. Then I grudged

1—2


4


TWENTY-SE VENTS ASSEMBLY.


his wending whither I had wended, and took refuge
with Allah from the annoy of any sudden intruder.
But then, again, I hoped that he might chance to be a
bringer of news, or approve himself a guide [to my lost
one]. And when he came nigh my tree, and had all
but reached my biding-place, I found it was our learned
friend [Shaykh] of Seruj, wearing his wallet by way of
belt, and his travelling gear under his arm. Then he
accosted me with friendliness, and made me forget my
loss, and I inquired of him, whence he hailed just then
and how he fared within and without. Forthwith,
without a word of demur, he recited on the spur of the
moment:


“ ® a y to him, who would look into the inward state of my affair,
thou shalt meet at my hands with all honour and regard.

I am roving from land to land, a night-traveller from one trackless
desert to the other.

The chase yields me food, the sandal is my riding-beast, all my
equipment the wallet and the ferruled staff.

If I chance to alight in a city, my abode is the garret of the
hostelry, and my boon-companion a scroll.

There is nothing mine, that I miss when it is gone, or fret about
when the vicissitudes [wiles] of time rob me thereof;

Save that I pass my night free from concern, and my mind has
severed partnership with sorrow.

I sleep at night the fill of my eyelids and my heart is cool of
burning grief and anxiety;

I reck not from what cup I sip, and sip again, or what is the
sweetness that comes from the bitter-sweet;

No not I, though I allow me not abasement to become an oasy
road to bounties; J


For if an object of desire dons the raiment of shame, out on him
who courts a gift,

And whenever a wretch inclines to baseness, my nature shrinks
from his fashion and inclining.

in vfflahiy ” ^ ^ deed ’ mount the bier liefer > ^an embark


TWENTY-SEVENTE ASSEMBLY.


o


Then he raised his glance to me, and said: “For
some purpose did Kosayr cut off his nose.” So I told
him the tale of my strayed camel, and what I had
endured this day and the by-gone night; and he said :

“ Leave concerning thyself about things departed, or
pining for that which has perished ; regret not what is
gone, though it were a river of gold ; nor incline to
him who veers from thee, and kindles the fire of thy
anguish, though he were the son of thy loins, or the
own brother of thy soul.” Then he added : “ Hast
thou a mind to a noon-day nap, and to abstain from
talk ? For forsooth our bodies are [as it were] jaded
camels for fatigue, and the heat is all aglow ; whereas
there is nothing to furbish up the mind, and to enliven
the languid, like sleep at noon while the blaze is fiercest,
especially [most so] in the two months, when the skin
of the camel shrivels through excessive thirst.” I
replied : “As thou wilt, I have no wish to thwart
thee.” Thereupon he made the ground his bed, and
fell a-dozing, nay, soon he gave evidence that he was
fast asleep. But I sat leaning on my elbow, to keep
watch, and not to succumb to slumber ; however,
drowsiness overpowered me, after our tongues were
bridled, and I recovered not myself, until night had
crept in, and the stars began to twinkle, when, lo, there
■was no friend of Seruj, and, alas, no saddle-beast, so
that I passed a night such as Nabighah sings of, preg¬
nant with the grief of Jacob, while I was battling
against my sullenness, and vying with the stars in
wakefulness. Now I bethought me that I had hence¬
forth to fare on foot, now in what wise I should retrace
my homeward way ; until, at the smile of morn, there


6 ' TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.

appeared to me on the horizon a rider, ambling over
the plain with the stride of the ostrich. So I signalled
to him with my garment, hoping that he would turn in
my direction. He, however, heeded not my signal, nor
took he compassion on my anxiety, trotting on at his
leisure and smiting my entrails with the ai’row of his
contempt. Then I hastened in his track, to ask him
for a mount behind him, though I should have to put
up with his superciliousness. But when I reached him,
by dint of hard running, and cast my eye on him with
a sweeping glance, I found that my camel was his
riding-beast, and what I had lost he had picked up.
Then I belied me not in dragging him from her hunch,
and tussling with him for the end of her halter, calling
out : “I am her master; it is I from whom she has
strayed ; to me belongs her colt and her milk! So be
not like Ashab in greediness, and give no trouble, lost
thou see trouble I” But he took to abusing and shout¬
ing, and he waxed impudent, and would not be
abashed ; and while he assaulted and relented in turns,
now acting the lion, now cowering, behold, there came
upon us Abu Zayd, clad in the leopard’s skin, rushing
along with the rush of the furious torrent. Then I.
feared, that his feat of to-day might be like his per¬
formance of yesterday, that [the brightness of] his full
moon would equal [that of] his sun, after which I would
join the two tan-gatherers, never to be seen again, and
become a [mere] tale after the suKstance. So I saw no
help but to remind him of former bonds, and yester¬
day’s misdeed, and conjured him by Allah, [asking] if
he came to make good my wrong, or to encompass my
utter ruin. He however said : “ God forfend that I


TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


7


should despatch one whom I have wounded, or follow
up the Simoom of my day with a deadly night-blast.
Rather have I come to find out the truth of thy state,
and to be a right hand to .thy left.” Thereupon my
anxiety was allayed, and my suspiciousness subsided.
I made him aware of my milch camel, and of the cloak
of insolence that my mate had assumed, when he
glanced at him as the lion of the thicket glances at his
prey. Then he pointed his lance against him, swearing
by Him who kindles the morning, that if he made not
away with the swiftness of the fly, and contented him¬
self with escape as the best part of his booty, he would
pierce his neck-vein with the spear, and make his
offspring and friends mourn for him. Forthwith the
fellow let go the halter of the camel, and ran apace,
taking to his heels in hottest haste. Abu Zayd said to
me : “ Seize her and mount her hump, for of the two
boons, booty and witness for the faith, she is one, and
one woe is easier to bear than two.”

Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Then I was at a
loss, whether to rebuke Abu Zayd, or thank him, and
how to balance the benefit received from him, against
the damage endured. But it was as if someone had
whispered to him the secret of my breast, or he had
divined what stirred in my heart, for he accosted me
with open brow, and indited with a glib tongue :

“ 0 brother mine who bears up with my injury better than my
brethren and own kinsfolk,

If my yesterday has harmed thee, my to-day has brought thee joy.

So forgive that for the sake of this, and spare me both thanks and
blame.”

Then he added : “lam hasty and thou art sluggish;


8


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


how then should we agree V Wherewith he turned
away to cleave the ground, urging his steed to career,
aye, what a career ! But I tarried not to take seat on
nay beast, and return to my homestead, and after hap
and mishap reached my tent-village.


THE TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF SAMARCAND.”

On one of his mercantile journeys Harith arrives at Samarcand
early on a Friday morning, and after having refreshed himself in a
public bath and performed the ceremonial ablutions incumbent on
the day, he hurries to the chief mosque, to be one of the foremost
amongst the worshippers. Here he listens attentively to a most
impressive sermon on the instability of human destinies, and on the
certainty and terrors of death. This address strikes him not only
by the forcibleness of its diction, but by the peculiarity, that all the
words employed in it consist of letters without diacritical points,—a
peculiarity to which he alludes by calling it “ a spotless bride.” He,
therefore, looks closer at the preacher, and soon recognises in him
Abft Zayd. After the divine service is over, he accosts him, and, as
usual, the meeting between them is most affectionate on both sides.
Abff Zayd invites Harith to accompany him to his dwelling, and at
nightfall shocks his guest by producing decanters filled with wine.
Eebuke and remonstrances are airily met with some verses, spiced
with AhCi Zayd’s reckless philosophy. Eelaxing from his habitual
austerity, Harith for once does at Eome as the Eomans do, and
pledged to secrecy under the influence of the cup, he even counten¬
ances his abandoned friend before the outside world during his stay
in the city.

A1 H&rith, son of Hamm&m, related : In one of my
journeys I cbose sugar-candy for a*merchandise, making
with the same for Samarcand, and in those days I was
upright of build, brimful of sprightliness, taking sight
from the bow of enjoyment at the target of pleasures,
and seeking in the sap of my youth help against the


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


9


glamours of the water-semblance [mirage]. Now I
reached her on a Friday morn, after I had endured
hardship, and I bestirred myself without tarrying, until
a nightstead was got, and when I had carried there my
sugar-candy, and was entitled to say “ at home with
me,” I wended forthwith towards a bath, when I put
from me the weariness of travel, and took to the washing
of the congregation-day conformably to tradition. Then
I hastened with the bearing of the humble to the
cathedral mosque, so as to join those who near the
prayer-leader, and offer [as it were] the fattened camel,
and happily I was foremost in the race, and elected the
central place for hearing the sermon. Meanwhile people
ceased not to enter in troops into the faith of Allah, and
to arrive singly and in pairs, until, when the mosque
was crowded with its assembly, and a person had
waxed equal with his shadow, the preacher sallied forth,
swaggering in the wake of his acolyths, and straight¬
way mounted the steps of the pulpit of the [divine]
call, until he stood at its summit, when he gave blessing
with a wave of his right hand, sitting down thereafter
until the ritual of the cry to prayer was completed.
Then he rose and spoke: “Praise be to Allah, the
exalted of names, the praised for His bounties, the
abundant in gifts, the called upon for the rescinding of
calamity ;—king of the nations, restorer of rotten bones,
honourer of the folks of forbearance and generosity,
destroyer of ‘Ad and Trem ;—whose cognizance comes
up with every secret, whose compassion' encompasses
every obdurate in sin, whose munificence comprises all
the world, whose power breaks down every revolter.—
I praise Him with the praise of one who proclaims


10


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


[God’s] unity and professes Islam, I pray to Him with
the prayer of the hopeful, the trusting, for He is the
God, there is no God but He, the unique, the one, the
just, the eternal, there is none begotten to Him, and no
begetter, no companion with Him and no helpmate.—
He sent forth Mohammed to spread about Islam, to
consolidate religion, to confirm the guidance of the
apostles, to straighten the black-hued and the red.—
He united womb-connections, he taught the funda¬
mentals of truth, he set a stamp on the lawful and the
forbidden, he regulated [laid down the rules for] the
doffing and the donning of the pilgrim-cloak.—May
Allah exalt his place, and perfect the blessing and
benediction upon him, may He have compassion on his
race, the worthy, and on his progeny, the uterine, as
long as the pile-cloud pours, as long as the dove coos,
as long as the cattle graze, as long as the sword
assaults.—Work ye, may Allah have mercy upon you,
the work of the pious, exert yourselves towards your
return [on the resurrection day] with the exertion of
the sound, curb your lusts with the curbing of enemies,
make ready for your departure with the readiness of the
blissful.—Put ye on the robes of abstinence, and put
away the ailings of greed, make straight the crooked¬
ness of your dealings, and resist the whisperings of
hope.—Portray ye to your imaginings the vicissitudes
of circumstances, and the alighting of terrors, and the
attacks of sickness, and the cutting off from pelf and
kin:—Bethink ye yourselves of death, and the agony of
its throwing-place, of the tomb and the awfulness of
that which is sighted there, of the grave-niche and the
loneliness of the one deposed in it, of the angel and the


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY. 11

^£»sn

frightfulness of his questioning and of his advent!'—’
Look ye at fortune and the baseness of its onslaught,
and the evil of its deceit and cunning :—How many
road-marks has it effaced, how many viands embittered!
how many a host has it scattered, how many an
honoured king has it overthrown.—Its striving is to
strike deaf the ears, to make flow the tear-founts, to
baffle desires, to destroy the songster and the listener
to the song. Its decree is the same for kings and
subjects, for the lord and the henchman, for the envied
and the envier, for serpents and for lions.—It enriches
not, but to turn away, and reverse hopes ; it bestows
not, hut to outrage and cut into the limbs ; it gladdens
not, but to sadden, and revile, and injure ; it grants no
health, hut to engender disease and frighten friends.—
Fear ye Allah ! fear ye Allah 1 May Allah keep you !
How long this persistency in levity, this perseverance
in thoughtlessness, this stubbornness in sin, this loading
yourselves with crime, this rejection of the word of the
wise, this rebellion against the Grod of heaven ?—Is not
senility your harvest, and the clod your couch % Is
not death your capturer, and [the bridge] Sirat your
path % Is not the hour [of resurrection] your tryst,
and the plain [or hell] your goal ? Are not the terrors
of doomsday laid in ambush for you ? Is not the
abode of transgressors Al-Hutamah, the firmly [safely]
locked ?—Their warder Malik, their comeliness raven
blackness, their food ’poison, their breathing-air the
scorching blast 1—Ho wealth prospers them, no off¬
spring ; no numbers protect them, and no equipments.
—But lo, Allah has mercy upon the! man who rules his
passion, and who treads the paths of His guidance ;


12


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


■who makes firm his obedience towards bis Lord, and
strives for the restfulness of bis place of refuge ; who
works while life lasts obedient, and fortune at truce
with him, and health perfect and welfare at hand ;—
Lest he be overtaken by the frustration of his wish, by
the faltering of speech, by the alighting of afflictions, by
the fulfilment of fate, by the blunting of senses, by the
remedy of the sepulchres. Alack on them for a misery
whose woefulness is assured, whose term is infinite!
He who is remedied thereby is wretched, his distracted¬
ness has none to allay it, his regret none to pity it;
there is no one to ward off that which befalls him.
May then Allah inspire you with the praiseworthiest of
inspirations! May He robe you with the robe of
glory ! May He cause you to alight in the abode of
peace ! Of Him I ask mercy upon you and on the
people of the religion of Islam, for He is the most
forgiving of the generous, the saviour, and peace be
with you.”—Said A1 H&rith, son of HammArn : How,
when I saw that the sermon was a choice thing without
a flaw, and a bride without a spot, the wonderment at
its admirable strain urged me on to look at the .preacher’s
face, and I began to scan it narrowly, and to let my
glance range over him carefully, when it became clear
to me by the truth of tokens, that it was our Shaykh,
the author of the Assemblies.—There was, however, no
help from keeping silent for the time being ; so I with¬
held until he had left off prayirfg, and “ the dispersing
on the earth ” had come. Then I turned towards him,
and hastened to meet him, and when he spied me he
quickened his pace, and was profuse in doing me
honour, bidding me to accompany him to his abode and


TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


13


making me a confidant of the particulars of his intimate
affairs.—Now, when the wing of darkness had. spread,
and the time for sleep had come, he brought forth wine-
flasks secured with plug, whereupon I said to him:

“ Dost thou quaff it before sleep, and thou the prayer-
leader of the people?” But he replied: “Hush! I
by day am preacher, hut by night make merry.”—
Said I: “ By Allah, I know not whether to wonder
more at thy unconcernedness as to thy kinsfolk and
thy birthplace, or at thy preacher-office with thy foul
habits, and the rotation of thy winecup.”—Thereupon
he turned his face in disgust from me, and presently he
said :—Listen to me :

“ Weep not for a friond that is distant, nor for an abode, but
turn thyself about with fortune as it turns about.

Reckon thou all mankind thy dwelling-place, and fancy all the
earth thy home.

Forbear with the ways of him with whom thou dealest, and
humour him, for it is the wise that humours.

Miss thou no chance of enjoyment, for thou knowest not if
thou live a day, or if an age.

Know thou that death is going round, and the moon-haloes
circle above all created beings.

Swearing that they will not cease chasing them, as long as morn
and evon turn and re-turn.

How then maycst thou hope to escape from a net, from which
neither Kisril escaped, nor Dara.”

Said lie [the narrator] : And when the cups went
between us from hand to hand, and the vital spirits
waxed gleeful, he dragged from me the oath that allows
no exception, that I would screen his repute [secret].
So T. complied, with his wish, and kept faith with him,
and ranked him before the great in the rank of A1
Nuzail, and let down the skirt over the turpitudes of


14 ' TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.

the night ; and this continued to be his wont and my
wont, until the time for my return came, when I took
leave from him, while he persisted in hypocrisy and in
secretly quaffing old wine.


THE TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF WASIT.”

In a Kh&n or inn at Wasit, frequented by many travellers, A1
Harith overhears his neighbour in the adjoining room tell his son
to go to the market with one person, and come back with another,
both of whom he describes in enigmatical and fanciful language.
His curiosity being roused, he watches the lad’s exit, and finding
that he starts unaccompanied, he feels still more mystified, and,
therefore, follows him to the market, where he sees him give in
change a loaf against a flint-stone for striking fire. Then the solu¬
tion of the riddle dawns upon him, and at the same time he is
convinced that the originator of this witticism could be none other
but Abfi Zayd. Hastening back, he finds his surmise confirmed, for
the Seruji was sitting in the courtyard of the hostelry, and after a
cordial greeting the two friends were soon deeply engaged in
familiar conversation. In response to Abft Zayd’s inquiries, Hfirith
tells him that reverses of fortune and the machinations of enemies
have forced him to leave his home almost destitute. To help him
out of his difficulties, the former proposes to bring about a matri¬
monial alliance between him and some wealthy people alighted in
the KMn, whom he avers to be high-principled, and who would be
contented with a dowry of 500 dirhems, a sum which the Prophet
used to settle upon his wives and to fix for his daughters as a
marriage portion. He promises to undertake the conduct of the
transaction, and to crown proceedings by pronouncing at the
wedding an address, such as had never been heard before. More
eager to listen to this wonderful specimen of oratory, than to set
his eyes on the prospective bride, HJrith lends himself to the
scheme, and Abft Zayd quickly pushes the preliminaries to a satis¬
factory cod elusion, offering himself as security for the 500 dirhems,
after which he prepares some sweet-meats for the wedding entertain¬
ment. At nightfall he assembles all the inhabitants of the Kh&n
in his room, and after having busied himself with the pretence of


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


15


some astronomical calculations, which brings the guests to the verge
of sleep, he delivers at the instigation of the impatient H&rith the
promised speech, in which he displays the marvellous resources ot
his rhetorical skill, by repeating the principal heads of the sermon
in the preceding Assembly in varied diction and under fresh images,
while he moreover surpasses its grammatical artifice by excluding
this time even the occasionally dotted Ha of the feminine termina¬
tion from it. Then he performs the marriage ceremonies, which he
concludes with the usual wish for prosperity and male offspring to
the newly married couple, and produces his sweet-meats, urging
Harith to hand them round, instead of joining in their consumption,
as he had been about to do. Scarcely have the company tasted of
the dishes, when they fall senseless to the ground. Harith, terrified,
at first thinks that they have been poisoned, but Abfi Zayd re¬
assuringly informs him that he has only drugged them. Then he
coolly begins to collect the contents of all the rooms, and carefully
selects everything most valuable, to carry off with him. HArith is
amazed at this wild freak and frightened at its consequences, but
the Serftji tells him, as far as he himself is concerned, that he and
his ill-gotten affluence would soon be at a safe distance, and as for
his perplexed friend, he had only to feed on the remainder of the
dishes and to allow himself to be stripped, when he would not be
held responsible for an outrage of which he himself was a victim;
or else to join in the flight, offering even to find a new bride for
him to wed. In spite of his indignation, Harith banteringly replies,
that he had enough with the first one, and would leave someone
else welcome to the second; but when Abft Zayd blandly steps
forward, to enfold him in a parting embrace, he draws back in dis¬
gust. Then Abfi Zayd breaks forth in one of his exquisite pieces of
poetry, in which he tries to justify this and many more similar
enormities committed previously by the wickedness of the injured
people, winding up with a sincere touch of remorse at his own sin¬
fulness, which makes him burst out in tears and earnest supplication
for forgiveness. Hfirith softens towards him, and hoping that he
may finally meet with the divine pardon, which is held out to the
repentant transgressor, he sees him depart with his son; then
collecting his own scanty belongings he continues his journey in the
direction of Tib, a town midway between Wash and the swamps of
the Batihah.

A1 Harith, son of Hamm&m related: The decree of
waning fortune drove me to the country of Wasit, and I


16


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


repaired thither without knowing one there who would
house me, or owning therein a lodging. Now when I
alighted there with the alighting of the fish on the dry
land, or of the white hair in the black locks, evil hap
and receding luck guided me to a Khan frequented by a
jumble from every land, and a medley of travellers,
which, on account of the cleanliness of the place, and
the civility of its inhabitants, enticed the stranger to
make himself at home therein, and made him forget the
air of his native country. So I secluded myself in one
of its chambers, not paying an excess of rent. Then it
was not but the a-twinkling of the eye, or the time to
scribble a letter, that I heard my next-door neighbour
say to his fellow-dweller in the room —“ Rise, my dear
son, may thy luck not set, nor thy adversary keep on
foot, take with thee the one of full-moon face and of
pearly hue, of pure root and tormented body, who was
pinched and stretched, imprisoned and released, made
to drink and weaned, and pushed into the fire, after he
had been slapped. Then career to the market the
career of the longing swain, and bring back instead of
it the pregnant that impregnates, the' spoiler who
enriches, the saddener who gladdens, the possessor of
a puff that sets on fire, and of a germ that breaks forth
in light, of an emission [utterance] that satisfies, and of
a gift that profits, who, when he is struck, thunders and
lightens, and reveals himself in flames, and who sputters
on tinder-rags.” Then, as soon jas the throat-bag of the
roaring camel had subsided, and nothing was left but
the going of him who was to go, there sallied forth a
youth with a graceful swagger, and no mate with him.
So I saw that it was a tight knot to make game of


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


17


understanding's and to render one eager to enter into
the idle fancies [absurdities]. I therefore set out in the
track of the youth, to find out the meaning of the
speech. Then he ceased not bustling himself with the
bustle of sprites, and searching amongst the rows of
market shops, until he came at last to a store of flint-
stones, and gave their seller a loaf [or cake], receiving
from him a fine flint in return. Then I wondered at
the sagacity of the sender and the sent one, and I knew
that it was of Seruji growth, and I tarried not in
hastening back to the Khan, giving myself the rein, to
test the truth of my surmise and whether my arrow had
hit the mark in its divining. And, for sooth, I proved
an expert in sharpness of sagacity, for Abu Zayd was
sitting in the courtyard of the Khan. Then we con¬
gratulated each other on the meeting, and mutually
paid the dues of the welcoming of friends. Whereupon
he said : “ What is it that befell thee, so that thou
didst quit thy place ?”—Said I : “Fortune broke and
oppression "was rife.”—He replied: “By Him who
sends down the rain from the clouds, and makes come
forth the fruit from its sheath, times are foul and
iniquity [wrong] prevails on all sides, and the helper is
not to be found, but Allah is the One besought for help.
How then gottest thou away and which of the twain
was thy state Avhen thou wentest off ?”—Said I: “I
made night my shirt and set out early in it, a starve¬
ling.”—Then he prickecl holes in the ground with his
stick, and bethought him how to find a loan or procure
a gift for me. Presently he stirred with the stirring of
one to whom a prey comes near, or an opportunity
presents itself, and said : “ It just occurred to my


18


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


heart that thou mightest ally thyself with one who
heals thy wound and feathers thy wing.”—Said I:
“ How then am I to make union between the neck-ring
and an empty purse, and who is it that will have
Zull, son of Zull [Nobody, son of Nobody] ?”—Then
he said: “ It is I, who shall drop hints of thee and for
thee, and be proxy in and on thy behalf, besides that
the people profess to set the broken bone, and to
ransom the prisoner, and to hold in honour their kith
and kin, and to consult the adviser ; save that, if
Ibrahim, son of Adham, proposed to them, or Jebeleh,
son of Ayham, they would not give in marriage unless
for five hundred dirhems, in accordance with that which
the Prophet, may Allah bless and hallow him, settled
on his wives, or stipulated for the dowries of his
daughters, with the proviso, that no portion should be
claimed from thee, if thou w r ert driven to seek refuge in
divorcement. Then I will deliver at the place of thy
betrothal and at the gathering of thy wedding-guests an
address such as has not opened an obstructed ear, and
has not been pronounced the like of it in any assembly.”
—Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Now he roused
my spirits more by the description of the address to be
indited, than of the bride to be displayed, so that I
said to him : “I entrust thee with the affair, so manage
it with the management of him wdio is sharp-witted in
the interest of him he loves.” Forthwith he rose, trot¬
ting away briskly, then returned beaming, and said :
“ Rejoice at the tidings of fortune, and the milking of
an abundant flow. I have already been charged with
fixing the contract, and stood security for the money,
so the thing is all but settled. Thereupon he took to


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY. 19

pledging all the people of the Kh&n [to be present at
the appointed time], and to preparing sweet-meats for
the table. Then when night had extended her tent-
ropes, and every owner of a door had closed his door, he
called out to the assembly : “ Halloo ! be present
instantly,” and none of them lagged to obey his voice,
and to enter his room. Now, when they stood in rows
before him, and the witness and witnessed upon were
gathered, he busied himself in raising the astrolabe and
lowering it, and in consulting the almanack and laying
it aside, until the people became drowsy, and sleep drew
nigh. Said I t.o him : “Ho, Sirrah, put the axe to
the block, and free the people from sleepiness.” Then
he cast a glance at the stars, and breaking loose from
the tie of silence, he swore by [mount] Tur, and the
written book, that the secret of this hidden matter
should be unravelled and its memory spread lorth
unto the day of resurrection. Whereupon he sat in a
kneeling position, and invited the ears to feed on his
address, saying : “ Praise be to Allah the king glorified
with praise, the beloved Loi’d, the fashioner of every
born one, the refuge of every outcast, the spreader of
earth’s couch, the fastener of the mountains, the sender
of rains, the smoother of difficulties, who knows all
secrets and penetrates them, who overthrows kings and
destroys them, who makes follow each other the ages in
their turns, who initiates affairs and brings them to an
issue.—His bounty is universal and perfect, His rain-
cloud pours and showers, He answers request and hope,
He makes it easy for the distressed and widowed.—I
praise Him with the praise that endureth through all
times, 1 proclaim His unity, as Abraham, the son-owful,

2—2


20


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


proclaimed it, for He is God, there is no God to the
nations besides Him, there is none who inclines to that
which would counterbalance or equal Him.—He sent
Mohammed, a standard to Islam, an Imam to rulers, a
fortifier of the lowly, an abolisher of the rights of Wadd
and Suwa, for he made known and taught, he restrained
and established, he rooted firmly the principles of faith
and propagated them, he confirmed promises and
uttered threats.—May Allah never cease to bestow
honour on him, and bring his spirit to the abode of
peace, may he have compassion on his race and house,
the noble, as long as a mirage glitters, as a young of
the ostrich runs, as a new moon rises, as a shout that
greets the same is heard.—"Work ye, may Allah keep
you, the best of works, and tread the paths of lawful¬
ness, throw ye off the forbidden, and abandon it, and
listen to the command of Allah, and obey it; unite ye
the blood-relations and revere them, and resist the lusts
and repel them ; ally ye yourselves to people of
righteousness and piety ; and cut yourselves off from
the band of wantonness and greed.—How the seeker of
your alliance is the purest of freemen as to birth, and
the noblest of them as to lordliness, the sweetest as for
a watering-place, and the soundest as for keeping his
word.—Behold he has come to you and alighted in your
sanctuary to wed your bride, the honoured, and to settle
a dowry upon her as the Prophet settled upon TJmm
Salamah ;—and he is the worthiest of sons-in-law to
whom children have been trusted and who was made
possessed of what he desired,—he who gives to him in
marriage is not hasty nor errs he, the one who enters
with him in relationship is neither foiled nor soiled.—I


TWENTY-NINTH. ASSEMBLY.


21


ask from Allah for you to approve of his connection,
and to prosper him lastingly, and may He inspire each
one to seek improvement of his state and to make
ready for his return. To Him be eternal praise, and
glory to his Apostle Mohammed.” Now when he had
ended his address, marvellous of disposition, void of
punctuation, he concluded the marriage contract at the
settlement of the five hundred, after which he said to
me: “For ease and sons!”—Then he brought forth
the sweet-meats which he had prepared and set going
a feast to be remembered for aye. I advanced [stepped
up] to them as the company advanced [stepped up] and
was nigh to stretch out my hand towards them, but he
scared me from eating and urged me to hand them
round, when, lo, by Allah it was not in quicker time
than the eyelids meet, that the people fell prone upon
their chins. Then when I saw them like the roots of a
falling date-tree, or like those thrown by the daughter
of the wine-cask, I knew for sooth that it was an un¬
exampled mischief, and the mother of precedents. So
I said to him: “ 0 thou arch-fiend of thy own soul,
and vile slave of thy coin, hast thou prepared for the
people sweets, ora bane?”—Said he : “I have not gone
beyond a mess of banj in trays of the Khalanj tree.”—
Then I said : “ I swear by Him who makes the stars rise
in brightness and guides by them all wayfarers, thou
hast done a hateful thing and secured thee a record
amongst shameful deeds.” Thereupon I was be¬
wildered at thought of what would come of his affair,
and with fear of infection from his scab, so that my
soul fluttered within me distractedly, and my side-
muscles quivered with fright. Then, when he saw the


22


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


extent of my fear and the excessiveness of my anxiety,
he said : “ What is this burning thought and this
white-hot fear ? If thy concern at my offence is for the
sake of me, know that I am now well off and gone,
freeing this spot from my presence, and leaving it void
of me, and how many like it have I quitted to remain
deserted. But if it is with a view to thyself, and from
apprehension of thy imprisonment, then partake of the
remainder of the mess, and be contented to be without
thy shirt, so as to be safe against the redresser and the
seeker of redress, that thy stay after me may be
tranquil. But if not, the flight ! the flight ! before
thou be captured and dragged away.” Forthwith he
proceeded to clear out whatever there was in the rooms
of money-sacks and chests, and began to appropriate
the selected part of everything stored, and the choicest
of everything measured and weighed, so that he left
that which his net spared, like a bone voided of its
marrow. Then after he had bagged that which he had
chosen, and tied it in bundles, and had tucked up his
sleeves and girded himself, he accosted me as accosts
one who has donned impudence, and arrayed himself
with the garb of sincere friendship, saying : “Hast
thou a mind to accompany me to the Batihah, so that I
may wed thee to another fair one V —Then I made oath
to him by Him who had created him to be blessed
wherever he might find himself, and not of those who
commit felony in a Ivhan, ’that I* had it not in me to
marry two freeborn and to cohabit with twain rival
wives, moreover said I to him in the language of one
who humours his humour, and measures to him with
his own bushel: “ The first suffices me for a boast, so


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLE


23


seek another one for the other.”—Then he smiled at my
speech and stepped forward to embrace me. but I turned
from him my cheek and showed him my repugnance.
So when he saw my shrinking back, and my aversion
became manifest to him, he indited :

“ 0 thou, who turnest away from me, for it is time’s nature to be
fraught with turns,

And rebukest me for my foul treatment of those whom I had for
neighbours, with the rebuke of the harsh :

Thou comprehendest me not in what I have done, but as for
them, I know them full well:

Heretofore I sought their hospitality, and I saw them unheedful
of their guests.

I probed them, and when I tested them I found them to be base
coin.

Amongst them is none but who strikes terror when he can, or else
is terror-stricken.

None sincere in friendship, none trustworthy, none benevolent,
none kindly disposed.

So I sprang upon them the spring of the tearing wolf upon the
sheep,

And left them prostrate, as if they had been made to drink the
cup of death,

And my hand possessed itself of what they had hoarded, for they
were the abhorrence of men’s nostrils.

Then I wended my way with booty sweet of cullings and reapings.

For sooth, often times I left behind me one wounded of entrails,
who slunk after me when I had gone.

And despoiled the owners of state-chairs and carpets and curtains.

How much have I obtained by my cunning that was not obtained
by the sword,

And stood my ground in terrors, such that lions would shrink from
facing.

How often have I shed blood, and slain unawares and desecrated
the sanctuary of the high-minded ;

How many a pernicious course have I taken into sin, how many a
headlong rush,

But withal I have laid in a goodly opinion with regard to my
Lord, the Compassionate.”

Said the narrator : Now when be had reached this


24


TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


couplet, he was excessive in weeping and persistent in
asking for forgiveness, until he propitiated the inclina¬
tion of my heart that had turned from him, and I
hoped for him that which is hoped for the guilty who
confesses to his guilt. Thereupon he let subside his
flowing tears, and putting his wallet under his arm-pit,
he made off, saying to his son: “Carry the rest, and
Allah he the protector.” Said the reporter of this tale :
So when I saw the snake and the little snake slip away,
and the cure terminate in the cautery, I knew that my
tarrying in the Khan would drag me into ignominy.
I, therefore, collected my few chattels, and gathered my
skirt for departure, passing my night in faring towards
Tib, and relying on Allah against [the mischief of] the
preacher.

THE THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY, “CALLED OF

SUR,”

The only reason for calling this Assembly after the city of Sur
(Tyre) seems to be that the Eawi, who perhaps in this case may be
identified with Hariri himself, wished to pay her a tribute of grate¬
ful remembrance for a period of exceptional prosperity, which he
had passed there. The real scene of action is Cairo, whither he had
journeyed from the former place under the impulse of a sudden
fancy, and where he was indulging in a somewhat dissipated and
indolent life of pleasure. While riding one day about the town, he
encountered a gaily arrayed troop of horsemen, who, as he ascer¬
tained by inquiry, were on their road to witness a wedding-feast.
Hoping to meet with an enjoyable pastime, he follows them to a
distant mansion, which, although grand of appearance, is adorned
in an odd manner with ragged clothes, and baskets such as
beggars use for carrying the produce of their rounds. He asks an
aged porter for the name of the owner of the building, and is in¬
formed that it has no particular master, but is the gathering-
place of strolling people of every description, and on entering, he
finds, that however poor and squalid the assembled may be indi-


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


25


vidually, as a congregation or guild they know how to fare luxuri¬
ously when the occasion demands it. Presently the bridegroom
appears in all his pomp, and a herald proclaims that the old and
revered chief of the begging fraternity himself is about to solemnize
the forthcoming marriage ceremony. The announced exalted
personage steps forward and is respectfully greeted, and delivers a
discourse, in which his earnest and impressive remarks on the duties
of the rich towards the poor, and on the divine purpose in founding
the institution of matrimony, form an amusing contrast to his
description, at once high-tiown and humorous, of the couple to be
united in wedlock. After the ceremony is finished, the company
repair, under his lead, to a richly dressed table, and Harith is on the
point of departing, when the old man calls to him reprovingly and
bids him to stay. He swears that he would not do so, unless the
other told him who he was, and is answered in some touching
verses, in which the speaker exalts in glowing colours the beauties
of his native town Seruj, and bitterly bewails his expulsion from io
by ruthless enemies. Harith now easily recognises Abu Zayd in
spite of his disguise, and the change which old age has wrought in
him, and passes the remainder of the day, as well as his evenings
during liis sojourn in Cairo, in his instructive and delightful company.

Al Haretli son of Hammam related : I fared from
the city of Mansur [Bagdad] to the town Sur [Tyre],
and when I had become there the possessor of high
rank and of affluence, and powerful to raise and to
abase, I longed for Misr [Egypt and Cairo] with the
longing of the sick for the physicians, and the generous
for the bestowing of bounties. So I left behind me the
attachments of stay, and shook off the impediments of
travel, and, bestriding [a steed like] Ibnuhi-Nabimeh,
T hastened towards her with the swiftness of the ostrich.
Now when I had entered her, after sustaining hardships
and being on the point of destruction, I was delighted
thereat with the delight of one intoxicated by drinking
morning draughts, and one dazzled by the break
of morning brightness. And when I was one day
loitering about, beneath me a steed of stately pace, I


26


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


beheld on short-haired nags, a troop of men like the lamps
of night. So I inquired for the sake of procuring me a
pleasure-trip, about the troop and their destination, when
I was told that the people were witnesses and their goal
a wedding to be witnessed. Then the sprightliness of
youth urged me to fare along with the foragers, so as to
obtain a share in the sweets of the bridal scatterings and
get some of the delicacies of the festive board. Presently
we came, after enduring fatigue, to a mansion high of
structure, wide of area, which testified to the builder’s
wealth and exalted station. When we alighted from
horse-back and put forward our steps to enter it, I saw
its vestibules adorned with tattered garments, and gar¬
landed [coronated] with begging-baskets hung round,
and there was an aged man sitting on a cloth of piled
stuff, upon a handsome bench. Now the title-page of
the book, and the sight of this strange furniture, made
one doubtful, and the evil augury of these ill-omened
objects induced me to accost that man on the seat, and
I adjured him by the dispenser of destinies to let me
know who was the lord of this mansion. Said he :
“ It has no distinct owner and no manifest master, it is
but the inn of the importune beggars and low artisans,
and the den of ballad-singers and rehearsers of the
traditions.” Then I said within myself: “For Allah’s
sake, out upon a fool’s errand, and the failure of my
pasture,” and I intended to return at once, but then I
considered my sudden departure and my going back
without the others to be churlish. So I entered the
house reluctantly, as one drinking choking draughts
[lit. drinking draughts that make one choke], or as the
sparrow enters the cage. Then, lo ! there were in it


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


27


richly adorned state-chairs, and spread carpets, and
cushions laid in rows, and arrayed curtains. Presently
stepped forth the bridegroom, swaggering in his burdah
[mantle of striped stuff’], and strutting like a lion in the
midst of his attendants, and when he had sat down as
though he were the son of Ma u’s-sama’, there cried out
a crier on the side of his relatives : u By the reverence
due to Susan, grand-master of masters and pattern of
sturdy beggars, none ties this knot on this day white of
forehead and extremities, but he who has roved and
roamed, who has been young and waxed old in
adversity.” Then the company [kith] on the bride’s
side were well pleased with that which yonder people
[the bridegroom’s relations] had proclaimed with
regard to the bringing in their presence the one
indicated. Forthwith sallied forth an old man whose
stature the days and nights had bent, whose Thagham 1
tree the morns and eves had decked with blossoms. Then
the congregation rejoiced at his approach and hastened
forward to welcome him, and when he had sat down on
his carpet, and the turmoil of voices had subsided, he
advanced to his cushion, and stroked his beard with
his hand, whereupon he spoke: “ Praise be to Allah,
the foremost in. munificence, the ever new in bestowing
bounties, to whom we are brought near by supplication,
on whom we are made to rely for the accomplishment
of hopes, who has ordained the legal alms from every
property, and sternly forbidden the refusal of suppli¬
cants, who has impressed on man to relieve the dis¬
tressed, and commanded to feed him that begs and him

1 Thagham is the name of a white blossoming tree frequently
used in Arabic poetry as an emblem of hoary old age.


28


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


that refuses to beg; who has described His servants in
His book, the manifest, when He spoke, and He is the
most truthful of speakers: ‘ Those who know well that
the supplicant and the destitute have a claim on their
riches.’—I praise Him for that which He has dispensed
of wholesome food, and I take refuge with Him from
hearing a prayer void of intention. And I testify there
is no God but God, the One, without a partner to Him
for a god, who requites the alms-giving men and
w r omen, who withdraws His blessing from usury, and
rewards alms with lavish interest. Furthermore I
attest, that Mohammed is His sincere servant, and His
honoured Apostle. He sent him that he might efface
the darkness by the light, and secure to the poor a
share from the rich, and he compassioned, may God
bless and hallow him, with the destitute, and lowered
his wing to the lowly ; he made obligatory the claims
on the possessions of the wealthy, and made clear what
is the due to those who have little on the part of those
who have much.—May Allah bless him with a blessing
that obtains for him proximity [to God’s throne], as
well as the elected of the stone-bench [certain Com¬
panions of the Prophet].—But now', Allah, be He
exalted, has made matrimony a law so that you may be
chaste, and instituted propagation so that you may
multiply, for He said so that you may know : ‘ 0 ye
men, we have created you from a male and female, and
made you clans and tribes, so* that you may recognise
each other.’—Now this is Abu’d-damij Wallaj [in¬
goer], son of Ivharraj [out-goer], lord of the impudent
face, and manifest mendacity, of yelping and shouting,
of importunity and persistency in begging ;—w r ho


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


' 29

woos the shrew of her people, fit mate of her husband,
Qanbas [spit-fire], daughter of Abu ‘Anbas [frowning
lion], for the sake of that which reached him of her
being clad with pertinacity, and her excessiveness in
stooping to beggary, and her quickness in grasping a,
livelihood, and her rising after a fall, along with her
combativeness. And he has lavished upon her for a
dowry a wallet and a ferruled stick, together with a
kerchief and a pitcher. So marry him as one like him
is to be married, and join your rope with his rope, and
if you fear poverty or want [through increase of family],
Allah will give you a sufficiency out of His bounty.
Thus I say my say, craving forgiveness from Allah, the
Mighty, for me and you, and praying that He may
multiply your offspring in the beggar-dens, and guard
all of you from dangers.”—Then, when the Shaykh had
ended his discourse, and pressed upon the bride’s
relatives her contract, there fell of scatterings a shower,
that exceeded the limits of abundance, and would have
made the miser to excel in liberality. Thereupon the
Shaykh rose, trailing his skirts and preceding his
rabble.—Said A1 Harith, son of Iiammam: Then I
followed him, so that I might see the array of the
people, and complete the enjoyment of the day. Forth¬
with he turned with them to a table that its dressers
had adorned, and whose every side equalled the other
in beauty. And when each one had seated himself in
his proper place and begun to cull freely in his garden,
I slipped out of the row, and fled from the throng.
But then it happened that a turn of the Shaykh’s face
fell in my direction, and that a glance from his eye
caught me unawares, when he said : “ Whither, 0 thou


ao •


THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.


curmudgeon ? Dost thou not affect the company of
him who is generous ?”—Said I: “By Him, who
created the heavens one above another, and permeated
them with light, I will not taste a morsel, nor turn in
my mouth a bit, unless thou tell me where is the
sprawling-place of thy youth, and whence thy breeze is
blowing.” Then he fetched a deep sigh, and shed tears
in torrents, until he had exhausted their flow, and bid
the company to be silent, when he said to me : “ Lend
me thy hearing:

“ My birth-place was Serfij, and there I heaved lustily my billows,

A city where all is found, and gotten readily and in abundance.
Her waters spring from Salsabil, her fields are pleasure-meads,

Her sons and her palaces, stars they are and sidereal mansions.
Hail her breeze of fragraney, her aspect lovely to behold !

And the flowers of her hills, when the snows have melted away.
Who sees her says the haven of earthly Eden is Seruj.

To him who leaves her sighs are meted and smothered weeping,
Such as I have met, since the Barbarians drove me thence,

Tears that pour and bitter anguish, that, scarcely calmed, will
rage afresh,

Day-long grief whose engrossing cares distract the mind.

How many struggles for hopefulness, short of step, frustrated !
Would that my fatal day had come, when I was fated to depart
from her.”

When he had indicated his native town, and I had
understood that which he had recited, I knew for a
certainty that he was our most learned Abu Zayd,
although old age had now shackled him. So I sallied
forth to put my hand in his, and I reckoned it a booty
to eat with him from his platters. And I continued
the time of my stay in Cairo to resort nightly to his
guest-fire, and to fill both my shells with the pearls
of his utterances, until the raven of separation croaked
between us, and I parted with him. as the lid would
part with the eye.


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


• 31


THE THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF RAMLAIL”

The subject of this Assembly has so aptly and succinctly been
stated by Mr. Chenery in the summary of the 24 Assemblies not
translated by him, that any attempt to improve on him would be
presumption. We therefore reproduce here the passage referring
to it from his Introduction, p. 76 of Vol. I. The Thirty-first
Assembly, he says, is a composition of exquisite beauty. Harith
makes the pilgrimage to Mecca, and there finds Abu Zayd, who
addresses the worshippers first in the usual rhymed prose, and then
in verse, on the duties of true religion. The Hajj, he tells them,
does not consist in hastening on camels to the holy city, or wearying
the body, or parting from home and children, but in adding to
these performances abstinence from sin, purity of intention, and the
practice of virtue; for “washing in fonts cleanses not from im¬
mersion in sins, the baring of the body compensates not for the
laying up of guilt, nor will the donning of the pilgrim’s garb avail
him who clothes himself with the forbidden.” The verses which
follow are inspired by the loftiest morality. When he has con¬
cluded, Haritli approaches him, but Abu Zayd declares that he has
a vow not to associate with anyone during his pilgrimage, nor to
make gain, nor to recite his pedigree, nor to ask alms. As the
pilgrims pass by on their journey he again addresses them in edifying
verse.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related : In the prime of
my youth and the freshness of vigorous life, I hated
making my den in the thickets [towns], and loved
slipping out of the scabbard, from my ken, that travel
fills the provision bags and produces gain, while cleaving
to one’s country hamstrings [houghs] the intellect and
lowers the Stay-at-home. So I shook the [divining-]
ai’rows of seeking advice and rubbed the fire-sticks of
choosing the best,- whereupon I made up my mind
firmer than rocks, and started towards the shores of
Sham [Syria] for the purpose of trading. Now when
I had tented at Ramlah, and thrown down the staff' of


32


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


travel, I found there montures being made ready for
night-faring, and saddles being strapped for [travelling
to] the mother of Cities [Mecca]. Then the gale of
longing blew strongly within me, and a craving for
the holy house seized on me passionately, so that I
haltered my camel, and flung from me my engagements
and ties,

And said to him who blamed me, “ Cut it short, for fain choose
I the 1 stand ’ [maqdm, the standing-place of Abraham] before the
stay,

And spend, what I have gathered, on the gathering-ground
[Muzdalifeh], forgetting for the sacred stone the metal cursed.”

Then I strung myself together with a travelling-
company like the stars of heaven, who in their faring
sped with the torrent’s rush, and coursed in quest of
their good with the course of the race-horse. So,
between night - journeying and journeying by day,
between trotting and ambling, we abated not, until the
legs of our beasts had done us rare service, in bringing
us to Juhfah [the station where the pilgrims from
Syria assembled, before setting out for the general
meeting-place, Muzdalifeh, nest to Mecca]. Then we
alighted therein, making ready for donning the pilgrim’s
cloak, and wishing each other joy in having attained
to our desire. But no sooner had we made kneel our
beasts in the place, and laid down the saddle-bags, when
there came in sight of us from amongst the mountains
a person, exposed [bare] of ski.n, and who cried out:
“ 0 ye people of this concourse, hither with you to that
which rescues on the day of the mutual call \tanadb\F
Then the pilgrims hastened towards him, and gathered
and surrounded him and waxed silent, and when he


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


33


saw tlieir propping up to him, and their eagerness to
feed on his discourse, he ascended one of the mounds,
then he hawked, opening up his speech, and said :
“ 0 ye company of pilgrims, flocking together from the
mountain-paths, do you comprehend what you are
about to face and whom you go to meet ? Or do you
know whom you approach, and what you are under¬
taking boldly ? Do you imagine that Hajj is (means)
the choosing of saddle-beasts and the traversing of
stations, the taking seat in litters, and the loading of
beasts of burden ? Or do you opine that piety is the
tucking up of sleeves, and the emaciating of bodies,
the separation from children and the getting far from
your native places ? Ay no, by Allah, but it is the
shunning of transgressions before preparing the beast,
the sincerity of purpose in making for yonder building,
and the purity of submissiveness along with the fervour
of devotion, the mending of dealings, before working
the doughty camels. By Him who prescribed the rites
for the devout, and guides astraight the wanderer in
the raven-black night, the washing with bucketfuls
cleanseth not from being immersed in [the mire of]
sin, and the stripping of bodies counterbalances not
for being loaden with crime, nor makes the donning of
the pilgrim’s cloak amends for being wrapped up in the
forbidden. The being plaided with the Izar profits
not, when one is burdened with iniquities, nor avails
the seeking of approach [to God] by getting one’s head
shaved when one busies himself in shaving mankind.
Obsequiousness in clipping the hair (after completion of
the pilgrimage) rubs not off the dirt of persistency in'
shortcomings. Hone prospers [by visiting mount]
VOL. xi.


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


34 *


‘Arafat, but be who is endowed with wisdom, nor is
any blessed [hallowed] by A1 Khayf, who is addicted
to injustice. None witnesses the standing place [of
Abraham], but he who stands upright, and he rejoices
not in the acceptance of his pilgrimage who swerves
from the right path. So have Allah mercy upon the
man who is sincere [pure], before his running to
[mount] Safa, and treads the road ot the divine
pleasure, before his repairing to the tanks [of the well
Zamzam]; who puts off his dissimulation before
doffing his garments, and excels in his beneficence 1 ,
before his rushing down from ‘Arafat.” Then he raised
his shrill note with a voice to make hear the deaf, and
wellnigh shaking the mountain-peaks, and indited:


“ The Hajj is not thy travelling by day and night, and thy selecting
camels and camel-litters,

The Hajj is that thou repair to the holy house for the sake of
? a jj> not that thou accomplish thy wants thereby.

That thou bestride the back of righteousness, taking the check of
lust for guide, and truth for high-road.

That thou bestow what has been given thee whilo in thy power,
to him who in his need tenders his hand towards thy gift.

A pilgrimage with all this fraught is perfect, but if tho 11 ajj is
void thereof it proves abortive.


For a losing-bargain of dissemblers it suffices that they plant and
reap not, having met with toil and exile,

And that they go without reward or praise, giving their famo a
bait to him who censures and lampoons.

Seek then, dear brother, in what sacrifice thou mayest offer up,
the face of God, the guardian, going in and out.

For lo, no hidden deed shall remain hidden from the Compas¬
sionate, whether the servant be sincere or shamming.

And steal a march on death by good deeds sent afore: death’s
sudden summons, when it comes, is not put off;

And use humility in frame of mind, such as tho nights can, in
eir turns, not alter, though a crown they gave thee.

And watch not every cloud whose lightning flasheth, though it
appear to pour a rain of copious shower.


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


35


Not every caller merits to be heard, how many a whisperer
shouted fatal news,

And none is wise but he who contents him with a morsel, that
makes life’s days to folden by degrees ;

■ For every mickle comes to be a mite, and meek grows every
stiff-necked, rage he as he may !”

Said the narrator : Now, when he had fructified the
barrenness of our understandings with the witchcraft
of his say, I sniffed the breeze of Abu Zayd, and delight
made me incline to him with what a thrill of affection.
But I kept still until he had completed the expounding
of his wisdom, and came down from his hillock, when
I slipped towards him, so that I might scan the traits
of his countenance, and descry the nature of his
accomplishments. And lo, it was the stray for whom
I had searched, and the threader of the pearl-strings
that he had displayed. Then I clung to him with the
clinging of the Lam to the Alif, and ranked him as
recovery is ranked with the sick, and I asked him to
join me, but he refused, or to poise me [on my camel],
but he declined, saying : “I have made oath in this
my pilgrimage, that I would neither ride together nor
alternately with any one, neither make gain nor boast
of pedigree, neither seek profit, nor companionship, nor
else accommodate myself to him who dissembles.”
Then he went in haste, and left me wailing, while I
ceased not to shelter him in my sight (hoping for his
return), nay, would have loved him to walk on the
pupil of my eye, until he had climbed up one of the
mountains, and stood watching the pilgrims, and when
he witnessed the riders faring onward over the sand-hills,
he made hand fall upon hand, and broke forth inditing :

3—2


36


THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


“ He who visits on the back of beasts is not like him who runs on
foot,

No, nor is the servant who obeys like him who riots amongst
servants.

How, 0 people, should the toil be like, of him who builds and
who pulls down 1

Sinners soon will have to call the mourning-women of repentance,

While the seeker of approach to God says, “ Hail to him who has
done service.”

Send then forward, I beseech thee, soul, deeds of acceptance with
the Lord of old,

Scorn the tinsel of this earthly life, for its existence is but naught.

And remind thee of the throw of death, when unawares his stroke
befalls,

And bewail thy work of shame, forth shedding tears of blood
for it,

Curing it with sore repentance, before the hide all through is
rotten.

May then be, that Allah guard thee, against the fire that blazes
fiercely,

On the day when sin is cancelled no more, tardy repentance vain.”

Then he sheathed the blade of his tongue, and went -
on his way. But I ceased not, in every water-station
that we came to, and every night-camp where we
pillowed, to search for him, hut failed, and to ask
people to help me seeking him, but they found him not,
until I fancied that the Jinn had snatched him up or
the earth had cut him off. And never in my pere¬
grinations suffered I a grief like this, nor was I in any
travel tried with its like of sorrow.


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


' 37


THE THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF TAYBEH.”

This is one of the most elaborate and important, as well as of the
longest and most difficult of the Assemblies. H&rith has completed
the ceremonies of the Pilgrimage to Mecca, and intends to follow it
up by the visitation of Mohammed’s tomb at Taybeh, one of the
names given to Medina. On his road he meets in the homestead of
one of the intermediate Arab tribes Abfi Zayd, who this time has
assumed the character of a mufti or jurisconsult and adept in the
sacred and secular law of Islam. A large gathering of people has
collected around him, whose spokesman proposes to him a hundred
questions on various canonical and legal points, as the religious
obligations of ceremonial ablution, prayer, fast, almsgiving, pilgrim¬
age, on buying and selling, the duties of magistrates towards
orphans or weak-minded persons, on principles of moral conduct,
and so on—questions which are calculated to exhibit Abft Zayd at
the same time as learned in the law and in the rarest idioms of the
Arabic tongue. For his answers, while startling the ordinary hearer
by being the opposite of what would be expected, prove perfectly
correct, if the leading word be taken in a certain more recondite
sense. For instance the question is : “ May a woman be rebuked
for being bashful ?” to which Abft Zayd, no doubt to Mrs. Grundy's
horror, replies “To be sure," because he gives to the verbal noun
khajal, in everyday parlance “ being ashamed or bashful," the rarer
meaning of “ being overbearing when in possession of riches/’ in
support of which Hariri quotes a remarkable saying of Mohammed,
recorded in the Traditions. As Chenery (vol. i., p. 78) appositely
observes, similar puzzles were not unknown in Europe, as the
question : “ Num peccatum est occidere patrem suum,” where not
“ one’s own father,” but “ the father of swine,” is meant. Hariri
has not given the interpretation of the ambiguous terms as an
integral part of the text, but inserted it in parenthesis after each
question, and with the help of these explanations, which, in case of
need, we have supplemented with a few additional remarks, the
reader will find no difficulty*^ following the general drift of the
Assembly. If some of the questions appear childish, he must
remember that Hariri, while satisfying to the fullest extent the taste
of his countrymen for the discussion of grammatical, rhetorical, and
religious points of controversy, raises himself with a fine touch of
irony above it, where such discussions degenerate into mere quibbles.


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


38

But for the most part, we feel confident the reader will be amused
and interested, and as a study on the synonyms and idioms of the
Arabic Language the Assembly is invaluable.

A1 Harith, son of Hammhm, related : At one time
when I had completed the rites of the Hajj and absolved
the duties of [the shout] labbaiJca , and the outpour of
the blood of the sacrifice, I resolved to make for Taybeh,
with a travelling company of the Benu Shaibah, to
visit -the tomb of the Prophet, the Elected, and to dis¬
engage myself from the tribe of those “ who perform
the Hajj and neglect him (Mohammed).” Now it was
rumoured that the roads were unsafe and the Arabs of
the two sanctuaries at war. So I was bewildered
between fear that made me lag, and longing that stirred
me on, until submissiveness was infused into my heart,
and the predominance of [my desire for] the visiting of
him upon whom be peace. Therefore, after having
chosen my beast, and made ready my travelling-gear, I
journeyed along with my companions without inclining
to any halt, or remissness in faring on day and night,
till we came to the Benu Harb, who had just returned
from the war. Then we made up our minds to pass the
length of the day in the encampment of the people, and
while we w T ere selecting a place for making kneel down
our camels, and spying for the watering-pond, and a
cool drink, lo, we saw them running as if they were
flocking to some idol. So their swarming roused our
suspicions, and we asked what was the matter with
them. Then we were told that a learned legist of the
Arabs was present in their assembly, and that this was
the reason of their turmoil. Said I to my company :
“ Halloo! let us witness the gathering of the clan, so


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


39


as to learn clearly to distinguish the right from the
wrong.” Thereupon they said: “ Truly, what thou
proposest is worth hearing, and thou hast given good
advice without stint.” Accordingly we rose to follow
our guide and repair to the assembly, until, when we
came near it, and stretched our necks to see the legist
to whom they had crowded, I found him to be Abu
Zayd, the father of lies and tricks, and of mischief and
choice rhymes. He had donned the turban in the
orthodox fashion and gathered his garment in proper
style, and was sitting crosswise, while the great ones
of the clan surrounded him, and their medley en¬
wrapped him from all sides. Presently he said to
them : “ Put questions to me on the points of intricacy,
and let me explain to you all difficulties, for by Him
who created the heavens, and taught Adam the names
[of all things], I am the legist of the Arabs of the
Arabians, and the most learned of those that live under
the star-pocked sky.” Then there stalked up to him a
man glib of tongue, stout of heart, saying : “ Know,
that I have had converse with the legists of the 'world
to the effect that I have selected from them a hundred
decisions, and if thou be of those who loathe the
daughters of others (meaning lies, untruth, falsehood),
and desire from us sound food, then listen and answer,
so that thou mayest get thee thy due. He replied:
“ G-od is greatest (Allah alcbar), the truth will become
evident, and the hidden.be disclosed, so say what thou
art bidden.” He said : u What sayest thou with regard
to him, who has made an ablution (wuzti), and after¬
wards touched the backside of his shoe ?” He replied :
“ His ablution is invalidated by his doing so ” (na‘l, a


40


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


shoe, and also “ wife ”). He said : “ And when he has
made an ablution, and afterwards the cold has thrown
him on his side ?” He replied : “ Then let him renew
his ablution” (al-bard, cold, and also “sleep'’). He
said : “ May one who makes an ablution rub with his
hands his testicles ?” He replied : “ He is invited to
do so, but it is not made obligatory on him ” ( unsai ,
the two testicles, and also “ both ears ”). He said :
“Is it allowed to make ablution with that which the
serpent emits ?” He replied : “ And is thei’e anything
cleaner than it for the Arabs ?” (su l bdn, a large
serpent, and also pi. of sab, “ water-course in a valley,
river ”). He said : “ Is the water [fetched by the
hands of] a blind man lawful?” He replied: “Yea,
and let that of the seeing man be avoided ” ( zarir , the
word translated with blind man, in whose case the
water fetched by him would not be lawful for ablution,
because he cannot know whether it is pure or not,
means also “river-side,” against the water of which
there is no objection. On the other hand al-lasir, the
seeing man, means also “ dog,” and in their case the
reverse would hold good : the water fetched by the
former is chosen with discernment, and therefore not to
be avoided, while “ the "water of the dog ” would be the
height of abomination). He said : “Is washing ( ghusl)
incumbent upon him who has lost sperm ?” He replied:
“Hay, even if he does so a second time” ( amna , he lost
or emitted sperm, and also “.he went to Mind,” the
sacred valley near Mecca). He said: “ Is it then
incumbent on one polluted by seminal loss to wash his
lur-coat?” He replied: “To be sure, and also his
needle” ( al-farwah, fur-coat, means also “skin of the


TH1BTY-SEC0ND ASSEMBLY.


41


head,” and al-ibrah , needle, has moreover the significa¬
tion “bone of the elbow”). He said: “Is circutn-
ambulation in the spring permitted ?” He replied :

“ This is abominated on account of the execrable
occurrence ” ( tatawwuf.\ circumambulation, means also
“ easing nature,” and ar-rabf , spring, early vegetation,
signifies also “ streamlet,” the defilement of which
would be a hideous crime). He said : “ Is the washing
of his book incumbent on him ?’’ He replied : “ Yea,
and also of his lip” ( as-saMfah , book, and also “lines
of the face ”). He said : “ How is it then, if he fails
to wash his hatchet ?” He replied :“ It is as though
he neglected to wash his head ” ( al-fa’s , hatchet, and
also “ bone of the occiput ”). He said : “ Is it allowed
to wash in a wallet ?” He replied : “ It is like washing
in wells ” ( jirdb , a leather bag, and also “ the inside of
a well ”). He said : “ And what sayest thou with
regard to one who has used sand for his ablution, and
afterwards sees gardens ?” He replied : “ His rubbing
with sand is void, and he has to make his ablution
afresh ” (rauz, pi. of rauzah, garden, and also “ a small
quantity of water remaining in a cistern ”). He said :
“Is it allowed that a man should make his prostration
upon ordure ?” He replied : “Yea, and let him avoid
the dirty one” (' azirah , human excrement, and also “a
courtyard ”). H'e said : “ Is it then permitted to make
prostration upon [the wood of] a Khilaf [-tree] ?” lie
replied : “Nay, nor - either on the edges of his
garments ” ( khildf the xafs&f or poplar-tree, on which
prostration is not forbidden, and also “ sleeve,” on
which a man is not allowed to make his prostration, as
little as on his atreif, in the sense of edges of a garment


42


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


in the text, while if the word is taken in the meaning
of “ extremities of the body, hands, and feet,” the
prostration upon them is in accordance with the
tradition : “ I was commanded to prostrate myself on
seven hones,” namely, the two feet, the two knees,
the two fore-arms, and the forehead). He said :
“ What then if he make prostration on his left ?” He
replied : “ There is no harm in his doing so ” ( shim&l ,
the left side, and also pi. of shimlah, “ cloak enveloping
the whole body ”). He said : “ Is it then allowed to
make prostration on trotters?” He replied: “Yea,
with exception of the fore-arms ” (al-hur&% here trans¬
lated with trotters, means that part in cattle which
corresponds to the pastern of a horse, which as part of
a dead animal would be considered unclean, but at the
same time the word means “ a projecting piece of stony
ground or rock,” on which prostration might take
place, unless it serves to ease the fore-arms). He said:
“Is it allowed that one should pray upon a dog’s
head ?” He replied : “ Yea, as well as upon all other
high places ” (rets al-Jcalb, dog’s head, is apart from its
literal meaning the name of a well-known mountain-
cliff). He said : “ Is it lawful for a student to carry
copies of the Koran ?” He replied : “ Kay, nor to
carry them in wrappers ” (ddris , a student, and also “ a
menstruous woman”). He said : “And. what sayest
thou with regard to him who prays while the hair of
his pubes appears ?” He replied: “ His prayer is
lawful” ( al-dnah , hair round the pudenda, and also
“ herd of asses,” in connection with which latter
meaning the word bdrizah would have to be translated
in its literal meaning of coming out or sallying forth).


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


43


He said : “ How then if he has said prayer while [the
obligation of] a fast was on him ?” He replied : “ He
must reiterate it, and if he has prayed a hundred days ”
(saum, fasting, and also “ excrement dropped by an
ostrich ”). He said : “ But if he has carried a puppy
while praying?” He replied: “It is as if he had
carried beans” ( jirw , the young of a dog, and also
small cucumbers, pomegranates, or similar fruit).
He said : “ Is the prayer of one who carries a hernia
with him sound ?” He replied: “ Nay, and if he had
been, praying on [the holy] mount Marwah” ( garwah , a
rupture, and also “ the vessel from which a dog
drinks ”). He said : “ How then if on the garment of
one praying any bodily excretion has fallen ?” He
replied : “ His prayer takes effect, and no doubt ” (najw
is a general term for anything coming out of the belly,
and therefore considered ceremonially impure, but it
means also “ a pouring cloud,” the drops of which
fallen on a man would not invalidate his prayer). He
said : “ Is it' allowed that one covered with a woman’s
veil should lead a man in prayer ?” He replied:
“ Yea, and also one in armour may lead him” ( muqunna 1 ,
one who wears the female veil miqna 1 , implying that
women are unfit to be Imams, and also “covered with
a helmet”). He said : “ But what if one has led them
in whose hand there is an object of a pious donation ?”
He replied: “ They will have to begin afresh, and if
they were a thousand” ( waqf\ any object consecrated
to pious purposes, and also “a bracelet of ivory or
tortoise-shell,” in the latter sense indicating that a
wearer of such, i.e., a woman, is excluded from the
Imam ship). He said : . “ What then if one has led


44


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


them whose thigh is visible ?” He replied : “ His
prayer and theirs is efficacious ” (falchizuhu bddiyah [a
man] whose thigh is bare, and also “ whose tribal
division or kindred are desert Arabs.” Hariri remarks
that some Lexicographers prefer in the latter meaning
the reading faMiz, instead of fakhiz, for the sake of dis¬
tinction). He said : “ But if the hornless bullock has
led them ?” He replied: “ Say thy prayer, and no woe
betide thee ” ( as-saur al-ajamm , a bullock without horns,
and also “ a lord or prince without a spear ”). He
said: “ Can the prayer of the witness be curtailed or
shortened?” He replied: “Hay, by the Invisible,
the All-seeing ” ( saldt-ash-shdhid , the prayer of the
witness, here meaning especially the blood-witness or
martyr in religious warfare, and also “the prayer of
sunset,” so called because it coincides with the rising of
the stars, to which the name sh&hid is given). He
said: “Is it allowed for the excused to break fast
in the month of Ramadan?” He replied : “It is not
permitted except to little children ” ( ma‘zu7', or
mu‘azzar, excused, and also “ circumcised ”). He said:
“ Is it then open to one who brings home his bride to
eat therein ?” He replied : “ Yea, to the fill of his
mouth” ( al-mu l arris, one bringing home a bride, and
also “ a traveller who takes a short rest at the end of
night and presently continues his journey”). He said:
“ But what if therein the naked break their fast ?” He
replied: “ The authorities gainsay them not ” ( al- ( urdt,
pi. of ‘an, the naked, and also irr. pi. of mudrrawin ,
“ seized by an ague,” £ urawd ’). He said: “ And if the
faster eat on entering the morning ?” He replied:
“ This is the more circumspect and safer for him ”


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


45


(asbah, lie has entered on the morning, and also “ he
has lighted a lamp, misbdh ”). He said : “ What then
if he venture on eating at night ?” He replied : “ Let
him be prepared to receive judgment ” ( lail-an , adverbial
accusative, at night, and also acc. of lail, meaning
according to Ibn Dorayd “ the young of a bustard,” and
according to others “that of the partridge or the crane ”).
He said: “And how when he eats before the fair one
has withdrawn from sight ?” He replied: “Judgment,
by Allah [The punishment of the law], is due on him”
[al-baizd\ woman, wife, and also “ sun ”). He said:

“ But if the faster provokes vomiting (by taking an
emetic) ?” He replied: “ He has broken his fast, by
Him who has made the chase lawful ” ( al-haid , violent
anger, and also “ vomiting,” to produce which the
breaking of the fast is permitted, while the provoking
of anger has nothing to do with it). He said : “ Is it
open to him to break the fast if the cook clings to him ?”
He replied: “ Yea, but not the cook who dresses the
food in the kitchen ” (tdbikh, cook, and also “ a hot
fever”). He said: “What then if a woman have
laughed during her fast ?” He replied: “ The fasting
of that day is invalidated for her” ( zahikat, she laughed,
and also “ she became menstruous,” as in Koran,
xi. 74: “ and she became menstruous and we an¬
nounced Isaac to her”). He said: “But if small¬
pox appears on her fellow-wife ?” He replied : “ Let
her break the fast, if she has made known her ailment ”
(zarrcoh, a fellow or rival wife, whose sickness would
not dispense the former from fasting, and also “ the root
of the thumb or of the teat,” which is understood in
Abu Zayd’s answer). He said: “ What is due in


46


TEIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


legal alms ( zalc&t ) for a hundred lamps ?” He replied :
“ Two full-grown mature she-camels, 0 my friend
(misbdh , a lamp, and also a she-camel that rises at day¬
break from her resting-place, to go to the pasturing
ground). He replied: “But if one owns ten daggei’s?”
He replied: “Let him bring out two sheep without
grumbling ” (Jchanajir, pi. of Jchanjar, a dagger, or long
knife, and also of Jchanjar, or Tchanjur, “ a camel rich in
milk ”). He said: “ But if he give over to the slanderer
(informer) the best of his kindred ?” He replied: “Ay,
happy tidings to him on the day of resurrection ”
(namimah, the foremost of one’s relations, and also “ the
choicest part of one’s property”; siVi, an informer, or
slanderer, and also “ the collector of the znh'it ”). lie
said : “ Is it that the bearers of sins [burdens] deserve
a share in the legal alms?” He replied: “Yea, if
they be engaged in warfare for the faith ” ( auzdr , pi. of
wizr, sins, burdens, and also “arms, weapons”), lie
said : “ Is it allowed to the Hajj (pilgrim) to perform
the ‘umrah (ceremonies of the lesser pilgrimage) ?” He
replied : “Nay, nor that he put on a veil” ( ya‘tamir ,
he performs the ‘umrah, and also “ he puts on the
'im&rah,” a kind of head-gear or turban). He said : “ Is
it then open to him to kill a brave one ?” He replied :
“ Yea, as he may kill a wild beast ” ( shujd‘, a valiant
man, and also “ a kind of serpent ”). He said : “ But
what about him who has killed a female flutist in the
Harem ?” He replied : “ On him is due the sacrifice of
some head of cattle ” ( zammdrah , a female player on the
mizmdr, flute, or pipe, and also an ostrich, whose cry is
called zimmdr; haram., the harem, and also “ the sacred
precinct of Mecca”). He said: “But when he has


\THIRTY-SEGOND ASSEMBLY.


47


thrown [his lance] at tlie leg of a free man and
killed him ?” He replied : “ Let him bring out a sheep
in compensation for it ” (sag, a leg, liurr, a free-man ;
■fiqu hurrin, “ the male of the turtle-dove ”). He said :

“ How then if he has killed the mother of ‘Auf after
donning the pilgrim-cloak ?” He replied : “ Let him
give in alms a small quantity of food ” (umm ‘Auf, name
of a woman by her son, and also “ a locust ”). He said :
“Is it incumbent upon the H&jj to be provided with
a boat ?” He replied : “ Yea, so that he may lead them
to the watering-places ” ( q&rib , a kind of boat, and also
“a seeker of water at night-time”). He said : “And
what sayest thou about the lawless after the Sabbath ?”
He replied : “ He has done what is lawful at that time ”
(J/arcim, unlawful, opp. to Jialdl, lawful, and also “one
who dons the pilgrim-cloak, a pilgrim”; sabt, Sabbath,
and also “ shaving of the head ”; hall , “ he has doffed
the cloak,” which, of course, is a lawful action after the
pilgrimage is completed). He said : “ But what sayest
thou with regard to the sale of a bay ?” He replied :

“ It is unlawful, as the sale of a dead body ” ( kumait , a
bay horse, and also “red wine”). He said: “Is it
allowed to sell [barter] vinegar for the flesh of the
camel ?” He said : “ Hot either for the flesh of sheep ”
(Mi,all, vinegar, and also a camel two years old, or the
young of a pregnant camel, the sale of a living animal
for flesh, whether of the same kind or any other being
unlawful). He said: “ Is the sale of a present lawful ?”
He said : “ Hay, nor that of -wine ” {hndiyyah, a present,
and also an animal being led to the Ka'beh for sacrifice;
mbiyyah, a female slave taken from the infidels, and also
“wine”). He said: “What sayest thou with regard


48


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


to the sale of a cornelian stone (or of the hair of a new¬
born) ?” He said: “ It is forbidden, in truth” (‘aqiqah,
a single cornelian stone ; the first wool of an animal,
or the hair of a new-born child ; but also “ an animal
sacrificed for a child on the seventh day after its birth ”).
He said : “ Is the sale of (meaning on the part of) a
crier to a herd’s man allowed ?” He replied: “ Hay,
nor to a collector of the zakat ” (dd% one who calls, or
makes proclamation, and also “ the remainder of milk
in the udder,” which it is as unlawful to sell as the
foetus of an animal in the womb). He said: “ May
a hawk be sold for dates ?” He replied : “ Hay, by the
Lord of creation and command ” ( saqar , a hawk, and
also “ date-sugar ”). He said : “ May a Moslem buy the
plunder [taken] from Moslem women ?” He replied:
“ Yea, and it may be inherited from him, when he has
died ” ( salab , plunder, booty, and also the bark of a
tree, and “leaf or blade of the plant sumtim”). He
said : “ But is it allowed that the intercessor be sold ?”
He replied: “ What is there to hinder it ?” (shdji 1 , an
intercessor, and also “ a sheep which one buys to skin
it ”). He said : “ May a pitcher be sold to the Benu
Asfar ?” He replied : “ It is abominated as the selling
of a helmet [to them]” (ibriq, a pitcher, and also a
furbished and well-tempered sword; Bend Asfar are
the Greeks, to whom, as enemies of Islam, it would be
unlawful to sell weapons of attack or defence). He
said : “ Is it lawful for a man to. sell the colt of his camel
born in summer ?” He replied : “ Hay, but he may sell
his friend” (saifi, a camel colt born in summer, and
also “a son begotten in old age,” to which latter
meaning Abu Zayd’s answer refers ; soft, a milch camel


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


49


yielding a copious flow, and also “ a sincere friend,” the
meaning which would suggest itself most readily to the
ordinary hearer). He said : “ But if one has bought a
slave and a wound appears on his mother ?” He said :
“There is no sin in returning him” ( umm , mother, and
also “ the pia mater of the brain ”). He said : “ Holds
the right of pre-emption good for the co-partner in a
field ?” He replied : “ Nay, nor for the co-partner in a
[yellow] she-camel ” (sahrd', a field, and also “ an ass
whose white is mingled with grey ; sqfrd, a yellow she-
camel, a word which, however, would more readily
suggest the word “ bile”). He said : “ Is it lawful that
the water of the well and of an open place should be
heated ?” He replied: “If they are in deserts, then
certainly not ” (; yuhmd , it is being heated, and also “ it
is prohibited from general use ”: Miald, an open place,
here taken in construction with md, water, and also
“ fodder, both green and dry ”). He said : “ What
sayest thou with regard to the dead body of an infidel
(as an article of food) ?” He replied : “ It is lawful for
the dweller in a place and the traveller ” (kafir, an
infidel, and also “the sea”; maitah, dead body, and
also “fish floating on the water”). He said: “Is it
allowed to offer as a forenoon sacrifice squinting men ?”
He replied: “ This is worthier of acceptance” (al-htd,
pi. of ahwal, squint-eyed, and also of hctil, “a sheep that
has not conceived”). He said : “May then a divorced
woman be sacrificed in the forenoon ?” He replied :
“ Yea, and the nightfarer may be treated thereto hospit¬
ably ” ( af-flilig , divorced woman, and also “ a she-camel
allowed to pasture freely ”). He said: “ How then if
one slaughters before the appearance of the gazelle ?”

4


VOL. II.


50


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


He replied: “ It is a sheep whose flesh may be sold
(not a sacrifice) undoubtedly ” ( al-ghazdlah , gazelle, and
also a name for the rising sun, corresponding to
al-jaunah, which is a name of the sun when setting, as
in the words of the poet: tah&d/ira ’l-jaunatu an taghilxt,
the sun was setting quickly). He said : “Is it lawful
to make gain by beating wool (or hammering metals) ?'’
He said : “ This is like gambling with dice, there is no
difference” (tarq, beating, hammering, and also “the
throwing of pebbles for the purpose of vaticination ”).
He said : {£ May one standing say saldm ‘nick to one
sitting ?” He replied: “ It is forbidden between
strangers ” ( al-qd‘id , one who sits, and also “ a woman
who has ceased being menstruous or copulating.” He
said: “ May a sensible man sleep under a fool ?” He said :
“ How lovely it is to do so in the Baqi‘ ” {raqt‘, a fool,
and also “the sky”; al-baqi‘, the cemetery of Medina).
He said: “Is a Zimmi forbidden to kill an old
woman?” He replied : “ It is not allowed to oppose
him with regard to wine ” ( al-‘ajuz , an old woman,
and also “ old wine,” which to kill means to mix it
with water [see the Assembly of Tiflis]). He said :
“Is it allowed that a man should remove [secede]
from his father’s premises ?” He replied : “ It is

not allowed either to one obscure or to a noble of
birth ” (' imdrah , building, edifice, and also “ tribe ”).
He said : “ What sayest thou with regard to becoming
a Jew ?” He replied: “ This is the key to an ascetic
life” (tahaivwud, turning a Jew, and also “turning to
God in repentance,” according to the words of the
Ivoran, “ behold we have returned to thee ”). He said :
“ What sayest thou with regard to patience in mis-


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY. 51

fortune?” He replied: “What a great sin it is!”
(■ ?abr , patience, and also “ tying, fastening, keeping one
imprisoned until death ensues”; baliyyah, calamity,
misfortune, and also “ a camel tied to the tomb of her
master,” and neither watered nor fed until she dies, on
which the deceased man was by the Arabs of the
ignorance supposed to ride to his doom). He said :
“ Is it lawful to beat the ambassador ?” He replied :
“ Yea, and also to load therewith the seeker of counsel ”
(saftr, envoy, ambassador, and also “ leaves falling from
a tree mustanhir, one who asks advice from another,
and also “ a fat camel,” or “ a camel which knows the
pregnant from one that has not conceived”). He said:
“ May a man beat his father ?” He replied : “ The
dutiful does so and refuseth not” (’ azzar , he chastised,
beat violently, and also “ he helped, strengthened,
honoured,” as in Koran, xlviii. 9, “ and may assist him
and honour him ”). He said : “ What sayest thou with
regard to him who has impoverished his brother V He
replied : “ Well done of him, how brotherly he has
acted towards him” ( afqar , he impoverished, apd also
“ he lent a camel to ride upon her back”). He said :
“ But what if he strips his child of its clothing ?” He
replied : “ On what a handsome thing he has resolved!”
(' ardhu , he stripped him, and also “ he gave him the
fruit of a date-tree for a year ”). He said : “ What
then if he bakes his slave on the fire ?” He replied :
“ There is no sin on him, nor any blame ” (al-rnarnluk,
a white slave, and also “ a dough kneaded repeatedly
until it has become consistent ”). He said : “ Is it
allowed for a woman to cut her husband ?” (in the
Arabic idiom meaning to be undutiful to him). He

4—2


52


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


replied: “ Nobody forbids her doing so ” (ba‘l, a husband,
and also “ a date-tree,” in which sense “ cutting ” may
be taken literally, or in the meaning of “ gathering its
fruit”). He said: “ May then a woman be upbraided
for being bashful ?” He replied : “ Most certainly ”
(Jdiajal, being bashful, blushing, and also “ being over¬
bearing in possession of riches,” according to the saying
of Mohammed to the women : “ When ye are hungry
ye fawn, and when ye have your fill ye become over¬
bearing”). He said : “What sayest thou with regard
to him who has shaved [planed] the tamarisk of his
brother ?” He replied : “ He has sinned even if he has
given permission to him ” (nahata aslat-hu, he shaved
his tamarisk, and also “ he backbited him and detracted
from his honour”). He said: “Is it allowed to the
magistrate to appoint a curator for one possessed of a
bullock?” He replied: “Yea, to be safe from the
mischief of violence ” ( saur , a bullock, and also “ mad¬
ness ”). He said : “ But is it open to him to strike on
the hand of an orphan ?” He replied : “ Yea, until he
is of age ” (zaraba ‘aid yadi-hi, besides having the literal
meaning given above, is an idiom for : “ he appointed a
curator for him”). He said : “Is it then allowed to
him to take for the same (an orphan) a suburban place?”
He replied: “Nay, even if he consents to it” (rabz,
buildings outside the walls of a city, and also “ a wife”).
He said : “ But when may he (the magistrate) sell the
body of an idiot 1” He replied : “ Whenever he sees
that it pleases him ” ( badan , body, and also “ a short
armour”). He said ; “ Is it then allowed that he buy
for him jakes ?” He replied: “Yea, if they be not
haunted” (hashsh , a privy, and also “a palm-planta-


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


53


tion ”). He said : “ Is it allowed that the magistrate
be an oppressor ?” He replied: “ Yea, if he be

knowing ” ( zcilim , one who oppresses, and also “ one
who drinks milk before it curdles ”). He said: “ Is
one fit to become a Kadi who has no perspicacity ?”
He replied : “ Yea, if his conduct be fair ” ( badrah ,
sharpsightedness, sagacity, and also “a shield”). He
said : “ But if he is bare of intellect ?” He replied :
“ This is an indication [the title-page] of excellence ”
(' aql , intellect, wisdom, and also “ embroidered silk
stuff”). He said : “ But if he have the pride of a
tyrant ?” He replied : “ Thei'e is nothing to be said
against or to make much of” ( zahw, pride, and also “ a
date which begins to colour ”; jcibbdr, a tyrant, a shedder
of blood, and also “ a high palm-tree whose fruit is out
of the reach of the hand,” opposed to qd l id). He said :
“ Is it allowed that the witness be a suspected character ?”
He replied : “ Yea, if he be a sensible man ” ( murib ,
suspected, exposed to doubt, and also “ one who has
plenty of curdled milk ”). He said : “ But when it has
transpired that he has committed sodomy ?” He
replied: “He is like one who has tailored ” (lat, he
committed the sin of the people of Lot, and also “ he
coated a well with clay ”). He said : “ And if it comes
out that he has been winnowing ?” He replied : “ Let
his evidence be refused, and not accepted ” ( gharbal , he
sifted corn, and also “ he killed,” as the poet says in the
metre rejez : “ Thou wilt see the kings slain around
him.” The word has also an obscene meaning). He
said : “ But if it has become manifest that he is a liar ?”
He replied : “ That is for him a quality which adorns
him” (man, yamm , he lied, and also, with aor. yamdn.


54


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


“lie provided for his family”). He said: “What is
incumbent upon a servant of God ?” He replied : “ Let
him make oath by the God of creation” ('abid al-haqq,
a servant of God, and also “ one who gainsays the true
belief,” as some commentators explain the word in
Koran, xliii. 81). He said : “ And what sayest thou
with regard to him who has deliberately gouged the eye
of a nightingale?” “Let his eye be gouged, to make
the speech short ” ( bulbul , a nightingale, and also “ a
spare man ”). He said : “ But if he has wounded the
Kata (bird) of a woman and death ensued ?” He said :
“ Soul for soul, if it has gone ” (qata, sandgrouse, and
also “ what lies between the hip-bones ”). He said :
“ But if a pregnant woman has dropped her foetus in
consequence of his blow ?” He replied : “ Let him
atone for his sin by the manumission of a slave ”
(hashish, grass, green herbs, etc., and also “ a foetus
dropped in abortion ”). He said : “ What is due in law
to one who keeps himself secluded ?” He replied: “ To
have his extremities cut off for the sake of determent ”
( mulchtafl , one who sticks to a place without leaving
it, and also “ a spoiler of tombs, a stripper of grave-
clothes ”). He said : “ What then is to be done to him
who has stolen the snakes of the house ?” He replied :
“ Let his right hand be cut off, if they are worth the
fourth part of a denar ” ( asawid , pi. of asioad, snakes,
and also “ household utensils, as a washing-tub, kettle,
dish,” etc.). He said : “ But if he have stolen a great
worth [value] of gold ?” He replied : “ There is no
amputation as though he had committed a violent
robbery” (samm, what is precious, valuable,, and also
“the eighth part,” as nastf is used for nisf, half, sadis


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


55


for suds, sixth part, etc. ; under gold is in this case to
he understood a gold coin). He said : “ What then if
theft is brought home to a woman ?” He replied :
“ There is no guilt upon her, and she has nothing to
fear ” ( saraq , theft, and also “ white silk ”). He said :
‘Ts a marriage contract valid, which is not witnessed
by starlings ?” He replied : “ Nay, by the Creator,
the Maker ” ( qawdri, pi. of qdriyali, a bird of the
starling kind, from which the Arabs take a lucky
augury, especially with regard to rain, and also “ wit¬
nesses,” because they follow up matters, from qara, he
followed up). He said: “What sayest thou with
regard to a bride who has passed the first night of a
month, and then has been returned early in the morning
to her previous state ?” He replied : “Half of the
dowry is due to her, and the days of probation for
divorce (iddah) are not incumbent on her” (lailah
hurrah , the first night of a month, and also “ a wedding
night in which no consummation has taken place”).
Then the asker of the questions said to him : “ Allah
has blessed thee with the fulness of a sea that he who
draws from it lessens it not, and of a man of learning to
whose praise the praiser reaches not.” Thereupon he
looked down with the downward look of the abashed,
and stopped silent with the silence of the tongue-tied.
Said to him Abu Zayd : “ G-o on, Sirrah, how long
then [wilt thou tarry], how long ?” He replied:
‘ There remains no missile in my quiver, and after the
peaking forth of thy mom there is no scope left for
lebate : by Allah then, the son of what country art
Jaou, and how beautiful was that which thou hast


56


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


expounded. 1 ’ Forthwith he indited with a glib tongue
and a powerful voice :

“ In the world I am a pattern, point of sight [Kiblah] for folk of
wisdom,

Save that all my days I pass in tardy rest and early outset,

And the stranger, though in Eden he alight, is like one homeless.”

Then he said : “ 0 Allah, as Thou hast made us of the
number of those who are guided so that they may guide
others, make us also of the number of those who follow
the right way and spend. 77 Thereupon the people
brought him a drove of camels together with a singing
girl, and begged him to visit them while after while.
Then he rose to go, making them longing for his return,
and carrying off the slave-girl and the drove. Said
A1 H&rith, son of Hamm&m : Thereupon I accosted
him, and said: “ I know thee a rogue, since when then
hast thou become a legist ?’ J He kept twisting about a
little while and then he indited, saying :

“ I alter my coat to the whims of each moment and mix with its
changes of welfare and ill-fare,

And pledge my companion in converse with all that may flatter
his humour to please my companion,

With tellers of tales circulating narrations, with drinkers of wine
circulating the goblets.

Now making the tears by my sermon to pour down, now cheering
the hearts by my jocular sallies,

And feasting the ears, if but op’ning my mouth, by spell of my
speech that will meeken the restive,

And if I am minded my hand makes the pen drop a shower of
pearls to adorn many volumes.

How many a subtlety dim as Solid that came to be bright as a
sun by my clearing,

How many my sayings that captivate hearts, and leave in the
hearer a yearning behind them,

And virgin Kasidehs indited by me, that met with applause
loud expressed and enduring.


THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


57


Yet plotting of fortune has singled me out, a plotting surpassing
that Tir'aun’s ’gainst Moses,

And kindles against me a war day by day, I tread through its
blaze on a furnace, a furnace !

And strikes me with ills, such as melt a man’s vigour, and blanch
people’s heads with the whiteness of hoar-frost.

And brings to me near but the alien, the hateful, while banishing
from me the nearest, the dearest!

And were it not but for the vileness of fortune my lot in the
world were not vile, by its fell feud.”

Then I said to him: “ Soothe thy sorrows and blame
not fortune, but be thankful to Him who has turned
thee from the way of Iblis to the way of Idris ” (Ash-
Sh&fi'i). He replied : “ Leave off idle talk, and tear no
veils, but rise with us to make for the Masjid of
Yathrib (Medina), haply we may cleanse away by the
visitation the filth of our sins.” So I said : “ Far be it
that I fare with thee, before I learn thy explanation.”
He replied : “ By Allah, thou hast imposed duties upon
me, and when thou hast asked, thou hast asked but a
small matter; listen then to what remedies the mind,
and removes ambiguity.” Then after he had made
clear to me the enigmatical and lifted from me my
perplexity, we tightened our saddles, and I fared on,
and he fared on, while he ceased not from his nightly
talk as long as the journey lasted, on such topics that
made me forget hardship and I would have liked with
him “ the distance to be long ” (allusion to Koran,
ix. 42, “ but the distance seemed long to them,” referring
to those who were called upon to join in the expedition
to Tabuk), until when we had reached the city of the
Prophet, and obtained our desire from the visitation, he
set out Syriawards, and I towards ‘Irfik, he veered to
the West, and I to the East.


58


THIRTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


THE THIRTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF TIFLIS.”

In this Assembly Abu Zayd presents himself in the guise of a
mendicant, afflicted with a paraiytical contortion of the face, before
a congregation in Tiflis, whom Harith had joined in the performance
of the appointed prayers, and he obtains by an eloquent appeal to their
commiseration, in rhymed prose and verse, a liberal supply of alms
from the captivated audience. H&rith follows him, when he departs
with his prey, and after having reached a secluded spot, Abu Zayd
laughingly throws off his palsy and reveals his identity, anticipating
the rebukes of his indignant friend with his usual frank avowal,
that his necessity makes for him the law, if lawful means will not
provide for his necessity. Yielding to the spell of his fascinating
personality, Harith accompanies him in his travels during two years,
after the lapse of which he regrets that circumstances enforced their
separation.

I liad covenanted with Allah, be He exalted, since I
was of the age of about a score, that I would not delay
prayer as far as it was in my power, so that with my
roaming in deserts, and in spite of the sport of leisure-
hours, I kept the stated times of prayer and guarded
myself from the sin of letting them slip by, and when
I joined in a journey, and alighted in any place, I
welcomed the summoner to it, and took pattern from
him, who observed it religiously. How it happened at
a time when I had come to Tiflis, that I prayed
together with a number of poorly-off people, and when
■we had finished prayer, and were about to go, there
sallied forth an old man, with a face plainly contorted
by palsy, worn of garments and strength, who said :

“ I conjure him, who has been made of the clay of
liberality, and suckled of the milk of good fellowship,
that he but spare me a moment's hurrying, and listen


THIRTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


59


to a few words from me, whereaftei' the choice belongs
to him, and it rests with his hand to spend or refuse.”
Then the people fastened their hoops to him [locked
their knees together to him], and sat still like the
hillocks. Now when he perceived how nicely they kept
silent and. how considerate they showed themselves in
their demeanour [deportment] he said : “0 ye, endowed
with eyes clear of sight, and visions bright of percep¬
tion, does not eye-witnessing dispense with hearsay ?
and does not the smoke tell of the fire ? Iioariness is
apparent, and weakness oppressive, and disease manifest,
and the inward state thus laid bare. Yet erewhile I
was one of those who possess and bestow, who exercise
authority and rule, who grant help and gifts, who
assist and assault. But calamities ceased not to subvert,
nor vicissitudes to take away scrap by scrap, till the
nest was despoiled and the palm empty, privation
became my l-aiment and bitterness my life-stay, my
little ones whined from hunger and craved for the
sucking of a date-stone. Yet withal I came not to
stand in this place of ignominy and to disclose to you
things [to be] hidden, but after I had suffered and was
palsy-stricken, and had waxed grey from all I met with,
and, oh! would that I had not been spared!” Then he
sighed the sigh of the sorrowful, and indited with a
feeble voice:

“ I cry to the Compassionate, be praise to Him, for fortune’s fickle¬
ness and hostile rancour

And for calamities that have shattered my rock, and overthrown
my frame and its foundations,

Have broken down my stem, and woe to him, whose boughs
adversities pull down and break.

My dwelling they have wasted even as to banish from the wasted
spot the rats themselves ;


60 THI^TY-TEIBD ASSEMBLY.

\

They left me bewildered and dazed, to bear the brunt of poverty
and all its pangs,

While heretofore I was a lord of wealth, who trailed his sleeves
along in luxury,

Whose leaves the supplicants beat freely down, whose hospitable
fires night-farers praised;

But who is now, as though the world, that casts the evil eye on
him, had never smiled on him, •

From whom he turns who was his visitor, and whom he scorns to
know who sought his gift.

So if a good man mourns the evil plight he sees an old man in,
betrayed by fortune,

Then let him ease the sorrow that afflicts him, and mend the state
that puts him thus to shame.”

Said the narrates: Now. the company inclined to
ascertain his condition, so as to find out what he might
have concealed, and to sift the truth of his affair. So
they said to him : “We know by this time the ex¬
cellence of thy degree, and the abundance of thy rain-
cloud, but make now known to us the tree of thy
branch, and withdraw the veil from, thy descent.’' Then
he showed himself averse with the reluctancy of one
whom misfortunes have befallen or to whom the tidings
of daughters [born to him] have been brought, and
he indited with emphatic utterance, although in a low
voice:

“ By thy life, I assure thee, not sboweth the branch by the zest of
its fruit from what root it has sprung,

So eat what is sweet, when it comefch to hand, and ask not the
honey where swarmeth the bee !

And learn to discern, when thou pressest thy grapes, the must of
thy press from the acid it yields,

That by testing thou value the costly and cheap, to buy and to
sell all things by their likes ;

For blame would accrue to the witty, the wise, if error of
judgment were fastened on him.”


THIRTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


(51


Then the people were roused by his sagacity and
subtleness, and beguiled by the beauty of his delivery,
along with his disease, so that they collected for him
the hidden treasures of their belts and whatever was
secreted in their breast-pockets, saying to him: “ Thou
hast drifted^ to a shallow well and repaired to an empty
hive; so take this trifle [pittance] and reckon it neither
a miss nor a hit.” Then he made much of their little,
and accompanied its acceptance with thanks, whereupon
he turned away, dragging half his body, and made off,
stumbling on his road. Said the narrator of this tale:
Now the fancy struck me, that he had disguised his
appearance, and shammed in his gait, so I rose to
thread his path and to track his traces, while he glanced
at me askance and gave me a wide berth, until, when
the road was clear and identification [the disclosure of
the truth] became possible, he looked at me with the
look of him who is friendly and glad of the meeting,
and shows his true colours, after he had dissembled,
saying to me: “I imagine thou art a brother of pere¬
grination, and looking out for companionship. Wouldst
thou then fain have a mate who is kind to thee and
helps thee, and is indulgent with thee and shares in
thy expenses ?” Said I to him : “If such a mate came
forward, providence, indeed, would favour me.” He
re]died: “ Thou hast found, so rejoice, and hast en¬
countered the generous, so cleave to him.” Then he
had a long laugh, and stood before me, a sound man,
when lo! it was our Shaykh of Seruj, with no ailment
in his body, and nothing doubtful in his outward
tokens. Then I rejoiced at meeting with him, and at
the feignedness of his palsy, and bethought me of


62


THIRTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY


rebuking him for the evilness of his ways, but he opened
his mouth and indited before I could chide him:

“ I show me in rags, so that people may say, a wretch that for¬
bears with the hardships of times.

I feign to the world to be palsied of face, for often my heart thus
obtaineth its wish ;

Ay, but for my raggedness find I compassion, and but for the
palsy I meet with my wants . 53

Thereupon he said : “ No pasture is left me in these
parts, nor anything to be hoped for from their people,
and if thou wilt be my mate, on our way with us, on
our way!” So we fared forth from the place, we twain
by ourselves, and I kept company with him for full
two years, nay, I would fain have associated with him
while my life lasts, but time, the disperser, forbade me.

THE THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF ZABID.”

In this Assembly Abft Zayd appears in the character of a slave-
merchant. Harith, while travelling in Yemen, had lost by death in
the city of Zabid a faithful servant, whom he found it difficult to
replace. After having commissioned in vain the merchants of the
town, to find him a ■substitute, he repairs himself to the market,
where a man, muffled up in a Lisam or face-veil offers to him for sale
a youth, whose good qualities he praises in some spirited verses.
H&rith is struck by the boy's beauty, which ominously reminds him
of Joseph, whose comeliness had made the Egyptian ladies compare
him to an angel. He asks the boy for his name, but receives no
answer, and only after he has shown his vexation at this, the youth,
less in obedience to his intended purchaser^ wish, than to impart to
him a derisive warning, emphatically says: “I am Joseph, I am
Joseph / 5 implying thereby that his case is identical with that of the
patriarch, and that he, as free-born, could as little be sold lawfully
as Joseph was by his brothers. The hint, however, is lost on
Harith, who eagerly concludes the bargain, but, after the merchant
is gone, soon finds out his mistake. Eor the boy, now openly
claiming his freedom, appeals to the Kadi of the place, who con-


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


63


firms his statement, by mentioning, that only the day before his
father had given in court a declaration to that effect. On further
inquiry, Harith learns with dismay that the father’s name is Abft
Zayd, and he forswears all future intercourse with the wily Shaykh,
until this one meets him in a narrow road, and again charms him
into more friendly feelings, although this last experience of the
others unscrupulous proceedings still rankles in his mind.

A1 H&rith, son of Hamm&m, related : When I crossed
the deserts as far as Zabid, I had with me a slave,
whom I had reared up to his full age, and trained until
he had perfected his right conduct, and he was fully
familiar with my ways, and knew how to draw forth
my goodwill, so as not to over-step my intentions, nor
to be remiss in [carrying out] my wishes. Therefore
needs his good services had won him my heart, and I
singled him out [as my companion] in my stay and
travel. But pernicious fate made away with him when
we had reached Zabid, and when “the sole of his foot was
turned up,” and his voice had waxed still, I was a year
without relishing my food, or looking out for another
servant, until the various inconveniences of solitary life,
and the troubles of getting up and sitting down drove
me to take the bead instead of the pearl, and to hunt
for one who might he a stopgap for my needs. So I
repaired to the slave-sellers in the market of Zabid,
when I said : “ I want a lad who gives satisfaction when
he is probed [tried] and who is approved when he is
tested, and let him be one of those whom the intelligent
have brought out, and poverty alone has thrown into
the market.” Then every one of them bestirred himself
for the object of my search, and bustled about and
exerted himself to encompass it speedily. Thereupon
the new moons completed their round, and turned in


64


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


their increase and wane, but there came to pass [the
fulfilment of] none of their promises, and no thunder¬
cloud yielded rain in response thereto. Now when I
saw that the slave-merchants had either forgotten or
pretended to forget, I knew that not everyone who
undertakes a work carries it through, and that naught
will scratch my skin as well as my own nail, so I
abandoned the way of commissioning and sallied forth
to the market with the yellow and the white ones, and
had the slave-boys led past me, inquiring for the prices,
when, lo! there accosted me a man who had the face-
veil drawn over his nostrils, and who held a boy by his
fore-arm, saying :

“ Who buys from me a lad who proves deft at his work, and is in
make and manners surpassingly fair 1

Equal to any task thou mayest lay upon him, who speeds thee
when he speaks, and spoken to attends ;

Who if thou stumble says to thee: ‘Rise to thy feet,’ and if thou
bid him: ‘ Enter the fire,’ he enters it.

Who when thou wilt, if but a day, associates thee, and is contented
but with a scrap, if such thy wish.

Although he have his wits collected, when he talks, he neither
tells a lie nor claims more than his due.

He yields not to the call of any wish of his, nor lets a secret,
trusted with him, get out of keep.

And oftentimes he makes one wonder at his skill, excelling both
in prose and verse-stringiDg alike,

And were it not, by God, for life’s straitening stress, and little
ones that sadly want clothing and food :

I would not sell him for the realms that Kisra rules.”

Now when I looked at his straight build and his
exquisite beauty, I fancied him one of the youths of the
garden of delight (Paradise), and quoth : “ This is not
a man, but for sooth an honoured angel.” Then I
wished him to enounce his name, not from a desire to


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


65


know it, but to see whether his elocution matched his
comeliness and how his utterance responded to the
fairness of his countenance. But he spoke not either
sweet or hitter, and uttered not a sound of the son of
slave-woman or a woman of free birth. So I turned
aside from him and said : “ Out upon thy impediment
and be gone!” Then he burst out in laughter and
shook with it, whereupon he nodded his head to me,
and indited :

“ 0 thou, whose wrath is kindled if I withhold my name, not thus
a man, who in his dealings shows him fair !

But if thou he not pleased unless it be revealed, then listen:
Joseph I am, am Joseph, hear !

Now have I lifted to thee the veil and if thy wits are sharp, thou
knowest, but I fancy thou knowest not.”

Then he allayed my anger by his poetry, and captivated
my heart by his sorcery, so that I was too bewildered
to perceive the truth, and made oblivious of the story of
Joseph the faithful, and I concerned myself only with
asking his master’s charge for him, and inquiring after
the amount of his price, so that I might pay it in full.
Now I thought he would look askance at me and
demand from me a high sum, but he did not soar
whither I had soared, nor held he on to that to which
I held on, nay, on the contrary he said : “ Here is the
boy ! if the price is low, and his keep but slight, his
master thinks himself blessed in him and loves him all
the better for it, and I wish above all to make thee fond
of the lad by lightening to thee the price for him ; so
weigh out two hundred dirhems if thou wilt, and be
thankful to me as long as thou livest.” So I paid him
the amount at once, as the lawful price is paid in a
cheap bargain, and it occurred not to my mind, that

VOL. II.


o


66


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


everyone who sells cheap, makes one pay dear. Now
when the transaction was concluded, and separation was
impending, both eyes of the lad brimmed over with
tears, though they were not the bloody tears of grief ;
then he stepped up to his master, and said :

cc Allah confound thee ! is it right to sell one such as me to fill
the hungry bellies,

And is it walking in the path of justice, to make me bear what
cannot he endured ?

To try me sore with terror after terror, though one like me, if
tried, cannot be frightened ?

Yet hast thou probed me and experienced from me good counsels,
unalloyed with any falsehood.

How often hast thou set me as a net for game, and I brought
home prey captured in my snares ;

And hast imposed on me tasks difficult that were obeyed, though
I might have refused them.

How many a battle that I had to fight in, how many a booty, and
I had no share.

And never, ail my days, did I a sin, which, if thou break’st with
me, could be revealed [unveiled],

Nor couldst thou stumble on a fault of mine, praise be to God, to
hide it, or proclaim it.

How canst thou cast me off then so light-heartedly, as skilful
women cast away their shreds ?

And why allows thy soul thee to enslave me, and offer me for sale
as goods are sold 1

Wouldst thou not shield my honour, as I shield thy own concerns
the day when parting*grieves us,

And say to him who bartered for me : ‘ This is Sakabi, neither
to buy nor borrow ? i

Now, I am not, for sooth, below that horse, but far above thy
nature is their nature

And boldly sing I out: trading on me, my worth was lost to
them, and what a worth !”

When the old man had understood his couplets and
taken in [the meaning of] his ditty, he fetched a deep
sigh and wept so as to make weep the far away, and
said to me : “I hold this lad in the place of my son, and


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


67


distinguish him not from the lobes of my liver, and
were it not for the emptiness of my abode and the
extinction of my lamp, he would not go out of my nest
till he escorted my bier. Now thou hast seen what has
come to him of the pangs of separation, and the believer
is kind and gentle. So wouldst thou have a mind, for
the soothing of his heart, and the removal of his grief,
to stipulate with me for the cancelling of his sale,
whenever I asked for it, and not to find me importune
if T .should press for the same, for it is amongst the
choice traditions transmitted by the trustworthy, that
£ he who grants redemption to one repenting of his
bargain, Allah remits to him his transgressions.’ ” Said
A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Thereupon I made to him
a promise, prompted by shame, but within my heart I
thought otherwise. Then he bade the boy to approach
him, and kissed him between both his eyes, inditing,
while the tears were coursing from his lids :

“ Bear patiently, my soul may be thy ransom, what thou hast
met of sorrow and of anguish,

May not for long the time of parting last, nor flag the beasts that
bring us to reunion ;

Through aid of God, the Mighty, the Creator.”

Then he said to him : “I commend thee to the keeping
of one who is a good master,” and tucked up his skirt
and turned away. But the lad remained sobbing and
wailing until the other might have gone the length of a
mile, and when he had recovered himself and stopped
the flow of his tears, he said : “ Dost thou know for
what I have wailed and what has been my object
therein ?” I said : “It is, I trow, the separation from
thy master which has made thee weep.” Said he :

5—2


68


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


“ Thou art in one valley, and I am in another, and
what a distance there is between a wisher and his
wish.” Then he indited :

“ By Allah, weeping was I not for friend departed, nor eke for
loss of any pleasure or delight,

But tears were flowing from my eyelids for a fool, whose eyes,
though opened wide, led into pitfalls him,

So that he came to grief and was sadly disgraced, and lost his
white engraven ones, his lustrous coin.

Woe thee, have not those subtle words warned thee enough, that
I was free, and hence not lawful was my sale ?

For clear as daylight should it be what Joseph meant.”

Now I looked at his speech as a thing seen in the
mirror of one who jests, or the exhibition of one
indulging in pleasantry, but he waxed obstinate
[restive] with the obstinacy [restiveness] of one who
claims a right, and protested not to be tainted with the
clay of servile condition ; so we jostled about in an
altercation which terminated in fisticuffs and led to an
appeal to the judge. When we had explained the case
to the Kadi, and read to him our Sura, he said :
“ Indeed, he who has warned has excused himself,
he who has put one on his guard is like one who has
given information, he who has made one see the state
of affairs, has done no damage. Now what you both
have said in explanation, demonstrates that this lad
has tried to rouse thee, but thou wouldst not be awaked,
and has advised thee, but thou wouldst not understand ;
therefore veil the ailment of thy stupidity and hide it,
and blame thyself, but blame not him ; beware to lay
hold on him, and to wish to make him thy slave, for he
is free of body, and not subject to be exposed for sale.
It was only yesterday that his father brought him into


THIBTY-F0U11TH ASSEMBLY.


69


my presence, a little while before sunset, declaring him
to be his branch that he had grown, and that he had
no heir but him.” Then I said to the Kadi : “ And
knowest thou his father? may Allah put him to shame!”
He replied : “ How should Abu Zayd be unknown for
whose wound there is no retaliation, and of whom
every Kadi has stories to tell and proclamation tO'
make.” Then I gnashed my teeth in anger and said,.
“ There is no power and no strength, but in Allah, the'
Exalted, the Great,” becoming wide awake, but when
the time had slipped, and making sure that his face-veil
was a net of his cunning, and the crowning couplet of
his poem. So my mishap made me cast down my
looks, and I swore that I would never again deal with
the bearer of a face-veil as long as I lived, bewailing all
the while my losing bargain, and the shame to which I
should be put amongst my comrades. Then the Kadi
said to me, when he saw my distress, and became clearly
aware of the brunt of my burning grief: “ Ay such a
one, thy loss has given thee a lesson, and he who has
roused [awakened] thy wits, has not done thee an
•injury ; take then warning by thy adventure and conceal
from thy friends what has befallen thee; remember
always what has occurred to thee, so as to keep in mind
the admonition which thy money has administered thee
and mould thyself after the disposition of one who has
been tried and shown patience and who has profited by
the examples set before him.” Said A1 Harith, son of
Hammam : Thereupon I took leave from him, donning
the raiment of shame and sorrow and trailing my skirt
of defrauded folly, and I purposed to show Abu Zayd
my aversion by shunning him, and to cut him for the


70


THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


remainder of my life, deliberately keeping aloof from
his abode, and avoiding to see him, until he came upon
me in a narrow path, and welcomed me with the
welcome of an affectionate friend, though all I did was
to frown at him and keep silent. Then he said : “ What
ails thee that thou turnest up thy nose at thy mate ?”
Answered I: “ Hast thou forgotten that thou hast
plotted against me, and cheated me, and done the thing
which thou hast done ?” Then he puffed his cheek and
cracked it at me in derision, after which he indited
appeasingly:

“0 thou who show’st estrangement and curl’st up thy brow in
savage scowl,

And featherest the shafts of blame that hit as hard, nay, harder,
than arrows sharp

And say est who sells a free-born man, as a nigger is sold or a
dusky nag,

Cut short thy say, and know I am not the first therein as thou
seem’st to think:

Heretofore the tribes sold Joseph, though they were what people
know they were.

So it is ; and by the holy house that in Tihameh is visited

And those who circumambulate it, emaciated, -with ashen locks,

Not had I stood in this place of shame, I swear it, if I owned a
coin.

So excuse thy brother, and bother not with the blame of one who
ignores the facts.”

Thereupon he said : “ My excuse is plain and thy
dirhems are gone. But if thy shrinking from me and
thy aversion towards me arises from the excess of thy
tender concern for the remainder of thy pelf, I am not
of those who sting twice and make one tread upon two
cinders, and if thou art cross and givest way to thy
stinginess, in order to escape the bait that hangs in my
nets, the mourning-women will weep over thy wits.”


THIRTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


71


Said A1 Hfirith, son of Hammam: So he deluded me
by his deceitful utterance and his powerful sorcery into
turning his friend and becoming attached to him again,
flinging the remembrance of his exploit behind me,
though it was an abominable thing.


THE THIRTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF SHIRAZ.”

This composition is in the style of the eighth and the earlier part
of the twenty-ninth Assembly. Abu Zayd describes, in a company
of distinguished men of literary tastes in Shiraz, where H&rith has
met them, a wine-cask metaphorically under the simile of a maiden,
for whom, as he tells the people, he desires to purchase wedding
attire. They give him money, and it turns out that by the wedding
attire is meant a flagon and a cup, which were necessary to wed
as it were the wine-cask to the drinker. The allegory may have
been suggested by the circumstance that the scene of the event is
Shiraz, a city celebrated for its wine, or rather for the manufacture
of a peculiar kind of wine-flagons, which on account of their exquisite
workmanship are used in preference to others for presenting in them
wines of superior quality.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, narrated : In my roam¬
ings I met in Shiraz with an Assembly, who invited the
passer-by to stay, even if he should be in haste, and I
was unable to tear myself away from them, and my foot
would not move to step past them, for I inclined to
them, so that 1 might test their intrinsic worth and see
how their fruit would be from their blossom. How
they proved to be select people, and he who inclined to
them was profited, and while we were engaged in talk
pleasanter than the songs of birds and more delightful
than the milk of grapes, there entered our midst a man
in two tattered pieces of clothing who had wellnigh
reached the two terms of life. He greeted us with a


72


THIRTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


glib tongue, and expressed himself in the delivery of
the eloquent ; then he sat down as one joining in the
assembly, with his hands round his knees, and said :
“ 0 Allah, let us be of the rightly guided.” Now the
people made little of him, on account of his ragged
attire, forgetting that they would have to reckon with
the two things smallest in him (his tongue and heart),
and they began to bandy between them the chapter of
rhetoric, counting its aloes as common wood, but he
vouchsafed not a word, nor declared himself by any
sign until he had probed their intellectual powers, and
knew who of them made rise the scale and who weighed
it down. But when he had brought to light their
buried treasures and exhausted their quivers, he said:
“ 0 ye people, if you had known that behind the plug
there is pure wine you would not have slighted a bearer
of tattered garments, but asked what parts he possesses.”
Then he let flow of the springs of learning, and of
choice sayings that whereby he drew forth marvels of
wonderment and which was worthy to be written in
fluid gold ; and when he had captivated all their senses,
and made every heart turn to him, he stirred for taking
his departure, and made ready to go. But the company
clung to him and barred the course of his progress,
saying: “We have just seen the sign of thy arrow,
now make known to us the shell of thy egg and its
yolk.” Then he was silent with the silence of one
choked by tears, whereupon he wailed so that he was
pitied by all. Said the narrator : Now when I saw the
mixture and tinge of Abu Zayd, and his wonted ways
and manners of proceeding, I looked hard at the old
man, with all his defacement of countenance and ful-


THIRTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY .


78


someness, and lo ! it was he himself. But I concealed
his secret, as an internal disease is concealed, and
veiled his cunning scheme, although he did not think
so, until when he ceased wailing, he blinked at me with
an eye full of laughter, whereupon he began to indite
with the tongue of one who shams tearfulness:

“I crave Allah’s forgiveness, humbling myself, for all the sins
whose heavy load burdens me.

0 folks, how many olden maids kept at home, though in assemblies
were their virtues praised about

Have I cut down not fearing from any heir that might revenge
them on me or claim a fine.

And when the sin thereof was laid at my door, I boldly cleared
myself and said : fate it was.

And never stopped my soul its headlong career in cutting damsels
down, and kept going stray,

Till hoariness shone on the crown of my head and checked me
from performing such evil deeds.

So since my temples have turned grey never shed I any more a
maiden’s blood, old or young,

But now I rear, in spite of what may be seen of my condition and
of my slacking trade,

A lass who for a long time has stayed at home, sheltered and
veiled carefully from air itself.

And she in spite of being thus kept recluse, has wooers for her
comeliness and pleasingness.

But for her outfit, at the least, I can’t do without a hundred,
though I try as I may,

While in my hand there is not one silver coin, the ground is empty
and the sky yields no rain.

Now is one here to help me that I may wed her amidst the
singing-girls' cheering strain,

Then let him wash my grief with its proper soap and cleanse my
heart from sorrows that worry me,

That he may cull my praises, whose fragrancy will only cease to
breathe when man prays in vain.”

Said the narrator : Then there was none left in the
company but his palm opened to him and his kindness
reached him, and when his wish had proved successful


74


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


and his hundred was completed, he praised them as
beseems the upright, and tucked up his skirt for
departure. But I followed him, wishing to learn who
was the foster-daughter of his chamber and whom he
had cut down in his early life, and it was as if the
swiftness of my rising had made him aware of my
intention, for he approached me and said : “ Hearken
to me,

“ ‘ Cutting down ’ means with one like me ‘ thinning the wine ’
not, 0 friend, with the lance or sword killing a man.

And the maid, kept at home with me, means the daughter of the
grape-tree, not virgin of high descent [extraction].

And to wed her to cup and flask was the errand, which thou
saw’st me intent upon when I joined you.

Understand then what I have said, and decide on kind forbear¬
ance, if so thy will, or rebuking.”

Then he said : “I am quarrelsome and thou art faint¬
hearted, so there is a wide gulf between us.” There¬
upon he bade me farewell, and went away, making me
send after him more than one glance of loving affection.


THE THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF MALTIYAH.”

In this Assembly AbA Zayd proposes twenty riddles or conun¬
drums of a particular kind, and all of the same form, which consists
in finding a word resembling a given short sentence in such a
manner, that its component parts are synonymous with the members
of the phrase in question. The introduction to the Assembly itself
adduces as an instance the query, what is like an-nawm fdt, Sleep
has departed, to which the answer would be al-hardmdt, pi. of
hardmdh in the sense of “wonder,” “miracle,” because the initial
part of the word, cd-kard, means “ slumber,” and the final syllable,
mdt, signifies “ is dead.” The English reader of this translation will
not be worse off than Abu Zayd’s Arabic audience, for the author
gives no solution in the body of the Assembly, leaving its discovery
to the ingenuity of the listener, but if his curiosity and interest


THIRTY-SIXTII ASSEMBLY.


75


are roused by the quaint form of the questions and the lively style
in which they are introduced, he will find at the cost of small
trouble amusement as well as linguistic instruction in the short
commentary, which Hariri himself has attached to this composition.

A1 Haritb, son of Hiunmam, related: I made my
camel of foreign travel kneel down at Maltiyah, and
my pouch was at that time well filled with coin. So 1
made it my wont, when I had deposed there my staff,
to frequent the places of entertainment and to hunt
after rare pleasures, so that nothing escaped me worthy
to be seen or heard, and no play-ground or resort of
enjoyment was left unvisitcd by me, until, when 1 had
no further business there, and no desire, for longer
stay, I resolved to expend my remaining gold in buying
travelling gear. Now when I had coni]doted my pre¬
parations, and was ready for departure, or all but ready,
I saw a group of nine people, who had purchased some
wine, wherewith they had ascended a hillock, and their
wanning manners captivated men’s eyes, while their
pleasantry was sweet-spoken. Therefore 1 wended
towards them from a wish to join in their conversation,
not in their drinking-bout, and from eagerness to mix
with them, not to taste the contents of their tumblers.
Now when I had become the tenth in (heir string, and
a companion in their forenoon meeting, 1 found (hem
to bo a medley assemblage thrown together from the
deserts, though the woof of literary culture united
them as with the union of relationship, and matched
them in their ranks, so that they shone like the
luminaries of the Twins, and appeared as a community
whose members are of one kindred. So I rejoiced at,
having been guided to them, and praised the lucky star


70


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


that had made me light upon them, beginning to shake
my arrow together with their arrows, and to solace
myself with the perfume of their refinement, not with
that of their wine, until the branch-roads of discussion
led us to the proposing of riddles, as if thou sayst,
intending thereby al-Iaramat , what is like “ al-naum
fat ” (sleep has departed), which may be expressed by
“ al-Tcara mdt ” (slumber is dead), whereupon we began
to display both Soha (the smallest star in the Bear)
and the moon, and to cull both the thorn and the
fruit, and while we were spreading out the fresh and
the old, and drawing from [fishing out of] the pot the
fat and the lean, an old man intruded upon us, whose
bloom of complexion and beauty of form had gone,
while knowledge and experience remained with him.
Then he stood as one who listens and observes, picking
up what we were scattering, until the purses were
empty and it became obvious that no more was to be
hoped for. Now when he saw the flagging of their
powers [faculties], and that both he who drew water
from the top of the well, and he who drew it from the
bottom, were equally baffled, he gathered his skirts
together, and turned his back on us, saying: “Not
everything black is a date, nor is everything ruddy
wine.” Then we clung to him as the chameleon clings
to the trees, and blocked his progress as with bars,
saying to him : “ The cure of a rent is to stitch it, and
if not, then retaliation! retaliation! So hope not to
wound while thou art safe, and to make bleed the gash
while thou goest scot-free.” Then he turned his bridle,
sitting down in his place for a good stay, and said:
“ Since you have challenged me to discussion, I shall


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


77


give the judgment of Solomon in the matter of the
sown field. Know, ye owners of literary accomplish¬
ments and golden coloured wine, that the proposing of
riddles is for the purpose of testing the quickness of
wit and bringing out its hidden treasures, under the
condition, that they ai’e founded on a real resemblance
and contain meaning words, and some scholarly nicety.
For if they are of a style different from this they are
refuse [worthless], and not to be put into the casket [as
something worthy to be preserved], and I noticed that
your • definitions kept not within these limits, and dis¬
tinguished not between the acceptable and the objection¬
able.” We said to him: “Thou art right, and hast
spoken the truth. But measure out to us somewhat
from thy select store, and pour upon us from thy main
sea” [ocean]. Said he: “I will do so in a manner
that those who failed may not doubt, nor look at me
with suspicion.” Then he turned to the foremost of the
people, and said:

1. “0 thou who excels in sharpness, who strikes the fire-sticks of
merit,

What is it that likens saying: ‘ hunger is cheered by pro¬
visions ’ V*

Then he smiled to the second, and indited:

2. “0 man of surpassing honour, unsullied by any baseness,

What is as if one in riddling would say : * a back looked askance

at ’ V*

Then he glanced at the third, saying:

3. “ 0 thou, the children of whose thought resemble coin of ready
course,

What is like saying to a man thou pliest with riddles : c he met
a gift ’


78


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


Then he stretched his neck towards the fourth, and
said:

4. “ 0 tliou who solvest what is intricate of riddles and enigmas,
Reveal to me that which resembles to * take a thousand gold

coins 5 V }

Then he cast his eye upon the fifth, and said;

5. “ 0 such an one of shrewdest wit, endowed with brightest
sagacity,

What resembles £ he neglects adornment 51 ? If rightly guided,
be quick and tell. 55

Then he turned in the direction of the sixth, and said:

6. 44 0 thou from whose capacity a rival’s steps stop short by far,
What is like thy saying to him who joins with thee in riddles :

4 Hold in 1 hold in !’ V’

Then he winked his eyebrows towards the seventh, and
said:

7. 0 thou who own’st intellect of brilliancy, in subtleness high
of rank amongst thy friends,

Explain, and, mind, tell aright in doing so, what saying is similar
to c brother fled 5 V*

Then he bade the eighth to listen, and indited:

8. “ 0 thou whose gardens of excellence are fresh with flowers in
bright array,

What is like telling the sharp of wit in solving riddles : 4 he chose
not silver 5 T

Then he cast a glance upon the ninth, and said:

9. 44 0 thou to whom they point for a mind of ready wit and for
eloquence,

Expound to us, what is like the speech of the riddler: 4 tread
upon the crowd 5 Y'

Said the narrator: Now when he came at last to me, he
patted me on the shoulder saying :

10. “0 thou possessed of subtleties to baffle sore and floor
opponents,

Thou makest clear, so tell us what is like my saying: 44 be still,
my uncle 5 1 55


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


79


Then he said: “I have watered you and allowed you
time, and if you want me to let you have another
draught, I let you have it.” So the brunt [heat] of
thirst drove us to ask for a second drink. Whereupon
he said : u I am not like one who from selfishness stints
his boon-companions, nor of those whose fat remains
in their own dish.” Then he returned to the first, and
said :

11. “0 thou whose sharpness unfolds a riddle [unties a ticklish
knot], however tight,

If one propose as a riddle, ‘take this/ say true what is like it.”

Then he bent his neck towards the second, and said :

12. “ 0 thou whose eloquence appears clear from his skill in
explanation,

What is as if people would say : £ an onager has been decked
out ’ V*

Then he blinked towards the third, and said :

13. “0 thou who in sagacity and sharpness art like Asma £ i,

What is like saying by way of riddle : £ spend lavishly, thou con-

querest then ’ V*

Then he looked sharp at the fourth, and indited :

14. “0 thou who if knotty questions arise enlightens their
darkness,

What is it that likens saying: c sniff in the perfume of grape-
wine 9 V 9

Then he ogled the fifth, and said:

15. ££ 0 thou whose intellect lets him not give way to anxious
thoughts and doubt,

What resembles saying to a man expert in riddles: * shield the
ruined 9 Y 9

Then he stepped in front of the sixth, and indited:

16. ££ 0 thou endowed with sagacity in which thy perfect worth
appears,

The saying, £ he travelled awhile at night,’ say what a thing is
like to it.”


80


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


Then, he turned his glance towards the seventh, and
said :

17. “0 thou whose wit, brisk of market, gives thee adornment
and honour,

Say, for thou art able to tell us, what word is like ‘love a
coward ’ 1”

Then he looked in the direction of the eighth, and
said: .

18. “ 0 thou who in fame hast reached a height surpassing every
height by far,

What resembles, tell us, saying: ‘give a crook [crutch] deprived
of the handle-part ’ ?”

Then he smiled to the ninth, and said :

19. “0 thou who hold’st undoubtedly fine judgment and elocution,
What is like saying to the skilled in solving riddles: “ I own the

bullock ’ 2”

Then he clutched my sleeve, and said :

20. “0 thou who hast penetrating sharpness of wit in solving
intricate question, bright as a star,

What is resembling the saying: ‘ whiz of a muzzle ’ 1 Explain so
that thy expounding renders it clear.”

Said A1 Hhrith, son of Hammhm : Now when he had
delighted us with what we had heard, and challenged
us to disclose its meaning, we answered : “ We are not
of the horses of this racecourse, and our hands are not
equal to untying these knots ; so if thou wilt explain,
thou conferrest a favour, and if thou wilt keep it
hidden, thou inflictest grief.” Then he consulted his
mind for and against and shook both his arrows (of
consent or refusal), until he was pleased to vouchsafe
the bounty, coming forward to the company, and
saying: “0 ye people of eloquence and distinction, I
will forthwith make known to you that which you
know not, and thought not you would ever know, so


THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


81


fasten upon it your vessels and freshen therewith the
assemblies.” Then he began an explanation which
furbished the intellects, and withal emptied the sleeves
(breast pockets), until the understandings became
brighter than the sun, and the pockets as if yesterday
they had not been rich. Now when he bethought him¬
self of departure, he was asked about his abode. Then
he sighed as sigheth the bereft mother, and said :

“ Each mountain-path is path for me, and ample is my dwelling
there,

Save that for Seruj town my heart is crazed with longing, mad
with love.

She is my virgin land from whence my erewhile youthful breeze
has sprung,

And for her mead so rich of growth above all meads I fondly
yearn.

Afar from her no sweet is sweet to me, delightful no delight.”
Concluded the narrator his tale : Thereupon I said to
my companions, “ This is Abu Zayd, the Seruji, whose
riddles are the least of his elegancies,” and I began to
descry to them the beauty of his diction, and the
obedience of speech to his will. Then I turned round,
and lo! he had leaped up, and was gone with what he
had gained. So we wondered at his performance, when
he had fallen in our midst, and knew not whither he
had wended and swerved.

EXPLANATION OF THE RIDDLES.

1. Hunger is cheered by provisions (ju umidd bi-zdd) resembles
t.awdmlr, pi. of tdnmlr, books, rolls, scrolls (= tawd, hunger, + mlr,
pass, of mdr, has been provided for).

2. A back ( which is) looked askance at ( zahr asdbathu 'ain) resembles
matd'in, pi. of mat'un, pierced with a lance (= matd, back, + 'in,
pass, of 'dn, is struck by the evil eye).

3. He met a gift (sddaf jd'kah) resembles al-fdsilah, fern, of al-fdsil,
what separates two things (= alfd, he found, + silah, a gift).

VOL. II. 6


82


^HIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


4. Take a thousand gold coins (tandwal alf dinar) resembles hddiyah ,
fem. of hddi, one who guides aright (= hd, take, + diyah , fine for
bloodshed which amounts to 1 3 000 dinars).

5. He neglects adornment (ahmal Jiihjah) resembles al-ghdshiyah, a
saddle-cloth (— alghd, he disregarded, + shiyah , finery).

6. Hold in 1 hold in I (ukfuf , ukfuf) resembles mahmah, a desert
( = mah, stop, repeated for the sake of emphasis).

7. Brother fled ( ash-shuqiq aflat) resembles akhtdr, pi. of Jchatar,
dangers (= akh, brother, -f- tar , he flew, took to flight).

8. He chose not silver (md akhtdr fizzah (resembles abdriqah, pi. of
ibrig, pitchers (= abd, he refused, + rigah , a silver coin).

9. Tread upon a crowd (das jama ah) resembles tdfiyah , fem. of
tdfi, what floats on the water ( td x for ta\ imp. of toata', tread
under foot, trample upon, + fiyah , for fi’ah , a troup of men).

10. Be still my uncle (khdli uskat ) resembles khdlisah, fem. of
khdli ?, pure, sincere (—khdli, apocopated vocative of khdli, my
maternal uncle, + sah , hush !).

11. Take this (khuz tilk) resembles hdtik , this woman ( — hd, take,
as in the 4th riddle, 4- iik , fem. of zdk, this).

12. An onager has been decked out (himdr wahsh zin) resembles
fardzin , pi. of flrzdn, Queens in chess (= fird, wild ass, -f- zin , pass,
of zdn, he was adorned).

13. Spend lavishly, thou conquerest then (infag tagma) resembles
muntaqim , one who avenges himself ( = mun, imp. of mdn, spend
on provisions, + taqim , aor. of waqam, thou subduest).

14. Sniff in the perfume of grape-wine (istanshi rih muddmah) re¬
sembles rahrdh, vast, wide, ample (= rah, imp. of rdh, smell, + rdh,
one of the names of wine).

15. Shield the ruined (ghatti halkd) resembles mnbdr, an isolated
palm-tree, a word also of various meanings (— sun , imp. of sdn,
shelter, protect, preserve, + bur , pi. of bdlr , doomed to destruction).

16. He travelled a while at night (sdr bil-lail muddah) resembles
sarahin, pi. of sirhdn, wolves (== sard, he fared at night, + Mn, time).

17. Love a coward (ilibab fardqah) resembles miqld', a sling (-miq,
imp. of wamig, be in love with, + Id', timid, pusillanimous).

18. Give a crock deprived of the handle-part (ati ibrig yaldh bic/hair
*urwah) resembles usMb, flowing, shed(= us, imp. of ds, bestow,
+ Mb, a mug without handle).

19. I own the bullock (as-saur milki) resembles al-ladli, pi. of lulu’,
the pearls (= al-la'd, the wild ox, + U, to me, mine).

20. Whiz of a muzzle (safzr jahfalah) resembles mukdshafah , un¬
covering, disclosing ( = mukd, a whistling sound, produced by blowing
into one’s hand, + shafah , lip).


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


S3


THE THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF SA'DAH.”

In Sa c dah, one of the chief towns of Yemen, A1 Harith has con¬
tracted an intimacy with the Kadi of the place, whom he occasion¬
ally assists in the decision of law cases. One day an old man
presents himself before them, complaining bitterly of the untract¬
ableness and disobedience of his son. The youth retorts, that his
father urges him to beg, although he had formerly strongly impressed
him with the ignominy of the practice, in support of which he
quotes some verses that his father had taught him on the subject.
The latter rejoins that necessity knows no law, and recites on his
part some lines of the boy’s composition, to the effect, that rather
than meekly to submit to poverty a needy man should appeal to the
liberality of the wealthy. Thus placed on the horns of a dilemma,
the youth sullenly disclaims the use of any such appeal, when
munificence is no longer to be found in the world. This stings the
Kadi, who belongs to the tribe of Temim, renowned for their
generous disposition, into bestowing a bounty on them, and they
leave the court together, the father well pleased with his booty, the
son simulating earnest remorsefulness. Harith, whose instinct had
told him that the apparent excessive decrepitude of the old man is
only a blind, follows and overtakes them, and a cordial recognition
takes place between him and Abu Zayd, who, however, soon
manages to give him the slip, so as to escape all further inquiries.

A1 Harith, son of Hamm&m, related : I had travelled
up to Sa c dah, at a time when I was straight of stature
like a spear-shaft and of vigour that outstripped the
daughters of Sa'dah (the young of the onager or ostrich).
Now when I had seen its freshness and fed [my looks]
on her meads, I inquired from the most knowing of its
informants, whom of lordly persons and mines of
excellence it contained, so that I might take him for
a beacon-light (ember) in times of darkness, and my
tower of strength in days of oppression. Then there
was pointed out to me a Ivadi, wide of range [in
generosity], easy in his circumstances, a Temimi in

fi—2


84


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


descent and disposition. So I ceased not seeking
approach to him by respectful attendance, at the same
time making myself valuable to him by being chary in
visiting, until I became the echo of his voice, and the
Salmon of his household, and while gathering his honey
and inhaling the fragrance of his bay-tree, I used to
witness the contentions of litigant parties and to mediate
between the unoffending of them and the offender.
Now when the Kadi was sitting to give judgment on
a day of flocking together and crowding, lo ! there
entered an old man, in plumage worse for the wear,
of shaky appearance, who looked at the throng with
the sharp look of the money-sifter. Then he stated
that he had an unmanageable adversary, and it was
not but as the scintillating of a spark or the intimation
of a beckoning finger, that a lad was put in presence
[bold] as though he were a lion. Said the old man:
“ May Allah help the Kadi, and preserve him from
[ever becoming guilty of] connivance ! behold this my
son, like a bad reed-pen or a rusty sword, ignores the
predicaments of equity, and suckles the teats of contra¬
vention [contradiction, opposition, gainsaying]. When
I advanced, he drew back, when I spoke plain, he
shuffled in his speech, when I kindled a fire, he put it
out, and when I roasted, he scattered ashes, although I
had' reared him since he first crawled until he was a
youth, and was to him the kindest of trainers and
educators.” Then the Kadi made much of [put great
stress upon] his complaint, and those around him were
amazed at it [as at a case of grave concern]. Thereupon
he said: “ I protest that disobedience in children is
one bereavement of twain, and that many an instance


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


85


of infertility keeps the eye cooler.” Said the boy whom
this speech had incensed: “By Him who has set up
judges for the sake of justice, and possessed them of
the reins of preferment and discrimination, forsooth, he
never prayed, hut I said Amen, and he never made a
claim, hut I maintained its truth, he never said
‘ labbaika ,’ hut I donned the pilgrim’s cloak, and he
never struck fire, hut I gave sparks, in spite of his
being like one who craves for the eggs of the cock-
hawk, and wants the camels to fly.” Then the Ivadi
said to him: “ Wherewith then used he to vex thee
and to try thy obedience ?” He said: “ Ever since
his substance has gone, and he has been visited with
penury, he urges me to roll about my tongue in
begging, and to ask rain from the clouds of bounty,
so that his draught, which was dried up, might flow
afresh in abundance, and what was broken in his
fortunes might be set again. Yet when he had first
taken me into schooling, and taught me culture of
mind, he imbued my heart with the notion, that
inordinate desire is a thing to be blamed, and covetous¬
ness worthy of rebuke, that greed breeds indigestion,
and begging is a reproach. Then he indited to me,
straight from the parting of his lips, with all the polish
of his verse:

“ ‘ Content thyself with scanty means, giving thanks therefor, like
one who recks the little mighty much.

Shun greediness, that never fails lowering the worth of any wight
who may take to it.

Fend thy fair fame and shield it with jealous care, as with a
frown the lion would fend his mane.

Bear thou with patience, and forbear, poverty, as lords of holy
purpose bore patiently;


86


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


Spill not the water of thy face even if he whom thou beg’st from
spends on thee gifts galore.

For free is he, who if a mote hurts his eye conceals the mote from
even his pupils twain,

And if his whilom gold-stuff has gone to rags sees not his way by
begging to fret his cheeks.’ ”

Then the old man contracted his brows and scowled at
his son, and rushed upon him and growled, saying:

‘ ‘ Hush! 0 thou disobedient one, 0 thou who art
choking and stifling me! Woe betide thee, wilt thou
teach thy mother how to copulate, and thy nurse how
to give thee suck ? forsooth, the scorpion has rubbed
himself against the snake, and the weanlings have
coursed along with the stallions.” Then it was as if he
repented of what had escaped his mouth, and affection
led him to conciliate the boy, for he looked at him with
the eye of the fondly disposed, and lowered to him the
wing of the kindly, saying: “Alas! dear son, those
who are bidden to be contented, and chidden from
self-abasement are the owners of merchandise, and the
workers for gain through handicraft, but as for those
who are possessed of needs, an exception is made in
their behalf with regard to matters prohibited. And
granted thou wast ignorant of this interpretation, and
it has not reached thee what has been said [on this
point], wast not thou he who opposed his father in what
he said, not revering him:

“ ‘ Sit not content with distress and suffering hunger’s pangs, that
people may say he is high-minded and patience full.

See for thyself if a land that is not decked out with plants, is like
a land all around hedged in with trees, rich of growth;

So wend aside from what fools are in their sloth pointing to, for
say, what good can there be in wood that bears never fruit ?

And lead thy beasts from a place where thou sustainest brunt of
thirst, to pasture-grounds whereupon in fertile flow falls the rain,


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


87


And ask the drought to descend full from the breast of the cloud,,
for if thy hands are bedewed then may thy gain prosper thee,

But if thou shouldst be denied, there is no harm in rebuff, for
Moses met heretofore, and Prophet Khizr, with the same.’ ”

Said the narrator: Now when the Kadi saw the contra¬
diction between the speech of the lad and his action,
and that he adorned himself with that which was not
his own, he looked w r ith wrathful eye, and said:

“ Temimi at one time, and Kaisi at another ? Fie upon
him, who belies what he says, and changes colour as
the Grhul changes colour.” Then the boy said: “ By
Him, who has made thee a key for the truth, and an
opener [of justice] amongst mankind, I have been
caused to forget, since I became sorrowful, and my wits
have been turned rusty, since I waxed thirsty. More¬
over, where is the open door, and the ready gift ? And
is there one left who bestows with full hands, and if
asked for food says: c Take.’ ” Thereupon the Kadi
replied to him: “ Stop ! for among the missing arrows
is one that hits, and not every lightning deceives, so
distinguish between the flashes if thou watchest the
clouds [for rain], and testify not but what thou
knowest.” Now when the old man saw that the Kadi
was wroth on account of the generous, and thought it
a serious thing to reckon all men as [to be] misers, he
knew that he would abet his word, and show his
munificence. So he belied him not [was not slow] in
setting his net, and baking his fish before the fire, and
quoth saying:

“ 0 Kadi, thou whose wisdom and kindliness more deeply are
rooted than mount Bazwd,

This youth maintains, misguided by ignorance, that in this wortd
none exercise bounty,


88


TEIBTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


Not knowing that thou art the son of a tribe, whose gifts are like
yon quails and yon Manna.

Confer thou then that which will make him ashamed of what he
forged of impudent falsehood,

And let me go rejoicing and giving praise for what in helpful
bounty thou spendest.”

Then the Kadi was pleased at his speech, and bestowed
on him liberally of his largess, whereupon he turned
his face towards the hoy, for whom he had already
headed the arrows of rebuke, and said to him: “ Hast
thou now seen the refutation of thy assertion, and the
error of thy opinion ? So be not henceforth hasty in
thy blame, and pare no wood before testing it ; and
beware to refuse obedience to thy father. For if thou
return to thy revolt against him, there will alight on
thee from me that which thou deservest.” Then the
youth was dumfounded with repentance (fell to biting
his hand with remorse), and sought shelter by his
parent’s side, and presently rose and sped away, while
the old man followed him inditing:

“ Let him whom his fell fortune has treated ill repair to Sa'dah
town and her Kadi.

His bounty shames the bounteous that went before, his justice
baffles those who come after.”

Said the narrator: How I was bewildered in my
mind as to whether I knew the old man, or not, until
he had started off on his journey, when I persuaded
myself to follow him, even if need be to his abode ;
haply I might become aware of his secrets and learn
what tree was the fuel of his fire. So I flung from me
what clung to me, and set out whither he had set out,
and he ceased not to step along and I to follow in his
track, he to get further, and I to come nearer to him,


THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


89


until both were face to face, and recognition was in¬
cumbent on any two intimates. Then he showed
gladness, and did away with his shakiness, saying:
a He who deceives his brother may not live (enjoy life).”
Accordingly I knew that he was the Seruji and
no mistake, and without change of condition. So I
hastened towards him to shake [clasp] his hand, and
to inquire after his good and evil hap. Thereupon he
said: ££ Here is the dutiful son of thy brother at hand
for thee” (ie. f let him tell thee what thou wantest to
know), and left me passing his way. The youth, liow-
ever, did but laugh, then he fled, as yonder had fled.
So I went back after I had ascertained their identity,
but where was I to find the twain of them ?

THE THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY", CALLED
££ OF MERY.”

“ In the thirty-eighth Abu Zayd addresses the governor of a town ”
(for Englishmen it may not be without interest that the town in
question is the famous city of Merv) “in some fine verses in praise of
liberality to men of genius.” With these few lines Chenery sums
up this Makamah, and Preston says that it contains little beyond a
repetition of circumstances and phrases which occur in other Assem¬
blies, and is of inferior interest to most of them. It should, however,
be kept in view that Hariri’s work is not one to be read in uninter¬
rupted succession, like a production of modern fiction, except perhaps
by scholars. The whole plan of the work renders it almost inevitable
that, to quote once more the words of the former distinguished
translator, “the repetition of similar adventures and similar rhetoric
becomes monotonous.” But Hariri is an author whose book may
be taken in hand by a reader of cultivated mind and refined taste at
any moment in which the mood seizes him, and be opened at
random, when he will always bo sure to find much that will entertain,
interest, or instruct him, and if he happens to hit on the present
Assembly, taking it by itself and on its own merits, I have no doubt
that he will proclaim it to be a composition of exquisite beauty,


90


THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


conceived in Hariri’s most happy vein, and written in his most
brilliant style.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related : It had become
dear to me ever since my foot moved and my pen sput-
tured, to take literary learning for my roadway and
the kindling of my torch thereat for my pursuit. Ac¬
cordingly I furrowed out its doctors and the treasures
of its mysteries, and when I had found of them [such
as are] the desire of the seeker, and the burning log to
light one’s fire from, I clutched with my hand his
stirrup, and beseeched him for a dole from out his
hoard. Withal I met none that equalled the Serfiji in
the abundant shower of his clouds, and hi applying the
pitch to the places where the symptoms of scab appear,
save that he used to wander abroad faster than the
'proverb, and swifter than the moon in her changes,
wherefore from longing to encounter him, and from my
delight in joining his assemblies, I was eager for pere¬
grination, and found enjoyment in travel which [accord¬
ing to a saying of Mohammed’s] is part of the [infernal]
torment. So at a time when I had strayed to Merv,
and no wonder, the rousing of birds, and the presage
which is the harbinger of good, gave me happy tidings
of a meeting with him. Hence I ceased not spying for
him in the assemblies and on the arrival of caravans,
but I found none to give me news of him, nor saw I
any trace or speck of him, until despair got the better
of hope, and expectation became reduced and subdued.
How one day I was in the presence of the W&li of Merv,
who was one of those who combine excellence with
dominion, when lo, Abti Zayd rose to sight in the rags
of one poverty-stricken, and greeted with the greeting


THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


91


of the needy when he meets a lord of the crown. Then
he said to the Will: “Know thou, mayest thou be
kept safe from blame, and spared sorrow, that on him
who is entrusted with offices, hopes depend, and to him
whose degrees have been exalted, needs [wants] are
referred, and that he is the fortunate, who if he has the
power and destiny aids him, pays the zakat for divine
favours, as he pays the zakat for cattle, and who clings
to the people commanding reverence, as he clings to his
wife and close relations. Truly thou ha^t become,
praise be to Allah, the support of thy city, and the
pillar of thy age, to whose sanctuary the saddle-beasts
are driven, and from whose generosity bounties are
hoped, to whose court requests are carried, and from
whose palm relief is expected to descend, for Allah’s
grace upon thee has been great, and His beneficence in
thy behalf plentiful. Now I am an old man who
grovels in the dust after having rolled in riches, and
who lacks greencrop when he has waxed hoary. I have
come to thee from a distant place, and a wretched state,
hoping from thy sea a swell, and from thy rank a lift,
and hope is the best means of propitiation for him who
begs, and the best gift of him who gives. Therefore
bestow upon me what is incumbent on thee, and deal
me fair, as Allah has dealt fair with thee, and beware
to turn thy face from him who visits thee, and repairs
to thy house, and to close thy fist [in denial] from him
who asks thy gift and appeals for support to thy
generosity. For he excels not who is stingy, nor goes
he the right way who hoards up. But he is the man
of head and heart ( al-laMb ), who when he has, bestows,
and when he first earns a profit, profits others, and the


92


THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


liberal is he who, when he is asked for the gift of gold,
is not afraid to give.” Then he held in, looking out
for the fruit of his planting and watching for the grati¬
fication of his soul. Now the W&li wished to know
whether his well was shallow, or whether his spring
had continuity. So he bent his head to think how to
strike sparks from his fire-stick and how to discriminate
the temper of his blade. But the secret of his silence
and of the delaying of his gift was hidden from AM
Zayd : so he flared up in wrath, and indited improvising:

“Despise not [may uever thee a curse betide] men of learning
because they show clad in rags and destitute paupers,

Nor fail to pay due regard to him who comes full of hope, both if
he be glib of speech or if he be tongue-tied.

But give thy bounty to him who solicits help from thee and raise
by thy timely aid one whom thou seest downcast.

For hail the wealth of a man whose wealth obtains praise for him,
the fame of which travellers through all the world blaze forth.

And he who buys fair renown from humankind by his gifts, will
never be overreached, and though he gave rubies.

But for magnanimity the wise would have no excuse, if he aspires
to what goes beyond the mere day’s food.

Yet to acquire eulogy he strives, and moved by his love of noble¬
ness, lifts his neck to aim at high places.

When he who is generous inhales the fragrance of thanks, he
spurns the fragrance of musk, however fine pounded,

And never meet stinginess and praise so that one would think : a
lizard this, that a fish, in water this, that ashore [on land].

Beneficence is beloved by men for its qualities, whereas the close-
fisted wight is all his days hated.

And his excuses to spend his riches with kindliness, keep blame
on him evermore, and people’s stern censure.

Be bountiful then with what thy hands have been gathering, that
he who begs for thy boon be ever dumfounded,

And take thy share, ere a stroke of fortune come over thee that
shows thee thy tree of life deprived of its foliage.

For time is too fickle as in one state to endure, mayst thou
delight in that state or may it be hateful.”


THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


93


Said the narrator : Then the Will called him near on
account of his ravishing discourse, until he had made
him alight on the seat of the circumciser, whereupon he
dealt out to him from the streams of his donation that
which prognosticated length of skirt and shortness of
night for him. So he rose from his presence with a full
sleeve and a merry heart. But I followed him, keeping
in his direction and tracking his step, until, when he
was well out of the Willi’s gate, and had got clear of his
den, T said to him: “ Mayst thou thrive on what has
been given thee, and be allowed to enjoy long that
which has been put in thy possession.” Then his face
lit up and beamed, and he continued thanks to Allah,
be He exalted, whereupon he strutted along with a
proud swing, and indited straight off:

“ Know, who has gained a portion by plodding dulness, or who
owes rank to virtues of those before him.

That my earnings are due to worth, not to meddling, and my
station to power of speech, not to kings' grace.”

Then he said : “Out on him who blames learning, and
hail to him who strives after it and makes it his
pursuit;” wherewith he bade me farewell, and went
away, leaving me aflame with longing for him.

THE THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF 'OMAN.”

Called by some important business to 'Oman on the eastern coast
of Arabia, HYirith is about to cross the Persian Gulf, when at the
moment of departure an old man begs to be taken on board,
promising the ship-company in return for their kindness to him, a
safe passage, by means of a magic spell in his possession against all
dangers of the sea. They comply with his request, and Harith is
enchanted when he recognises in the stranger his old friend Abh
Zayd. At first all seems to go well. Probably, however, unknown


94


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


to the rest of the company, some miscreant was on hoard, whose
presence counteracted to a certain degree Abu Zayd’s panacea, for
after the voyage had continued for some time under the most
promising auspices, they are suddenly overtaken by a violent storm,
which forces them to seek refuge in the port of an island. When
their provisions begin to run dangerously short, Abft Zayd prevails
on Harith to go with him on land for a foraging expedition. Soon
they arrived at a magnificent mansion, whose numerous servants are
found to be plunged into the utmost grief, because the lady of the
house is labouring in throes of a difficult child-birth, and her life
almost despaired of. Abu. Zayd reassures them, pretending to have
another powerful charm for the occasion. With a great display of
solemnity, he writes some verses on a piece of meerschaum in which
he warns the child of the evils of existence and the troubled of life
awaiting it in the world, and which, with delightful humour, are
supposed, according to the innate perverseness of man’s heart, to act
as an irresistible inducement for it to struggle into the light of day.
Wrapped in a piece of silk, and profusely perfumed, the talisman is,
at his orders, tied to the limbs of the labouring woman, and this time
the incantation works well, for soon the confinement is happily got
over. The lord of the mansion, in his boundless joy at the birth of
a long desired son, not only overwhelms Abfi Zayd with costly
tokens of his gratitude, but attaches him to his household, with un¬
limited control over all his wealth. Harith tries to persuade him to
continue with him the voyage, but Abft Zayd refuses point blank,
paraphrasing in another piece of his charming poetry the popular
saying ubi bene ibigatria, and Harith reluctantly separates from him,
giving vent to his grief and disappointment in a wish, the savagery
of which may playfully be converted into the essence of the milk of
human kindness by the indulgent reader, who remembers the drift
of Abfi Zayd’s magical verses, and the words of the Greek poet:

“Best for man not to be born, second best, to die as soon as he
can.”

A1 H&rith, son of Hammam. related : I clung, ever
since the pile under my izdr had grown black, and the
down of my cheek had sprouted, to fare through the
deserts on the backs of Mahri camels, now ascending a
mountain-tract, now threading my way through low¬
land, so as to explore the wilds whether trodden or
trackless, and to get to ken the road-stations and


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


95


watering-places, making the blood flow from the hoofs
of horses and camels and jading the swift steeds and the
fleet dromedaries. Once when I was weary of desert-
travel, and some matter of importance cropped up for
me at SuMr, I inclined to cross the billowy sea and to
choose the swift-sailing ship. So I removed to it my
chattels, and took along with me my provisions and
water-bags ; then I embarked therein as embarketh the
timid, who registers vows, who blames himself and
would fain find excuses. Scarcely had we settled on
board, and hoisted the sails for speed, when we heard
from the shore of the roadstead, while the night was
darkening and waxing. gloomy, a caller who said :

“ 0 ye people of this strongbuilt ship, driven on the
high sea, by decree of the Mighty, the All-knowing,
shall I direct you unto a merchandise that will deliver
you from sore torment ?” (Koran lxi. 10). Then we
said : “ Light for us a brand from thy fire, 0 thou
guide, and show us the l-ight path, as the trusty friend
shows the right path to the trusty friend.” He replied:
“ Will ye take for companion a son of the road, who
carries his provisions in a basket, and whose shadow is
not heavy, wishing for nought but a sleeping-place ?”
So wo resolved to lower our wings to him, and not to
be stingy in providing for his need. When he had
come aboard of the ship, he said : “ I take refuge with
Allah from the paths of destruction.” Then he said :
“We have been told in the Traditions, handed down
by the doctors of divinity, that Allah, be He exalted,
has not made it binding on the ignorant to learn, any
more than He has made it incumbent on the learned to
teach. How I possess a charm transmitted from the


96


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


Prophets, and I have an advice for you sound of proofs,
which it is not in my power to conceal, nor in my
nature to withhold. Ponder then my speech and take
it in, and learn what you are taught so that you may
teach others.” Thereupon he shouted with the shout of
the boaster, exclaiming : “ Know ye what it is ? It is
the spell of travellers, when voyaging on the sea, and
the shield against anxiety, when the wave of the deep
rages. By it Noah was protected from the flood,
together with what was with him of animated beings,
as the verses of the Koran record it.” Then after some
stories he read out, and some tinselled talk he polished
up, he quoted [from the Koran] : “ And he said,

‘ Embark ye therein : in the name of God be its course,
and its riding at anchor.’ ” Thereupon he sighed with
the sigh of those burdened with debt, or of the fervent
servants of Allah, the revered ones, saying: “ Behold
me, I have stood amongst you in the stead of the
bringer of tidings, and advised you with the advice of
the zealous, and have entered with you on the path of
those who guide aright, so be Thou my witness,
0 Allah, who art the best of witnesses.” Said A1
Haritb, son of Hammam : Then his eloquent discourse,
conspicuous by its beauty, made us wonder, and our
voices were raised to him in recitation. But my heart
had from the sound of his voice a tinkling of knowledge
of the true nature of his sun. So I said to him : “ By
Him who holds in bondage the fathomless sea, art thou
not the Seruji ?” He replied : “ Aye, and how could
the son of brightness remain hidden ?” Forthwith I
praised my voyage, and revealed my own self since he
had revealed his, and we ceased not sailing, while the


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


97


sea was smooth, and the sky serene, and life pleasant,
and our time a sport, and while I. was delighted with
meeting him, as the rich delights in his ingot of gold,
and rejoiced in his converse, as the drowning man
rejoices at being saved, until on a sudden the south
wind blew fierce, and the sides [of the ship] bent
[groaned], and the travellers forgot what had been, and
the waves rushed against them from every quarter.
Therefore we veered, on account of this recent calamity,
towards one of the islands, to give rest [to our ship] and
to rest ourselves, until the wind should calm down.
The obstacle to our travelling on, however, continued,
so that the provisions dwindled to a mere pittance.
Then Abu Zayd said to me : “ Look here, the gathering
from the tree is not obtained by sitting still : so hast
thou a mind to rouse our luck by going on land ?” I
replied to him : ‘ ‘ Lo, I follow thee closer than thy
shadow, and wait on thee more obediently than thy
shoon.” Accordingly we descended upon the island,
despite the failing of our strength, to run the chase
after provender, though neither of us twain owned a
scrap, or was able to find a way in it, but we proceeded
to scout within, and to seek shade in its shady places,
until we came upon a lofty castle, with an iron gate,
and a troupe of slaves in front. These we accosted, that
we might make them a ladder to help us up, and a rope
to draw water with, but we found every one of them
mournful, deep in grief, so that we fancied them utterly
broken or dragged into captivity. So we said to them:
“ 0 ye slave-boys, what is this sorrow ?” But they
answered not our call, and spoke not either fair or foul.
When we saw that their fire was the fire of the glow-

7


vol. n.


98


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


worm, and their state as the mirage of the deserts, we
said : “ May their faces wax unsightly, and out upon
the churl, and him who hopes aught of him!” Then
hastened forward a servant whom old age had visited
and weeping overcome, saying : “0 ye folks, increase
not our distress, and pain us not with reproach, for we
are truly in soi’e anguish and in evil plight that makes
us listless of talk.” Said Abu Zayd to him : “ Relieve
thy choking sorrow, and speak out if thou have the
power to speak, for thou wilt find at my hand a com¬
petent leech and a healing prescriber.” He said:
“ Know thou, that the lord of this castle is the pole-star
of this place, and the SMh of this territory. Withal he
is not free from grief on account of his being childless.
So he ceased not paying honour to the seed-fields and
selecting from the partners of his couch the most
exquisite, until he was hailed with the happy tidings of
the pregnancy of a noble lady, and his palm-tree gave
promise of a shoot. Then vows were vowed in his
behalf, and the days and months were counted, and
when the time of delivery had come, and necklace
and crownlet [for the adornment of the child] were
fashioned, the throes of child-birth were severe, and
fear was conceived for root and branch ; therefore there
is none of us who knows rest or tastes sleep save by
snatches.” Then he burst out weeping and wailed
aloud, and repeatedly called on Allah unto whom we
shall return. Thereupon Abii Zayd said to him : “ Be
still, 0 such a one, and of good cheer, and receive news
of joy and proclaim them, for I possess a spell for child¬
birth, the fame of which is spread abroad amongst man¬
kind.’ Forthwith the slaves hastened to their master,


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


99


announcing each other the release from their calamity,
when it took no longer than to say “ nay,” that one
sallied out who summoned us to him, and as soon as
we had entered unto him, and were standing in his
presence, he said to Abu Zayd : “For sooth thy reward
will prosper thee if thy say is true and thy presage fails
not.” Abb. Zayd bade them bring a mended reed-pen,
and some meerschaum, and some saffron macerated in
pure rose-water. In a breath’s time they brought what
he had asked for. Then he prostrated himself, rubbing
his cheeks in the dust, and said praise to Allah, whose
forgiveness he craved, bidding those present to stand
off, and keeping them at a distance. Then he took the
pen with a mighty show of fuss, and wrote upon the
meerschaum with the saffron-solution :

“ Child to come, list to one who warns thee beforehand, aye! and
warning belongs to faith’s foremost duties:

Thou art safe now within a home closely guarded, an abode from
all misery well protected,

Nought thou seest there to frighten thee on the part of false a
friend or a foeman frank in his hatred,

But as soon as thou salliest forth from its shelter thou alight’st in
a dwelling hurtful and shameful,

Where the hardship awaiting thee will betide thee drawing tears
from thy eyne in fast-flowing down-pour.

So continue thy easeful life and beware of changing things proved
with things that are all uncertain,

Being heedful of one who seeks to beguile thee, that he hurl thee
the surer in sorry torment.

Now I gave thee, upon my soul, fair advice, but sound advisers
how often are they suspected.”

Then he blotted out the writing unawares, besputtering
it abundantly, and tied the meerschaum in a shred
of silk, after having besprinkled it profusely with
ambergris, and bade fasten it to the thigh of the

7—2


100


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY .


labouring woman, but that the hand of none men-
struous must touch it. Thereupon it took no longer
than the taste [lasts on the palate] of drinking, or the
interval that the milker makes in drawing the milk,
when the body of the child slipped out, through the
specific quality of the meerschaum, and the might of
the One, the Eternal. Then the castle was filled with
joy, and its thane and thralls were ready to fly with
delight, and their throng surrounded Abu Zayd, sing¬
ing his praises and kissing both his hands and deeming
themselves blessed by the touch of his tattered
garments, so that I was made to fane}- him Uways Al-
Karani or Dobays Al-Asadi. Thereupon he bestowed
on him in presents of requital, and in abundant gifts
that which poured wealth upon him, and brightened
the face of his every wish, and his revenue, ceased not
to come in turn after turn, from the time the lamb was
born, until safety was given back to the sea and our
voyage to 'Oman became easy. Abb. Zayd was con¬
tented with the largess received, and prepared for
departure ; the Wall [governor], however, would not
allow him to move after he had experienced his
blessing, but bade enrol him in his household, so that
his hand might make free with his treasures. Said A1
Harith, son of Hamm&m : When I saw that he inclined
to where he might gain riches, I took to rebuking him
and taunted him with the forsaking of his home and
his intimate. He replied : “ Off with thee and listen
to me :

“To a native place cling not where folks oppress and hold thee in •
scant esteem,

But depart the land that exalts the low above the high in dignity,


THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


101


And take thy flight to a safe retreat, although it were on the
skirts of Kaf,

With a lofty soar, so as to dwell where naught of soilure attains
to thee

And roam about in the world at will, and where thou choosest,
select thy home,

Not thinking of thy haunts of old, nor breathing sighs for thy
distant friends.

For know full well that a free-born man in his country meets but
with disregard,

As the pearl is slighted within its shell and underrated its
preciousness.”

Thereupon he said : “ Suffice thee what thou hast
heard, and well done, if thou act accordingly.” So I
proffered to him my excuses, saying to him : “ Make
allowance for me,” wherewith he accepted them, and
excused himself, and provisioned me, stinting naught.
Then he escorted me, as one escorts one’s nearest rela¬
tives, until I had embarked in the boat, when I bade
him good-bye, lamenting our separation, and deprecating
it, wishing heartily the babe and its mother had come
to grief.


THE FORTIETH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF TEBRIZ.”

This Assembly exhibits Abft Zayd in lively altercation with his
handsome young wife before the Kadi of Tebriz, he complaining of
her contumacy, she of his abuse of his conjugal rights. Purists and
Puritans will probably object to the tone of this composition. But
in order to judge it equitably, it should not be forgotten that Hariri
is bent on exhausting all the stores, I will advisedly not say all the
treasures, of his native language, of which he is justly proud, and
the rich and sonorous vocabulary of invective, and even of obscenity,
could not be entirely ignored by him. Moreover the grossness, nay
coarseness of expression, with which a wonderful display of learning
is here interspersed, is not represented as inherent in the characters,
hut as an assumed part with a view to a specific object. If these


102


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


two points are borne in mind, the unprejudiced reader cannot fail to
admire this Assembly as one of the most original, amusing, and
spirited pieces of the whole collection. The miserly Kadi, who by
the astounding eloquence of the couple is reluctantly coaxed and partly
frightened into an act of unwonted generosity, stands out, with bis
heartrending lamentations over the loss of his gold coins, as a worthy
prototype of Shylock in Shakespear’s “Merchant of Venice.”

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related: I intended
leaving Tebriz at a time when it was unwholesome
[irksome] for high and low, and empty of patrons and
men of largess and while I was making ready my
travelling-gear and foraging for some company on the
journey, I encountered there Abu Zayd, the Seruji }
wrapped up in a cloak and surrounded by females. I
asked him about his business, and whither he was bound
with his bevy. Said he, pointing to a woman amongst
them, fair of face, apparently in high dudgeon : “I had
married this one, that she might make me forgetful of
exile, and cleanse me from the squalor of celibacy ; but
I met from her with the sweat of [the carrier of] the
water-bag, in that she now kept me out of my right,
and now plied me beyond my strength, wherefore 1 am
through her jaded with foot-soreness, and an ally to cark
and choking care, and here we are on our way to the
judge, that he may strike on the hand of the oppressor.
So, if he arrange matters between us, let there be
concord, but if not, a divorce, a divorce!” Then I
inclined to ascertain to whom the victory w r ould accrue,
and what the upshot would be. So I put my present
affair behind my back (in the Arabic idiom “ behind my
ear”), and accompanied the twain, though I should not
be of any use. Now, when he was in the presence of
the Kadi, who belonged to the number of those who


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


103


appreciate parsimony, and stint even tooth-pickings,
Abu Zayd crouched on his knees before him, and said
to him: “ Behold, this my palfrey refuses the bridle,,
and is much given to bolting, although I am more
obedient to her than her finger-tips, and fonder of her
than her own heart.” Then the Kadi said to her :

“ Woe betide thee, knowest thou not that stubbornness
angers thy lord and master, and requires the lash ?”'
Said she : “ But, lo, he is of those who use to prowl
behind the house, and to take the neighbour along with
the neighbour.” Then the Kadi said to him : “ Out
upon thee, sowest thou in the salt-marshes, and lookest •
out for chicks, where no chicks are to be got ? May it
never go well with thee, nor be thou safe from terror.”
Said Abu Zayd : “ Lo by Him, who sends down the
winds, she is more of a liar than Sajahi.” Said she :

“ Nay ! by Him, who has adorned the neck of the dove
with a ring, and given wings to the ostrich, he is a
worse liar than Ahu Samfimah, when he forged false¬
hoods in Tam&mah.” Thereupon Ahu Zayd hissed
with the hiss of the flaring fire, and blazed up with the
blaze of the enraged, saying : “ Woe to thee, 0 thou
slattern, 0 thou strumpet, 0 thou bane for thy husband
and thy neighbour, art thou resolved in privacy to
torment me, and showest off in public by giving me the
lie ? Yet thou knowest, that when I made thee a wife,
and gazed at thee, I found thee uglier than a monkey,
and drier than a strip of hide, and tougher than a palm-
fibre, and more offensive than carrion, and more trouble¬
some than the cholera, and dirtier than a menstrual cloth,
and more barefaced than the hark of a tree, and colder
than a winter night, and sillier than purslane (the plant


104


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


rijlah), and wider than the river Tigris. But I veiled
thy blemish, and disclosed not thy disgrace, though, if
Shirin had presented thee with her beauty, and Zobaydeh
with her wealth, and Bilkis with her throne, and Buran
with her carpet, and Zebba with her kingcraft, and
Rab'iah with her piety, and Khindaf with her nobility,
and Khans& with her poetry [such as she indited] upon
[the death of her brother] Sakhr, I would scorn thee
for my saddle-seat or a filly fit for my stallion.” Then
the woman bristled up, and played the tigress, and bared
her fore-arm, and tucked up her skirt, saying to him :
“ 0 thou, meaner than Madir, and more ill-omened than
K&shir, and more cowardly than Safir, and flightier than
Tamir, hurlest thou at me thy own shame, and thrustest
thy knife into my honour, while thou knowest that thou
art more contemptible than Kulameh, and more vicious
than the mule of Abu Dulameh, and more indecent than
a fart in company, and more out of place than a bug in
a perfume box, supposing thou wert al-Hasan in his
preaching and utterance, and ash-Sha'bi in his learning
and memory, and al-Khalil in his knowledge of prosody
and grammar, and Jerir in his love-song and lampoon,
and Ivoss in his eloquence and address, and 'Abd
al-Hamid in his facundity and style of writing, and
Abu 'Amr in his reading [of the Koran] and syntax, and
Ibn Korayb in his tradition-lore from the Arabs,
thinkest thou, that I should like thee as an Imam for
my prayer-niche, and a sword for my scabbard ? Not
by Allah, nor as door-keeper for my gate, or a stick
to carry my wallet with.” Said the Kadi to her: “ I
see that ye twain are Shann and Tabaqah (or ‘ an old
bag and its doubling ’), and Hida’ah and Bunduqah


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


105


(or ‘hawk and hunter’). So give over, ma\^-^the
altercation, and enter in thy conduct on the level rb&cfcf',
but as for thee, abstain from abusing him, and keep still
when he comes to the house by its door.” Then the
woman said : “ By Allah, I shall not hold back from
him my tongue, until he clothes me, nor will I hoist
for him my sail, unless he gives me enough to eat.”
Thereupon Abu Zayd swore with the three binding
forms of oath, that he owned naught but his tattered
rags. Thereupon the Kadi looked upon their story
with the eye of the sharp-witted, and pondered with the
thoughtfulness of the sagacious ; then he approached
the twain with a face that he made to look stern, and
a buckler that he flourished, saying : “ Suffices it not to
you, to vilify each other in the judgment-hall, and to
make bold of this offence, that you needs must proceed
from the disgrace of mutual befoulment to the malice of
defrauding each other ? But T swear by Allah, the
fundament of either of you has failed the ditch, and
your arrow has missed the pit of the throat. For the
Prince of the Faithful has appointed me to give judg¬
ment between litigants, not to pay the owings of
debtors, and by the thanks due to his favour which has
established me in this place, and conferred on me the
power of binding and loosing, if ye explain not to me
the truth of your case, and the hidden meaning of your
deceit, I will surely proclaim the pair of you in the
cities, and make an example of you for the -wary.’’
Abu Zayd looked down before him, as the serpent looks
down, then he said to him : “ Listen, listen !

“ I am the man of Sent], she my consort,—the full moon has none
but the sun for equal,—


106


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY,\


Her company and mine are never severed, nor is her cloister
distant from my abbot,

As naught I water but my own plantation; five nights, however,
is it now since morning

And eve we wear the sorry garb of hunger, knowing no more
what chewing means, or sipping,

So that from sheer exhaustion of our life-breath we are like
corpses risen from the grave-yard.

So, when our patience failed, and ev’ry comfort, we came by dint
of want whose touch is painful,

To this resort, for good or evil venture, to gain, by hook or crook,
some little money.

For poverty, when it assails the free-born, leads him to don the
shameful cloak of falsehood.

This then is my condition, this my lesson, see my to-day and ask,
what was my yestern.

And bid them mend my case or send to jail me at will, for in thy
hand my weal and woe lies.”

Then the Kadi said to him : “ Cheer up and set thy
heart at ease, for it is due to thee that thy fault should
be condoned, and thy donation made plentiful.” There¬
upon his spouse jumped to her feet and drew herself up
to her full length, and pointing [beckoning] to those
present, said :

“ O folks of Tebriz, ye are blest with a judge who ranks by far
ahead of all judges,

No fault in him save that his gift on a day of bounty is dealt out
with short measure.

We came to him so that we might cull the fruit from off his tree
that never fails yielding.

He sent away the Shaykh, rejoiced with his gift, and treated with
regard and distinction,

But turned me off more disappointed than one who watches for
the lightning in August,

As though he knew not that it is I who taught the Shaykh to
versify with such glibness,

And that I could if ever I were so willed make him the laughing¬
stock of all Tebriz.”

Said the narrator : Now when the Kadi saw the


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


107


stoutness of their hearts and the glibness [readiness] of
their tongues, he perceived that he was visited through
them with an incurable disease and a crushing [an
overwhelming] calamity, and that if he gave to one of
the spouses and turned off the other empty-handed, he
would be like one who pays a debt with borrowed
money and prays the sunset-prayer with two genu¬
flexions. So he frowned and knitted his brows, and
raged and fumed, and hemmed and hawed ; then he
turned to the right and left, and twisted about in distress
and regret, and began to abuse the office of a judge and
its troubles, and counted up its bothers and vicissitudes,
reviling one who seeks it and applies for it. Then he
groaned as the despoiled one groans, and wailed until
his wailing wellnigh made him appear abject, saying :
“ This indeed is an astounding thing! Am I in one
place to be hit with two arrows, am I in one case made
to deal with two debtors, am I able to please both
litigants ? Where from, I ask, where from ?” Then be
turned towards his Usher, the carrier out of his behests,
and said : “ This is not a day of judgment and delivery
of sentences, and of decision and execution : this is a
day of sorrow, this is a day that involves one in debt,
this is a day of crisis, this is a day of loss, this is a day
on which one is deprived of one’s share, not given it.
So rid me of these two babblers and silence their
tongues with two gold coins. Then dismiss the
company, and close the gate proclaiming that this is
an ill-omened day and that the Kadi is in mourning on
it, so that no litigant may come into my presence.”
Accordingly the Usher said the Amen to the Kadi’s
prayer, weeping along with him in response to his


108


FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.


weeping, whereupon he paid out to Abu Zayd and his
spouse the two misq&ls, and said : “I hear witness that
ye twain are the most crafty amongst men and Jinn,
but [henceforth] respect the court of judges, and eschew
therein ribaldry of speech. For not every Kadi is a
Kadi of Tebriz and not at all times will people listen to
doggerel rhyme. 57 So they said to him : “ There is not
thy like of Ushers, and thanks are due to thee 55 ; where¬
with they got up and stalked away with their two gold-
pieces, roasting'the heart of the Kadi on two fires.


THE FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY", CALLED
“ OF TANIS.”

On one of his travels H&rith has arrived in the old Egyptian town
Tanis, from which the Tanitic mouth of the river Nile derives its
name, and he finds in its mosque an eloquent preacher surrounded
by a numerous congregation, who listen attentively to his sermon
full of lofty moral admonitions. The speaker exhorts his hearers
in a powerful address, as usual first in rhymed prose, and sub¬
sequently in sonorous verse, with advancing age to abandon the
pleasures of youth and worldly pursuits, to atone for their past
transgressions by acts of piety and kindliness towards their fellow-
creatures, and to make provision from the wealth which they may
have acquired on earth, by spending part of it in liberality to the
poor. At the close of the discourse, which has moved many of
those present to tears, a half-naked youth comes forward., who
represents himself in his destitute condition as a fit object on whom
to carry into practice the good intentions stirred up in the hearts of
the assembly by the earnest words of the venerable Shaykh, and
the preacher, on his part, endorses the boy’s petition by some
additional remarks, calculated to rouse their compassion and sym¬
pathy for him. Thus the supplicant reaps a plentiful harvest of
bounties bestowed on him, and exultingly walks away, well con¬
tented, and praising the generous dispositions of the inhabitants of
Tanis. The Shaykh also takes his departure, and H&rith, who
thinks he possesses a clue to what is hidden from the unsuspecting
rest of the company, follows him. When both have reached a


FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


109


secluded spot, the former reveals himself as Abu Zayd, and as the
father of the boy who has so successfully made application of the
sermon delivered in his presence. It must be observed that Preston,
who has translated this Assembly in his volume of Makamat, stultifies
it, by letting the boy himself refer to his relationship to the preacher.
There is nothing of the kind in the text, and the introduction of
this gratuitous and unwarrantable interpolation entirely destroys
the artistic merit of the composition.

A1 Harith, son of Hamm&m, related : I responded to
the calls of wantonness in the bloom of my youth,
wherefore I ceased not visiting dainty damsels and
listening to the tunes of song, until the Warner had
arrived and the freshness of life had turned its back on
me. Then I craved for rectitude of watchful conduct,
and repented of what I had trespassed in the face of
Allah. So I began to drive out evil inclinations by
good deeds and to mend wicked ways before it was too
late, for I turned from the morning-call on the fair, to
meeting with the Grod-fearing and from mixing with
songstresses to drawing near to men of piety, swearing
that I would not associate but with him, who has
rooted out error, and whose dissolute manners should
have returned to the . pro per bend, and when I found
one loose of rein long of sleep, I removed my abode
far from his abode and fled from his scab and ignominy.
Now when foreign travel had cast me into Tanis, and
made me alight at its homely [familiar] mosque, I saw
therein a man surrounded by a dense circle and thronged
spectators, who said with a stout heart and clear tongue:
“ Poor is the son of Adam, ay, how poor ! He relies
upon the world, on that which is unreliable, and asks
from it a stay by that which has no stability, and
through his love for it he is slaughtered thereby with-


110


FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


out a knife. He is addicted to it through his folly, and
is rabid after it through his wretchedness, he hoards up
in it through his boastfulness and makes no provision
from it for his future state. I swear by Him who has
poured out both the waters [sweet and salt, Ivoran,
xxv. 55], and lit up the twain, sun and moon, and
exalted the might of the two [holy] stones, if the son
of Adam were wise, he would not revel in drinking-
bouts, and if he bethought himself of what went before,
he would weep blood, and if he were mindful of the
requital, he would strive to overtake that which escaped
his grasp, and if he looked at the issue he would better
the turpitude of his actions. 0 wonder of all wonders
at him who plunges into the abode of fire, while- he
treasures gold and hoards up riches for his descendants.
Again, it is of marvels unheard-of that, though the
interspersion [sprinkling] of hoariness warn thee, and
thy sun proclaim its setting, yet thou seest not fit to
turn, and to cleanse thee from thy blamefulness.”
Then he broke forth inditing, as inditeth one who
leads aright:

“ Woe to the man who warned by his hoariness still blindly rushes
along on youth’s folly bent,

And glances back on pleasure’s fire longingly when all his limbs
already from weakness shake,

Who rides the steed of wantonness, which he deems a softer
couch than chamberlains ever spread,

Not awed by hoary hair which no man of sense sees come without
its starry light startling him,

Nor to himself forbidding what right forbids, or heeding aught
that may impair fair repute.

Ay, such a man, away with him if he die, and if he live, he’s
reck’ed as though not alive,

No good in him: alive he breathes fulsomeness, as though a
corpse, ten days exhumed after death.


FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


Ill


But hail to him whose honour sheds fragrance sweet, bright in
its spotless beauty like broidered gown.

So say to him whom stings the thorn of his sin, pluck out the
thorn, poor brother, else thou art lost.

Wipe with sincere repentance out any writ that black misdeeds
have left on thy book of deeds,

And deal with men of ev’ry kind pleasantly, winning with courtly
ways alike fool and sage;

Feather the free whose plumage fair time has stripped, may he
not live who, while he can, feathers not.

Help one oppressed by tyranny : if too weak to help thyself, then
summon up hosts for him,

And raise him who when he has tripped, calls on thee, haply
through him thou risest on gathering-day.

This cup of counsel, drink of it, and bestow on one athirst that
which remains in the cup.”

Now when he had concluded his tear-provoking sen¬
tences and finished the recital of his verses, there rose a
lad to his feet, in the freshness of his youth, bare of
body, and said : “ 0 ye men of discretion, who listen to
injunctions, you have apprehended what has been
indited, and understood what has been directed : so,
whoever of you intends to accept [the proffered advice],
and to mend his future, let him by his beneficence
towards me manifest his intention, not withholding
from me his largess. For by Him who knows all things
secret, and condones obduracy in transgression, my
hidden state is like what ye behold of me, and my face
is well worthy of being spared shame: so aid me that
ye may have aid conferred on you.” Then the Shaykh
held forth what might dispose their hearts kindly
towards him, and make easy for him. the attainment of
his wish, until his well came upon a spring and his
desert-soil was covered with green-food. So when his
pouch was right full, he hied away with a swagger, and


112


FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


singing the praises of Tanis. - But the Shaykh pleased
no further stay, after the youth had retreated. He bade
them raise their hands in prayer, and turned to his
homeward way. Said the narrator : How I was on the
alert to test him, and solve his mystery. So I followed
him while he strode apace on his road, and vouchsafed
not to break his silence. But when he felt secure of
any sudden intruder and confidential talk became
possible, he turned his neck to me, and greeted me with
the greeting of joyful recognition, and said : “ Wast
thou pleased with the sharpness of that fawn ?” Said
I: “Ay, by the Faithful, the Guardian.” He said:
“ Lo, he is the youngster of the Serfiji, by Him
who brings the pearl from out the deep.” Then I
said : “ I [dare] testify that thou art the tree on which
his fruit has grown, and the fire from which his spark
has sprung.” So he confessed to the truth of my
surmise, and was gratified that I disclosed my identity.
Then he said : “ Hast thou a mind to hasten with me to
the house, so that we may pledge each other with the
cup of the ruddy wine ?” But I said to him : “ Woe to
thee! Will ye enjoin what is right upon others, and
forget your own souls ?” (Koran, ii. 41). He displayed
his teeth, smiling at me, and passed on without demur.
Then it occurred to him to turn back to me, and he
said :

(£ Drive cark and care away with wine unalloyed, and cheer thy
heart, not pining with fretful grief,

And say to him who blames thee for warding off the pang of
pain : ‘ Enough of thee, get thee gone !’ ”

Then he said : “ As for me, I am going where I may
quaff my morning and evening draught, and if thou


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


113


wilt not come with me and accord with the mirthful,
thou art no companion for me, and thy road is not my
road. So step out of my way and turn aside from it,
and pry and spy not after me.” Forthwith he turned
his back on me and went, without casting, a glance
behind him. Said A1 Harith, son of Hamraki: Then
I burnt with grief at his departure and fain would not
have met him.

THE FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF NAJRAN.”

The scene of this Assembly, as the title indicates, is Najran, a
celebrated town of Yemen, in Mohammed’s time chiefly inhabited
by Christians, whose bishop Koss became proverbial for eloquence
and is said to have originated the famous phrase ammd bcid (and
now to proceed), the formula of transition from the introductory
prayer or preliminary remarks to the principal subject of a discourse.

A 1 Harith, while making a prolonged stay in this city, meets with
an assembly of people engaged in proposing riddles. An old man,
who joins them, taunts them with the futility of their pursuit, but
when he perceives that his remarks have provoked their violent
anger, he appeases and at the same time dumfounds them, by ten
riddles of his own composition. These riddles hold the middle
between those of the thirty-sixth Assembly, which are of the nature
of our conundrum, and the enigmatical descriptions of the eighth,
the early part of the twenty-ninth and the thirty-fifth, and are like
these largely interspersed with plays on words which frequently
render a readable translation exceedingly difficult. Mr. Chenery
in his summary of the last twenty-four Assemblies adduces the
following instance (vol. i., p. 81 ), which we reprint in order to give
the reader an opportunity of comparing his translation of the
passage with the metrical rendering attempted in these pages :

“ What is he, who weds two sisters, both openly and secretly,
but none accuses him'for it ?

When he visits the one, he visits also the other; and though
husbands may be partial, he is not so.

He increases his visits as his wives grow grey: now this is an
affection rare among husbands.”

YOL. II.


8


114


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


The answer to this is the pencil used to place the kohl, or ointment
on the eyes: the two eyelids are the wives, each of which it anoints
at the same time without partiality, and as they grow old, the
necessity for anointing them increases.”

Our translation of the riddle runs :

What groom is it who weds, both in secret and openly, two
sisters, and no offence at his wedlock is ever found 1

When waiting on one, he waits as well on the other eke : if hus¬
bands be partial, no such bias is seen in him;

His attentions increase, as the sweethearts are growing grey, and
so does his largess : what a rare thing in married men !

A1 Harith, sen of Hammkn, related : The castings of
travel and the by-paths of inclination used to throw me
about, until I became a son of every soil and a brother
of every foreign land, save that I crossed no valley, nor
witnessed any Assembly, unless 1 fetched light from
the torch of learning that consoles for griefs, and raises
the worth of man, so that the habit was known of me,
and became the tale of tongues with regard to me,
cleaving closer to me than love to the Benu 'Uzrah, and
bravery to the race of Abu Sufrah. Now when I had
made for a while a stay at Najran and selected there my
friends and neighbours, I took its assemblies for my
visiting-place, and for the resort of my sportive recreation
and my night-talk, being assiduous in my attendance
at them morn and eve, and seeing therein both what
rejoices the heart and distresses it. Once while I was
in a thronged assembly and a concourse densely
crowded, there crouched before us an aged man,
burdened with senility, who greeted after the fashion of
a beguiler’s greeting, with a glib tongue, whereupon he
said : “0 ye full moons of gatherings, and seas of
bounties, forsooth the morning-light is evident to him
who has two eyne, and beholding holds the stead of two


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


115


witnesses. So what see you fit to do in what you see
[of my state] : will you vouchsafe help, or recede when
ye are called upon ?” Said they : “ By Allah, thou
hast provoked wrath, and while thy wish has been to
[open a spring] make spring the water, thou hast caused
it to sink away.” Then he conjured them by Allah to
tell him from what he had interrupted them, so that he
made it incumbent upon them to answer. So they
said : “We were vying in proposing riddles, as people
vie in shooting arrows on a day of battle.” Then he
refrained not from vilifying their missile, and treating
this feat as a futile thing. Forthwith the tongue-giffced
of the people railed at him and tilted at him with the
lances of reproach, and he began to excuse himself for
his slip, and to repent of his speech while they per¬
sisted in upbraiding him, and responded to the war-cry
of his contention, until he said to them : “0 my good
people, forbearance is part of generosity of disposition :
abstain then from taunt and foul abuse, rather come on
that we may riddle together, and let him be judge who
excels.” Thereupon the fire of their rage subsided, and
their anger was allayed. They agreed to what he
stipulated against them and for them, and desired him
to be the first of them. Then he kept back as long as a
boot-lace may be tied, or a saddle-girth fastened, when
he said : “ Listen, may ye be preserved of levity, and
given your fill of life’s enjoyment,” and he indited
riddling upon a ventilating-fan of canvas (punkah) :

“ A maiden I know, brisk, full of speed in her ministry, returning
the same track, that she went by when starting off:

A driver she has, kinsman of hers, who is urging her, but while
he thus is speeding her on, is her helpmate too.


8—2


116


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


In summer she is seen dew-besprinkled and moist and fresh,
when summer is gone, her body shows flabby and loose and dry.”

Then he said : “ Here is another for you, 0 ye lords
of excellence, and centres of intellect,” and indited
riddling upon the rope of palm-fibre :

“A son there is of a mother fair, whose root has sprung from her
lofty plant:

He hugs her neck, though for some time, she had erewhile dis¬
carded him:

He who reaps her beauty ascends by means of him and none
forbids and blames.”

Then he said : “ Here is another for you, hidden of
signification and fraught with obscurity,” and indited,
riddling upon the reed-pen:

“ One split in his head it is through whom * the writ * is known,
as honoured recording angels take their pride in him ;

When given to drink he craves for more, as though athirst, and
settles to rest when thirstiness takes hold of him;

And scatters tears about him when ye bid him run, but tears that
sparkle with the brightness of a smile.”

Then he said : C£ Take this one also, clear of indica¬
tion, and perspicuous of expression,” and indited
riddling upon the kohl-pencil:

“ What groom is it who weds, both in secret and openly, two
sisters, and no offence at his wedlock is ever found ?

When waiting on one, he waits as well on the other eke: if
husbands are partial, no such bias is seen in him;

His attentions increase as the sweethearts are growing grey, and
so does his largess: what a rare thing in married men I”

Then he said : “ Again this one, 0 ye men of under¬
standing and standards of learning,” and indited riddling
upon the water-wheel:

“ One restless, although firmly fixed, bestowing gifts, not working
mischief,

Now plunging, now uprising again, a marvel how he sinks and
soars:


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


117


He pours down tears as one oppressed, yet is his fierceness to he
feared:

For then he brings destruction on, although his inmost heart is
pure.”

Said the narrator: Now, when he had launched
forth the five which he had strung together he said:

“ 0 my good people, ponder these five and close your
five upon.them, then as you please gather your skirts
[for departure], or accept an increase from the same
measure.” Then the desire for more made it a light
matter for the people to he taxed with dulness. So
they said to him: “ Our comprehension falls short of
thy sharpness, so as to disable us to draw sparks from
thy fire-shaft, and to discern the lineaments of thy
blade : so if thou wilt make the ten full, it rests with
thee.” Then he rejoiced with the rejoicing of one
whose arrow has hit, and whose adversary has been
silenced, whereupon he opened his speech [with the
words] in the name of Allah,- and indited riddling
upon the cooling-vessel:

“ One veiled as if sorrowful, and gladsome withal to see, although
she alike of grief and of joy is unconscious.

Approached for her offspring sake at times, and how many times
a wife would be divorced were it not that she has a child.

At times she is discarded, though unchanged in all her ways:
discarding one unaltered in manners is cruelty.

When nights begin to shorten we relish her intercourse, as soon
as they grow longer we care not for her embrace.

Her outward attire is showy [pleasing], disdained is her under¬
cloth, but why should we disdain that which wisdom approveth of 1

Then he showed his yellow dog-teeth, and indited
riddling upon the finger-nail:

“ One of whose sharpness I fight shy, he grows without either
food, or drink:

Seen during Hajj, he disappears on offering-day, how strange to
tell!”


118


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


Then he looked askance as looketh the Ifrit, and
indited riddling upon the sulphur-match :

“ And who is the slighted one, sought and rejected in turns,
though, well thou knowest thou canst not spare her:

She has two heads of most perfect resemblance, though one of
them is opposite the other:

If both are painted, she is put to torture, but spurned without the
paint, and recked for nothing.”

Then he roared with the roar of the stallion, and
indited riddling upon the milk of the vine-tree:

“ What is the thing, that when it corrupts, its error turns to
righteousness,

And when its qualities are choice it stirs up mischief where it
appears:

Its parent is of pure descent, but wicked that which he begets.”

Then he placed his travelling staff beneath his arm,
and indited riddling upon a goldsmith’s balance :

“ One flighty and leaning with one half to one side, but no man
of sense will upbraid him for either :

He always is raised up on high as a just king is rightly exalted
for aye in his station.

Alike are to him both the pebble and nugget, though truth should
in no wise be balanced with falsehood.

And most to be wondered at in his description, if people regard
him with eyes of discernment,

Is that by his judgment the parties abide, though they know him
as flighty by nature, and partial.”'

Said the narrator : Thereupon their thoughts were
wandering in the vales of fancies and straying as the
love-crazed strayeth, until time waxed long and looks
grew sad. So when he saw that they rubbed the fire-
shafts and no spark sprang forth, and that they con¬
sumed the day in barren wishes, he said : “ 0 my good
people, until when will ye consider and how long will
ye delay ? Has the time not come for that the hidden


FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


119


should be disclosed, or the ignorant should surrender ?”
So they said : “ By Allah thou hast tied it hard, and
set up the net and caught the game : rule then, as thou
wilt, and get the booty and renown.” Then he fixed
for every riddle a fee and claimed it from them in ready
cash. Forthwith he opened the locks, and set a mark
on every [head] piece of his cattle, and wished to
decamp. But the headman of the people laid hold on
him and said to him : “ No dissembling after this day,
and tell thy pedigree before thou goest, ‘and reck this as
the dowry of divorce.” Then he looked down sulkily,
so that we said “ He is of doubtful birth,” whereupon
he indited while his tears were flowing:

“ Senij the place where my sun rose, the home of my joy and
comfort,

But now bereft of her pleasures, of all my soul took delight in,

I had to change her for exile, embittering past and present:

No hiding-place have on earth I, no rest there is for my camel.

My mom, my eve pass on one day in Nejd, in Syria another,

I drag my life out with food that dejects the heart, vile and abject,

No copper-coin own I ever;—a coin ! from whom should I get it 1

Who lives a life such as I live, has bought it at losing bargain.”

Then he put the select of the money into his belt,
and went to w r ander on the face of the earth. We con¬
jured him to return, and made him great our promises,
but by [the life of] thy father, he never came back and
our desire for him booted not.

THE FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ AL-BAKR1YAH.”

In this Assembly Abu Zayd displays his eloquence -and mastery
of the Arabic tongue in various ways. Hadramowt in Yemen being
celebrated both for its camel-breed and its cordwainery, the use of
terms which might equally well apply to a young camel or a sandal,
gives rise to an adventure, of which Abii Zavd renders a spirited


120


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


account. A1 Harith, as usually amused and charmed by his friend’s
descriptive powers, asks him whether he had ever met his equal in
the gift of speech. Abft Zayd readily answers in the affirmative,
and relates how once he was about to marry, but in the last moment
grave doubts occurred to him as to the advisability of the step.
After a sleepless night, passed in pondering anxiously the reasons
for and against, he resolves early in the morning to go out and con¬
sult the first whom he would encounter. This happens to be a
youth, a most unlikely person to speak authoritatively on the sub¬
ject; he, however, keeping to his resolution, states his case, and
when the lad inquires from him whether he had a maiden or a
matron in view, he says that he has not made up his mind on the
point, but was willing to abide by the decision of his interlocutor.
The latter at once pictures with a celebrated modern debater’s skill
first the white and then the black of either class of ladies, and when
Abu Zayd, bewildered by his contradictory ruling, suggests that
under the circumstances it might be safer to become a monk, he
again confuses him, by severely condemning celibacy and extolling the
advantages of matrimony, and finally leaves Abu Zayd more in doubt
than ever, but determined not to consult striplings again on a question
of home-rule. Harith, however, shrewdly guesses that the stripling is
fictitious, and the whole debate improvised by the Shaykh, as a
fresh feat of his consummate art, which leads him to speak with
effusion in praise of learning and literary accomplishments. Abu
Zayd demurs that nowadays learning is only appreciated when backed
up by wealth and high birth, and soon finds occasion to prove his
assertion in a lively dialogue with a youthful inhabitant of a village
on their road. While thus the enthusiastic Harith is forced to
acknowledge that erudition fetches less than nothing in the market
of a deteriorated world, the unscrupulous Abu Zayd sees in the fact
a sufficient excuse for himself to swindle, for a parting shot, his
friend out of a more saleable commodity.

A1 H&rith, son of Hamm&rn, related : Peregrination
that easts a man about, and troublesome travel had
wafted me to a tract where the experienced guide would
lose his way, and the venturesome be seized with terror,
and I met with that which the bewildered and lonely
meet with, and saw sights that I had loathed, though I
made stout my frightened heart and urged on my jaded


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


121


beast, journeying forth as one who throws both divining
arrows and resigns himself to destruction, and I ceased
not trotting and cantering and traversing mile after
mile until the sun was nigh setting and light veiling
itself, when I conceived fear because of the downfall of
darkness and the onslaught of the host of Ham [the
father of blackamoors], and knew not whether to gather
my skirts and tether, or to face the night and grope
my way. Now while I was revolving in my mind
for what I should decide myself, there appeared to
me the form of a camel in the shelter of a mountain,
and I hoped it to be the riding-beast of one taking rest,
and made for it cautiously. Then my surmise proved
soothsay, and the riding-beast a swift dromedary, whose
resting master was wrapped up in his striped cloak and
drowned in sleep. So I sat beside his head until he
awoke from his drowse ; then when his lamps were lit
(i.e., his eyes opened), and he saw who had suddenly
come upon him, he started back, as starts the suspicious,
and said: “ [Is it] thy brother or the wolf?” Said I:
“Nay, one groping in the night, who has lost his way:
so give me light, that I also may strike it for thee.”
He replied: “Let thy anxiety be at rest, for thou hast
many a brother whom thy mother bore not.” Then my
fear departed, and sleepfulness came to my eyne. But
he said: “In the morning people praise night-faring;
seest thou then fit what I see fit ?” Said I: “ Behold,
I am more obedient to thee than thy shoon, and agree
better with thee than thy food.” Then he commended
my friendly disposition, and hailed my companionship
applaudingly, whereupon we saddled our beasts in haste
and set out on our night-travel, and we ceased not to


122


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


speed our faring and to battle against sleep until the
night had reached her end and morning raised his
standard, and when the dawn broke and naught re¬
mained that was not clearly visible, I scanned the features
of my mate in the journey, and the partner in my night-
talk, when, lo, it was Abu Zayd, the object of the •
seeker’s desire and the road-sign of the rightly guided.
Then we bestowed on each other the greeting of two
lovers who have met after separation, whereupon we
communed our s'ecrets and intimated our mutual tidings,
my camel groaning with fatigue, while his mount flitted
along with the flitting [fleetness] of the young ostrich.
I wondered at the strength of her build and the extent
of her [power of] endurance. So I began to descry
her mettle, and asked him whence he had chosen her.
Said he: “ Ay, this camel has a story sweet to listen
to, and pleasant to relate. So if thou likest to hear
thereof, make a halt, and if thou art not so minded,
then hearken not.” Thereupon I made my jaded beast
kneel down for him to speak, and made my ear a
target for what he had to narrate. Said he: “ Know
that I had her exhibited to me for sale at Hadramowt,
and I endured death-pangs to acquire her, and I ceased
not faring on her over the lands, and treading with her
hoofs the sharp stones [or flints], until I found her
doughty for travels, and a provision for the time of stay
(on account of her abundance of milk), whom no fatigue
overcame, with whom no stout camel kept pace, and
who knew not what pitch is. Accordingly I made her
my mainstay for good and evil, and held her in the
place of one who benefits and gives joy. Now it hap¬
pened that she had strayed some little while since, and


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


123


I had no other mount. So I was overwhelmed with
grief and well-nigh undone, forgetting every calamity
that had gone before, and remaining three days without
being able to travel on, and without tasting sleep but
a little at a time. Then I began to follow up the roads
and to explore the pastures and the halting-stages, but
I got no wind of her, nor the quiet of despair, and
whenever I reminded me of her fleetness and her readi¬
ness to vie with the birds, the remembrance sickened
me and the thought thereof crazed me.* One day, while
I was in the tent-village of some clan, I heard a distant
person, and an isolated voice [crying out] : ‘ Who has
lost a mount hailing from Hadramowt, one easy of step,
her hide is marked, and her blemish has been cut short,
and her bridle is plaited, and her back is though it had
been broken and reset. She adorns her who travels
thereon and furthers the journey at the oncoming of
night, and keeps always close to thee, weariness comes
not near her, and footsoreness befalls her not, she needs
no stick, and resists not him who treats her roughly.’ ”
Said Abu Zayd: “ Then the voice drew me towards
the caller, and gave me glad tidings of the recovery of
my lost one, and when I came up to him and had made
salutation to him, I said to him: ‘ Give over the mount,
and take thy guerdon.’ Said he: ‘And what is thy
mount, may thy error be forgiven thee V I said: ‘ A
camel whose body is like a hillock, and her hump like
a dome, and her milk the fill of the pail, and I would
have been given twenty [dinars] for her, when I alighted
at Yabrln, and asked more from the bidder, and knew
that he was mistaken [in not buying her].’ Then he
turned from me when he heard my description, and


124


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


said: ‘ Thou art not the owner of my trove.’ There¬
upon I took hold of his collar, and persisted in giving
him the lie, and strove to tear his garments, while he
said: ‘ 0 such a one, my mount is not that which thou
seekest for, so withhold from thy rashness, and give
over thy abuse, or else sue me before the judge of this
tribe, who is not liable to error, and if he adjudges her
to thee, take her, but if he denies her to thee, jabber no
more.’ Then I saw no cure [or remedy] for my affair,
and no way out. of my anxiety, but to repair to the
judge, even though he should cuff me. So we hastened
[or sped] to a Shaykh, stoutly erect, with handsome
headgear, concerning whom one could perceive that the
birds might perch quietly on him, and that he was not
unjust. Thereupon I broke forth complaining of ill-
use, and lamenting, while my companion was silent, not
moving his lips, until, when I had emptied my quiver, and
finished my say, he brought out a sandal,heavy of weight,
ready for the road on rough ground, and said : ‘ This
is she whom I designated, and her I described, and if it
is she from whom he expected twenty, there he is with
his eyes open; consequently he has lied in his claim,
and it is an abomination what he has falsely put forth,
by Allah, else let him stretch out his nape, and show
plainly the truth of what he has said.’ Then the judge
said: ‘ Oh Allah, [I crave] thy forgiveness,’ and he
began to turn the sandal this side and that side, where¬
upon he said: As for this sandal, it is my sandal, and
as for thy mount, it is in my dwelling, so get thee up to
take thy camel, and do good according to thy power.’
Then I rose, and said:

“ I swear it by the ancient house, the worshipful, and those who
circumambulate the holy fane,


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


125


Thou art a good man to appeal for justice to, the best of Kadis
judging amongst Arab tribes,

So live as long as camels speed the pilgrims on.”

Then he replied without deliberation and on the spur of
the moment, saying:

“ Allah reward thee for thy thanks, dear nephew mine, though I
exact no thanks as ever due to me,

For worst of men is he who wrongs, when made a judge, and who,
when made trustee of aught, betrays his trust,

These twain I reckon with the dog alike in worth.”

Thereupon he ordered one into my presence, to hand
over to me my camel, without snubbing me for his
favour, and I went away successful in my suit, and
trailing the skirt of joy, calling out: “ How marvel¬
lous ! ,: —Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Then I said
to him: “ By Allah! thou hast told a wonderful tale,
and been lavish in thy praise on a subject thou knowest
well. [Tell me] I conjure thee by Allah, hast thou
ever found one more gifted with the sorcery of eloquence
than thyself, and a finer craftsman in fashioning the
jewellery of speech?” He replied: “By Allah, yea,
listen therefore and enjoy [what thou wilt hear]. 1
had intended, at a time when I made for Tihameh, on
taking a wife to myself, so that she might be a help¬
mate to me. How when the resident proxy [for the
conduct of the marriage negotiation] had been instructed,
and the affair was all but concluded, I bethought
myself with the thoughtfulness of one who guards
against a mistake, and considers carefully where the
arrow may fall, passing my night in communing with
my tortured heart, and revolving my wavering resolve,
until I decided that I would go out early in the morn¬
ing and consult the first whom I saw. So when dark-


126


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


ness had drawn in her tent-ropes, and the stars had
turned their tails, I sallied forth in the morning like
one who seeks a stray beast, and was early with the
earliness of the diviner from the flight of birds. Then
I encountered a youth, whose face pleaded in his favour,
wherefore I augured well from his cheering aspect and
wished to take light from his views on matrimony.
Said he: ‘ Wishest thou her to be a matron, or a
maid that gives trouble ?’ I replied: ‘ Choose thou
for me what thdu seest fit, I have put the matter in
thy hands (lit. thrown the loops or handles to thee).”
Then he said: ‘To me then belongs the explanation,
and on thee devolves the application, so listen, may I
be thy ransom after the burial of thy enemies : as for
the virgin, she is a treasured pearl, and a hidden egg,
an early fruit ripe for gathering, and a must that agrees
well with thee, a fresh meadow, and a necklace costly
and precious, none has soiled her with his touch, and
no intimate has come near her, no wanton has plied
her, and no deflowerer has despoiled her. She has a
face suffused with shame, and a bashful eye, her tongue
is faltering, and her heart is pui’e; withal she is a
playful puppet, and a sportive doll, a frolicsome gazelle,
and accomplished gracefulness, a jewelled belt bright
and new, and a sharer of thy couch that rejuvenates,
not renders hoary. But for the matron : she is the
trained steed, the ready morsel, the desire made easy,
one who has gained knowledge by repeated practice ;
the fond companion and confidential friend, the skilful
and well advised, the intelligent and experienced ;
moreover, she is the hasty meal of the rider, a slip¬
knot for the suing proxy [or suitor], an easy mount for


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


127


the enfeebled, a booty swiftly snatched by the com¬
batant ; her disposition is gentle, her bonds are light to
bear, her inward state is clearly manifest, and her service
adorns; and I swear by Allah, that I have been truth¬
ful in both descriptions, and have displayed the two
kinds, by which of the twain is thy heart enraptured,
and which rouses thy lust (on which of them stands thy
carnal desire) ?’ ” Said Abu Zayd : “ Then I saw that
he was a stone against which the adversary must be on
his guard, and by which the cupping - places of the
veins are made to bleed, save that I said: ‘ I had heard
that the virgin is stronger in her love, and less given
to wiles/ Said he: 1 Upon my life, this has been said
indeed, but how many a say has done harm. Woe
betide thee, she is a filly refusing the bridle, and the
mount tardy to be tamed, the fire-shaft difficult to strike
from, and the fortress hard to conquer ; moreover, the
provision she requires is plentiful, and the help she
affords is scanty, her enjoyment is savourless, and her
coquettishness provoking, her hand is clumsy, her
temper a snake that will not be charmed, and her dis¬
position froward, her night is a long and dark night
forsooth [her night is a night indeed] ; to break her
in is a heavy task, and to know her needs the lifting of
a screen, and oftentimes she puts the combatant to
shame, and is averse to the sportive, and angers one
inclined to toy, and humbles the experienced stallion ;
moreover, it is she who says: “ I dress and sit in
company, so I seek one who holds and spends.” ’ Said
I to him: ‘ What then thinkest thou of the matron,
0 father of all that is sweet ?’ He replied: ‘Woe betide
thee ! listest thou for the remnant of the dishes, and the


128


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


residue of the watering-ponds ? for draggled garments
and worn-out vessels? For one dainty, who browses
on every pasture ? One lavish of expenditure, a spend¬
thrift, an impudent shrew? One grasping and never
satisfied ? Moreover, all her talk is: “I was and have
become, erewhile when I was wronged I had given me
help, but w r hat a difference between to-day and yester¬
day, and where is the moon beside the sun ?” [Listest
thou for her] though she be always bewailing [her
former husband], and blest [with adult sons], and
withal a bold-faced wanton; she is a collar [round
a man’s neck] that breeds vermin and an ulcer that
never cicatrizes.’ Then I said to him: £ Art thou of
opinion that I should become a monk, and enter on that
path of conduct?’ Thereupon he chid me with the
chiding of one who rails at the slip of his pupil, saying :
‘Woe to thee, wilt thou follow in the track of the
monks, when the truth has been manifest ? Fy on
thee and the weakness of thy understanding, out upon
thee and them! Showest thou thyself up as though
thou hadst not heard that there is no monkery in Islam,
and hadst not been told of the wedlocks of thy Prophet,
may purest peace be upon him ? Or knowest thou not
that a good helpmate puts thy house in order, and
obeys thy voice, sobers thy sight, and brings thy fame
into good odour ? Through her thou beholdest the
coolness of thy eye, and the flower sweet to thy nostrils,
and the joy of thy heart, and the lastingness of thy
memory, and the solace of thy day and morrow (all
this meaning offspring). How then art thou averse
to the ordinance of the sent ones, and the enjoyment of
the wedded, and the path of the guarded, and that


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


129


which draws forth wealth and sons ? By Allah, ill
pleases in thee, what I have heard from thy mouth.’
Then he turned from me as one enraged, and bounded
aside with the bound of the locust. Said I to him:

‘ Allah curse thee ! Wilt thou strut jauntily away and
leave me bewildered?’ Said he: ‘I suspect thou
pretendest goodness, and indulgest thyself a bit, so
that thou mayest dispense with a damsel exacting a big
dowry.’ Said I to him : ‘ Allah confound thy sus¬
picion, and allow not thy generation* to grow old.’
Whereupon I went away from him shamefacedly, and
repented of consulting striplings.” A1 Harith, son of
Hamm&m, continued: Then I said to him: “ I swear
by Him who has planted the forests that this contro¬
versy was carried on by thee and with thee (i.e., between
thee and thy own self).” So he burst out laughing
exceedingly, and rejoiced with the glee of the thorough¬
going, whereupon he said : “ Lick up the honey and
ask no questions.” Then I began to expatiate in the
praise of learning, and to exalt its owner above the
possessor of riches. But he glanced at me with the
glance of one who taxes with ignorance, and winked at
me indulgently, and when I waxed excessive in my
partiality for the learned fraternity, he said to me :
“ Hush, hear from me and inwardly digest:

“ They say that a man’s chief adornment and pride, and his beauty
is learning deep-rooted, sound,

Alas, it adorns but the wealthy and him, whose summit of lord-
ship is rising aloft:

But as for the poor man I reckon for him far better than learning
a loaf and a stew.

What beauty bestows it on him, if they say : a scholar, a school-
drudge, or may be a clerk.”

VOL. II.


9


130


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


Thereupon he said: “Presently there will become
evident to thee the truth of my assertion, and the
illustration of my argument.” So- we travelled on
with unfailing strength and without flagging in our
exertion, until the journey brought us to a village,
may the good keep aloof from it, and forthwith we
entered it to forage for provender, for we were both of
us short of provisions. Now w r e had not reached the
halting-place, and the spot assigned for the kneeling
down of the catnels, before a lad met us, who had not
known yet [or grown up to the state of] sin, with a bundle
of grass on his shoulder. Abu Zayd greeted him with
the salutation of the Moslem, and asked him to stand
still, and give information. Said he: “And of what
wishest thou to ask, may Allah prosper thee.” He
said : “ Are here fresh dates sold for discourses ?” He
replied: “No, by Allah.” Said he: “ Nor green dates
for witticisms ?” He replied: “ Certainly not, by
Allah.” Said he : “ Nor fruit for night-talk ?” He
replied: “Far from it, by Allah.” Said he: Nor
honey-fritters for poems?” He replied: “Be silent,
may Allah preserve thee!” Said he: “Nor bread in
broth for choice verses ?” He replied: “ Whither stray
thy wits, may Allah guide thee aright.” Said he:
“Nor sifted flour for subtle sayings?” He replied:
“Give over with this, may Allah restore thy senses.”
But Abu Zayd took pleasure in reiterating question
and reply, and measuring out from this self-same sack,
and the' youth perceived that the goal of his talk was
distant, and that the Shaykh was a dovilkin. So he
said: “ Let this suffice thee, 0 Shaykh, I know now
what is thy drift, and see clearly thy quiddity. Take


FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY. 131

then thy answer in a lump, and be satisfied with it for
thy ken : In this place poetry fetches not a barley-corn,
nor prose a bread-crumb, nor a nai’rative nail-parings,
nor a treatise slop-water, nor the wise maxims of
Lokman a mouthful of food, nor the history of battles
a morsel of meat, for, as for the people of this age, there
is none amongst them who bestows a gift when an
encomium has been fashioned for him, none who gives
a reward when a poem has been recited to him, none
who shows himself bountiful when a tale has diverted
him, none who provides support, though he be a prince,
and with them the learned is like a waste spring¬
dwelling : if no rain falls in abundance thereon, it has
no value, and no beast approaches it ; and in like manner
learning, if no wealth abets it, its study is a weary toil,
and its profit a fagot.” Thereupon he departed in
haste, and went off and ran away. Said Abu Zayd to
me : “ Art thou aware now, that learning is slack, and
its whilom aiders have turned their backs on it ?” Then
I admitted the sharpness of his sagacity, and resigned
myself to the decree of necessity. Said he: “ Let us
by this time leave off discussion, and dive into the
chapter of platters : know that adorned speeches satisfy
not him who is a-hunger, and what is thy advice with
regard to what keeps back the last gasp and quenches
the fire of the entrails ?” I replied: “ The command
stands with thee, and the reins are in thy hand.”
Said he : “I opine that thou shouldst pawn thy sword
to satisfy thy gut and thy guest: so give it to me and
tarry here, -that I may return to thee with something to
swallow.” ISTow I took his proposal in good faith, and
invested him with the sword and the pledge, and he

9—2


132


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


lagged not to mount his camel, and to violate truth and
trustiness. I stayed a long time waiting for him, then
I got me up to follow him, but I was like one v> hose
milk has run short in summer, and met neither him nor
my sword.


THE FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“THE WINTRY.”

This Assembly contains a series of puzzling statements, made by
Abu Zayd in a circle of guests, who on a cold winter night warm
themselves at the fire and enjoy the profuse hospitality of a generous
entertainer. The intelligibleness of these statements, like that of
the legal questions of the thirty-second Assembly, depends on the
double meaning of the terms in which they are worded. Apparently,
therefore, they refuse translation into any other language, which
cannot supply similar ambiguities, but it must not be forgotten that
the more recondite meanings of the several idioms require explanation
even to the average Arab, who is not initiated in all the subtleties
of his mother-tongue, and notably in this particular instance the
English reader, who consults the short notes, attached to each puzzle,
has even the advantage over Abu Zayd’s audience. For the wily
Shaykh amuses himself by secretly departing in the middle of the
night, without vouchsafing to his* fellow-guests the interpretation
promised for the morning, and probably thinking that his noble and
presumably highly cultured host does not need it. Ho who has
made himself acquainted with the hidden meanings, and then once
more peruses the double-entenclres in their entirety, can scarcely fail
to be vastly delighted by the string of seeming absurdities and con¬
tradictions, which, moreover, in the Arab original forms a poetical
composition with the same rhyme running through the whole.
While adhering as much as possible to the metre, the translator had,
as in all other poetical passages of the work, to renounce this
adornment, and be contented with occasional alliterations and
assonances.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related : I came in a
night of deepest darkness, black of locks, upon a fire
kindled on a mountain-top, and giving tidings of


FOIITY-FOURTII ASSEMBLY,


133


liberality, and it was a night whose sky was cold, her
bosom closely buttoned, veiled her stars and her misty
gloom heaped up. 1 was colder in it than the eye of
the chameleon, and a mangy goat, so I urged on my
sturdy camel, saying “ Hail to thee and my own soul!”
until the kindler [of the fire] spied my person and
became aware of my speedy faring, when he came down
in hot haste, and indited in the rejez metre :

“ Long life to theo, groping along thy nightly way, whom sheen
of fire has shown, nay, brought him as a gift,

To one of ample bounty and of vast abode, who welcomes, as the
miser wolcomes golden coin,

Nightfarers seeking hospitable faro and who evades not visitors
with ‘ not at home,’

No tardy one to entertain in friendly guiso a guest, when all the
ground is bound with wintry cold,

And storm-portending stars are stingy with their rain. Well is
he wont to ward against the ills of time :

Ho gathers ashes, sharpons knives, and nover fails, be it in day¬
time or at night, at morn or evo,

To slaughter well-fed camels, and to kindle fire.”

Then he accosted me with the countenance of the
bashful and clasped my hands with the clasp of the
generous, and led me into a house whose camels roared,
whose cauldrons boiled, whose slave-girls carried pro¬
visions, whose trays went round, and along the sides
thereof were guests dragged hither by him who had
dragged me, and moulded in my mould, who were
culling (enjoying) the fruit of winter and rejoicing
with the glee of those endowed with youthful vigour.
So I. joined the place where they warmed themselves,
and found with them the pleasure which the inebriated
finds in wine ; and when embarrassment had passed
away and the cold was gone, trays were brought to


134


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


us like lunar halos in roundness, and like gardens
adorned with flowers which were laden with the victuals
of festive banquets, and well fenced against [the fault¬
finding or cavil of] the blamer and caviller [or fault¬
finder]. Then we spurned what is said about gluttony,
and saw sense in plunging into it, until, when we had
meted to ourselves with the measure of the greed)- and
come nigh the risk of indigestion, we had handl'd to us
napkins to wipe off the odour of food, whereupon we
settled in the se&ts of night-talk and every one of us
began to wag his tongue and to display what he had in
his show-case, except an old man whose side-locks were


hoary, both whose upper garments were tattered, for he


crouched apart and kept far aloof from us. So his
reserve, the motive for which was incomprehensible,
and which would have excused anyone who censured


him, angered us, save that we softened


to


him and were afraid to encroach on him by questioning,
and each time we wished him to overflow as we over¬
flowed, and to launch out in what we launched out, he
turned aside as the lofty turns aside from the lowly and
quoted : “Verily this is nought but idle tales of the
ancients” (Koran, vi. 25, and pa.csm). Presonfly it
was as though shame had smote him, and the forbidding
soul had whispered to him, for he crept up and eante
nigh, putting away his fastidiousness and exerting him¬
self to make amends for what had gone before. Then
he begged a hearing from the night-talkers, and broke
forth like the coursing torrent, saying :


. “ Marvels r I seen by me, and told without any lie, for not
m vam am I called the father of wonderment:

Folks have I seen, 0 my folk, that on a crone's juice are fed •
not, notice well, mean I though the daughter of graphs by | mr .


FORTY-FQTJRTE ASSEMBLY.


135


(i baulu ’ l-ajuz , lit. urina anus , is a popular idiom for “ cow's
milk al-ajziz, old woman, means also “ choice old wine.”)

And Arabs, at famine's time, who relished as dainty food, a
roasted rag, and allayed indeed therewith hunger’s pangs ;

(khirqalu & tatter, a rag, and also a swarm of locusts.)

And powerful men I saw, who said when things went amiss, or
when they did carelessly their work: ‘ It was fuel’s fault ’;

(i qddir , who is able, strong, powerful, and also “who cooks food
in the kettle,” qidr, when it is called qadzr.)

And scribes whose hands never wrote a letter in all their lives,
and who read not any more aught of what is writ in books ;

(kdtib, one who writes, a clerk, a scribe, and also “a cobler, a
mender of water-bags,” etc.) #

And people who in their flight in eagle’s wake sped along, although
they were heavily arrayed in helmet and steel;

( uqdb, a black eagle, and also u a standard ” : Mohammed’s
standard was called al-uqdb.)

And gathered folks, men of worth, to whom appeared suddenly a
noble dame and they turned away, to flee far from her;

(nabzlah, a lady of distinction, and also “ carrion,” whence the
phrase tanabbala ’l-ba'zr, the camel became putrid, ie., died.)

And eke a troop, who for sure have never seen Mecca’s fane and
yet had made pilgrimage on camel’s back without doubt ;

(hajjat juszyan , they performed the pilgrimage sitting crosswise
[on their camels], and also “ they got the better in argument
in that posture,” jusiy, being the plural of jdsi, one who sits
crosswise.)

And women-folks faring from Aleppo all through the night who
came to KAzimah-town at morn without weariness.

(sabbahna Icdzimat-an, they ■ reached in the morning KAzimah, a
town in the dependency of Basra, and also “they wished
good-morning to a woman silent with anger.”)

And people from KAzimah who faring forth during night found
in Aleppo themselves about the time morning dawned.

(asbaM fz halab , they arrived in the morning in Aleppo [far
distant from the former town], and also “they passed the
morning in milking.”)

A youth I saw who for sure had never touched lady fair, and
yet he had progeny to keep alive name and race.

(naslun min al e aqib , progeny of surviving children, and “ also
an enemy at his heels.”)

Again one hoary not hiding ever his hoariness, who in the desert
appeared still young of years, far from grey.


136


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


(shdHbun ghaira mu lch fi n li H-mashib, one hoary who conceals not
the hoariness, and also “ one who mixes milk [with water]
and makes no secret of the milk thus mixed.' 5 )

One suckled with mother-milk, not lisping yet with his lips, I saw
him in hot dispute amidst a brawl loud and fierce.

(ft shijdrin baina 5 s-sabab , in contention between arguments or
revilings, and also “in.an [open] camel-litter between the
cords 55 ; to the latter meaning of sabab Hariri quotes Koran,
xxii. 15 : “let him stretch a cord to heaven. 55 )

And one who sowed millet once, and when it came to be cut, it
turned, for sooth, jujube shrub, which merry men dearly love.

(al-ghubami\ an intoxicating liquor prepared from millet, also
called sakral&ah , of which a tradition says : “beware of the
ghubaira 5 , it is the wine of the world,” and also the Arabic
name of the plant Zizypha rubra Gilanensis.)

And one who was bound and rode upon a horse also bound, but
never ceased all the while to fare .along amblingly.

(maghlul, put in chains, fettered, bound, and ghulla , he was
bound, have also the meaning “thirsty,” and “he was
suffering from thirst. 55 )

And one I saw, free of hand, who led a fine saddle-beast, in haste,
although captive and a brother of misery.

(ma’sur, one taken captive, made prisoner of war, and also “ one
suffering from strangury.”)

One sitting, while walking, and with whom his beast fell aground,
though strange it seem what I tell, yet it admits naught of
doubt.

(jalis, one who is seated, and also “one who makes for Najd 55 ;
mdsht , a pedestrian, and also “owner of cattle, 5 ’ in ..which
latter sense some commentators explain im$M, in Koran,
lxvii. 15, as a prayer in behalf of mankind for abundance of
cattle and prosperity.)

A weaver too, both his hands cut off, I saw, deaf and dumb, if
this you deem marvellous, well, wonders will never cease.

(JidHk, a weaver, and also “ one who in walking moves his
shoulders, and keeps his feet far apart. 55 )

One straight of build met I once, whose stature rose like a lance,
on Mina mount, who complained to me of back-crookedness.

(i al-hadab , being hump-backed, and also “ rough rising ground 55 .)

One who exerted himself in giving all creatures joy, yet cheering
them thought a sin like lying or tyranny.

( ifrdJi , rendering cheerful, and also “ burdening with debts, 55 as
in the saying of Mohammed: “There is none left in Isl&m


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY,


137


burdened with debt [ mufrah] whose debt has not been
paid.”)

And one who loved people to commune with him secretly, but
never had any need for converse with humankind.

(hadisu ’ l-khalq , conversation with created beings, and also “ the
telling of a lie,” as in Koran passim: “ this is but a lying tale
of the ancients.”)

One scrupulous who redeemed always his word faithfully, lacked
none the less conscience according to Arab ways.

(. zimdm i conscientiousness, and also pi. of zimmah , cc a well with
scanty water,” when the words translated ct according to Arab
ways ” would have to be taken in the sense of “ on the road
of the Arabs,” meaning in the desert.)

One full of strength, never was there yieldingness seen in him, his
softness was manifest withal, and quite unconcealed.

_ (lin, softness, smoothness, yieldingness, and also “ a palm-tree

or plantation,” whence Koran, lix. 5 : “ your cutting down
some of their palm-trees.”)

And one prostrating himself on earners back, unconcerned at what
he did, thinking it an act of prime piety.

(fahl, a vigorous camel-stallion, and also “ a mat made of the
leaves of a male palm-tree ” [fuJJidl].)

One who excuses, and pains him whose excuse he accepts, though
coaxingly, while in screams is he who thus is excused.

( dzir, one who accepts another man's excuses, and also a “cir-
cumciser”; mcfztir, one excused, and also “a boy being
circumcised.”)

A town I saw, waterless for him who would scoop a draught,
though water flows over it with torrent’s rush many times.

(i baldah , a city, town, district, and also “ the space between the
eyebrows,” which is also called buljah.)

A village too, less in size than any nest built by birds, in which
there lived Dailamites on plunder and robbery.

(i qaryah , a village, and also an ant-hill; dailam , name of a
people in Gilan and extended to non-Arabs in general, and
also “ a swarm of ants khulsatu’s-salab , sudden robbery, and

also “ bark of a tree.”)

A star I saw, when it shows, a man is no longer seen, as though a
veil covered him, a veil that naught penetrates.

(kaulcab, a star, and also “a white speck in the eye producing
blindness”; insan, man, and also metaphorically “the pupil
of the eye.”)


138


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


A ball of dung, highly prized as part of one’s property, the owner
though recks it not by any means much of wealth.

(musah, the excrement of any hoofed animal, and also “ the tip
of the nose.”)

A platter of purest gold, I saw it bought after much hard bargain¬
ing for a grain, a solitary silver grain.

(- nuzdr , pure gold, and also “ wood of the m k b tree,” of which
trays, cups, bows, and similar objects are made.)

One gathering poppy-seed to ward from him off the foes assailing
him, and he was not disappointed therein.

(khashkhas , the plant called abu 5 n-naum , father of sleep, ie .,
poppy, and also a troop of armed and armoured men.)

And oftentimes passed me by a dog in whose mouth there was a
bull, but know ye, it was a bull without any tail.

(saur 1 a bullock, a bull, and also “ a piece of soft cheese.”)

How many an elephant, I swear it, has seen my eye on camel’s
back, perched upon a saddle and saddle-bags.

(fil, an elephant, and also “ a man of weak intellect, a dolt”.)

How many a man I met complaining in desert-tracts, and no
complaint uttered he in earnest or pleasantry.

(' mushtaJcz , one who complains, and also “ one who uses the
small water-bag, called shahcah.)

A pitcher I saw again, a shepherd’s girl in the wold was owning
it, and it looked with twain of eyes bright as stars.

(Jcarrdz, a pitcher with a narrow neck [the Qamus reads the
word in this meaning Jcurrdz], and also “ a he-goat on whose
horns a herdsman carries his utensils.”)

How often times saw my eye tw’o springs the water whereof,
though in Aleppo they were, was flowing from farthest West.

(al-gharb y the distant West, applied to Maghrib or West
Africa, and also “ the lachrymal gland e &m, a fountain,
source, spring, and also “ the eye.”)

And one who pierces with spears, although his hands never held
a lance, and he never leaped against a foe charging him.

{qctnd, pi. of qan&t, a lance, a spear, and also “ an aquiline
nose,” applied to which sadabi-hi means “he disclosed or
uncovered it.”)

How many times came I to a land without any palms, and on the
morrow I saw dates newly grown in their sheaths.

(i busr , dates beginning to ripen, and also “ rain-water lately
fallen”; qulub, pi. of qalb, pith of the palm-tree, and also of
qalib, “ a well.”)


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


139


How often a spacious tray in desert tracts have I seen, that in the
air was on wing and swooping down from on high.

(tabaq, a large tray, and also 14 a swarm of locusts.”)

How many old men I saw that lived in this world for aye, and
who, I ask you, escaped destruction at any time 1

( mujchallid , one who lasts eternally, and also 44 one whose hoari¬
ness is slow to come.”)

How many wild beasts I met complaining of hunger’s pangs with
fluent speech and a tongue more piercing than cutting swords.

( wahsh , a dumb brute, a wild beast, and also 44 a famished
man.”)

How often one who had eased his bowels called me and talked to
me, and nor he nor I in manners were lacking aught.

(mustanji, one who cleans himself after evacuation, and also one
who sits on an elevated place \najwoK\)

How oft I made kneel my beast beneath a pomegranate-bud that
would have shaded no end of e Ajam [i.e., foreign] and Arab men.
(junbuzah, the flower or bud of a pomegranate, a bud in
genera], and also 44 a dome, a cupola”; e urub , here probably
by poetical license for 'urb, Arabs, may also be taken as pi.
of 'ardb, 44 a woman fond of her husband,” as in Koran, lvi. 36:

44 loving their spouses, of equal age with them.”)

How oft I saw one rejoiced a little while, and his tears were seen
to fall freely as the drops of rain from a cloud,

(surra, he was filled with joy, and also 44 his navel-string was
cut,” the remaining part being called surrah , navel.)

' How often times have I seen a shirt that hurt badly him who
owned it maiming his limbs, unnerving him thoroughly.

(qamts, a shirt or vest, and also 44 a beast given to jumping and
rearing.”)

How many a veil there is, if time but would make away with it,
I trow numerous wayfarers would stay at home.

(izdr, a wrapper or veil covering the upper part of the body, and
also used metaphorically for 44 woman.”)

So far, and how many more of wondrous arts owns my mind, and
^allies of pleasing wit, and sayings choice, sweet to hear.

So if you are quick to seize the drift of words, you will find that
all is true and my bloom leads you to guess at my fruit.

But if you are baffled, then the fault, forsooth, lies with him who
knows not how to discern ’twixt sandal and common wood.”


Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Then we began to


140


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


grapple with his verse, and the explanation of the
riddles proposed by him, while he made game of us as
the careless makes game of the perplexed, saying : “ It
is not thy nest, so get thee gone !” until the birth
proved too difficult and the debarment complete.
Therefore we thrust the lead on him, and asked him for
enlightenment, and we were suspended between hope
and despair, he saying : “ The coaxing before the call for
milking.” So we knew him to be one of those who
want a return for their gift, and expect a bribe for their
judgment. Now it galled him who had given us
shelter, that we should be exposed to a mulct, or igno-
miniously frustrated; accordingly the lord of the mansion
sent for a camel of the breed of'Id, and a robe like
Sa'id’s, and said to him : “ Take them both as a lawful
property, and levy not from my guests [even] a trifle
for a forfeit.” Said he : “I testify that this is a disposi¬
tion like Akhzam’s and liberality like H&tim’s.” There¬
upon he approached us with a countenance whose
serenity was translucent and whose brightness beaming,
and said : “ 0 my people, the night is well-nigh gone,
and drowsiness has got the victory, so betake yourselves
to the sleeping-places, and snatch the repose of the
sleeper, so that ye may sip a draught of refreshing rest
and rise invigorated, when ye will understand that
which is explained to you, and things difficult will
become easy.” Then every one approved of his opinion,
and laid himself down on the pillow of his slumber.
Now when the lids were closed in sleep and the guests
had fallen a-doze, he sprang to the camel, and straight¬
way saddled her ; then he mounted her and started her
on the journey, saying, addressing her :


FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


141


“ Seruj, my camel, is thy goal, so fare apace, now through the
night, now through the day, now day and night,

So that thy hoofs may gladly tread her pastures moist and thou
mayst find thee thence well off and prosperous,

And safe of being jaded over hill and dale : ay haste thee on, my
precious beast, and speed thy pace,

Crossing the flinty mountains, peak by peak, contented with a
chance draught from the wat’ring pond,

And not alighting until yonder goal is reached ; for I have sworn
it, and in earnest made my oath

By worship due to Mecca’s lofty-pillared house, if thou but bring
me safely to my native town

Thou wilt for aye be held by me instead of child.”

Said the narrator : Then I knew that it was the
Seruji, who when he had sold out, was wont to start off,
and when he had filled his bushel, to decamp, and as
soon as the dawn of the morrow broke and the sleepers
recovered from their sleep, I informed them that at the
time when unconsciousness had overcome them, the
Shaykh had given them the slip for good, and mounted
his camel and departed. Then a fresh vexation took
hold of them after vexations of old, and they forgot
the good of him for his bad. Thereupon we disbanded
in all directions, and went away under every star of
heaven.

THE FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF RAMLAH.”

Once more Abft Zayd appears, together with his young wife, in a
Court of Justice, this time that of the Kadi of Ramlah, on the plea
of seeking redress for their matrimonial grievances. The first
instance of their quarrels was contained in the ninth Assembly, and
Riickert, in his free translation, or rather imitation of Hariri in
German, has very skilfully interwoven the two compositions into
one. The same subject we have seen treated from a different point
of view in the fortieth, called “ of Tebriz,” and as both the ninth and


FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


142

fortieth are much more elaborate than the present one, it seems to
me highly probable that this Assembly is what we would call the
first sketch or preliminary study to the two former, which he may
have thought fit to insert here, among some of the most artificial
and carefully finished of his compositions, because its comparative
simplicity and soberness endows it with a particular charm of its
own by way of contrast.

A1 H&rith, son of Hammam, related : I had gathered
it from men of experiences, that travel is a mirror of
marvels, wherefore I ceased not crossing every desert,
and braving every danger, so that I might bring into
my reach everything wonderful. Now amongst the
finest sights I ever enjoyed, and the strangest adven¬
tures that I reckoned pleasant, was that I found myself
in the presence of the Kadi of Kamlah,—and he one
of the lords of wealth and power,—when there had
appealed to him a worn wight in worn raiment, and a
fair one in faded finery. The old man was minded to
speak, and explain the object of his suit, but the wench
cut short his peroration, and checked his bark. Then
she removed from her face the flap of kerchief and
indited with the tongue of an impudent shrew :

“ 0 Kadi of Ramlah, in whose hands there is for us the date or
else the hot cinder-coal,

To thee complain I of my mate’s cruelty, who pays his pilgrim’s
duty but once a while :

Would that, when his devotion has come to end, and eased his
hack is after his pebble-throw,

He followed Abu Yusuf's wise rule and wont to join the lesser
with the chief pilgrimage.

This is his way in spite of that since he first took me to him I
never crossed him in aught.

So bid him show me henceforth sweet kindliness, or make him
drink the bitter draught of divorce,

Before he puts from him the last shred of shame, obedient to old
Abu ’1-Murrah’s hest.”


FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


143 .


Then the Kadi said to him : “ Thou hast heard what
she lays at thy door and with what she threatens thee,,
so turn aside from that which disgraces thee and beware
to anger her and come to grief.” Thereupon the Shaykh
crouched on his knees and poured forth the springs of
his utterances, saying :

“Listen, thou whom no blame may reach, to the speech of one-
who clears himself of doubts cast on him :

By Allah, not from hatred turn I from her, nor has my heart’s
love for my spouse died away,

But fortune’s fitful freak has come over us, ruthlessly robbing us
of both pearl and bead.

So my abode is empty, as unadorned her neck you see by shell or
gold ornament.

Erewhile my views on love and his creed and cult were those-
professed so staunchly by ‘Uzrah’s tribe,

But since fell fortune fled I left dolls alone, like one who vows
chastity for caution’s sake,

And not from grudge held I aloof from my field, only from fear to
see the seed spring in halm.

So blame not one who in such plight finds himself, rather be kind
to him and bear with his talk.”

Said the narrator : Then the woman flared up at his
speech and unsheathed arguments to fight him, saying :
“ Woe betide thee, thou fool, thou lack-food and lack-a-
lance, makest thou a fuss about a child, when for every
grazing creature there is a pasture-ground? Forsooth,,
thy understanding has strayed, and thy arrow missed
its aim : thou art a wretch, and thy spouse is wretched
through thee.” Said the Kadi to her : “ As for thee, if
thou wert to wrangle with lyiansfi’, she would go away
from thee silenced, but as for him, if he is truthful in
his assertion and his alleged poverty, there is enough in
his concern for his growling entrails, to make him
forget his pendulum.” Then she dropped her head,.


144


FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


looking askance, and returning no reply, so that we
said, shame has come back to her, or victory has
encompassed her. Then the Shaykh said to her:
“Out on thee, if thou hast tinselled thy speech or
concealed that which is full well known to thee.”
Said she : “ Alas, is there concealment after appeal,
and remains to us a seal upon any secret ? There
is neither of us, but says that which is true and
tears the veil of modesty in speaking out: so would
that we had -been visited with dumbness, and not
repaired to the judge.” Thereupon she covered herself
with her kerchief, and pretended to weep at her
exposure. But the Kadi began to wonder at their
address, and to admire it, and to blame fortune and
lament over it on their behalf, whereupon he brought
forth of dirhems two thousand, saying: “ Content
therewith the two hollows, and resist the mischief-
maker between two friends.” So the twain thanked
him for the handsome way in which he had dismissed
them and departed [as united] as though they were
wine and water. After they had gone, and their persons
were at a distance, the Kadi began to praise their
cultured minds, and to ask : “ Is there anyone who
knows them ?” Then the foremost of his henchmen
and the most particular of his intimates said to him :
“ As for the Shaykh, he is the Seruji, to whose excellence
all the world witnesses, and as for the woman she is his
travelling consort, but as for their litigation, it is a wile
of his device, and one of the hunting-nets of his deceit.”
The Kadi was angered at what he heard, and burned
with rage to see how he was cheated. Accordingly he
said to the informer against them : “ Get thee up, and


FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


145


spy for the pair of them, then pursue and chase them.”
So he rose, shaking his limbs defiantly, and after a
while he returned, defeated. Said the Kadi to him :
“Let us know what thou hast unearthed, and conceal
not from us aught of vileness thou hast found out.”
He replied : “I ceased not following up the roads,
and trying to overcome all obstructions, until I per¬
ceived them entering the desert, and they had already
bridled the beast of separation, when I excited their
eagerness for a second draught, and pledged myself for
their obtaining [the object of] their hope; but the
Shaykh’s heart was disposed to take a despairing view
of the case, and said : “ Flight with Kurab (name of a
celebrated horse) is wiser,” while she said: “ Nay,

rather the return is praiseworthier, and cowardice is
weakly.” Now when the Shaykh saw clearly the foolish¬
ness of her notion, and the risk of her venturesomeness,
he took hold of her skirts, whereupon he indited, saying
to her :

61 Take my advice, and follow its guarded way, and let the sum
suffice thee for details :

Fly from the date-tree when thou hast had thy pick, and separate
for good from it henceforth,

Bewaring to return to it even though its keeper made it free to all
comers,

For best a thief should not be seen in a spot where he has given
proof of his cunning.”

Whereupon he said to me : “ Thou hast taken trouble
in that which thou hast been bid to do : so return to
whence thou hast come, and say to him who has sent
thee, if thou wilt :

44 Eh, gently, let not bounty be followed by injury, for else both
thy wealth and fame alike will be lost and gone,

YOL. II.


10


146


FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


And fly not into passion if a beggar exaggerates, for lie is by no
means first to polish and gloss his speech,

And if some deceit of mine is taken by thee amiss, remember, Abu
Musa before thee has been deceived.”

Said the Kadi to him : “ Allah confound him ! how
charming are his ways and how exquisite his arts I”
Then he sent off his spy with two mantles and a purse
full of coin, saying to him : “ Fare speedily like one
who turns neither right nor left, until thou scest the
Shaykh and the wench, and moist their hands with this
gift, and show to them how fain I am to be beguiled by
the learned.” Quoth the narrator : Now in all my
wanderings abroad, I never saw a sight as wonderful as
this, nor heard I the like of it from anyone who roved
about and roamed through the lands.


THE FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF ALEPPO.”

After a prolonged stay in Aleppo, Hfirith passes on his return
journey through Hims (Emessa), a place noted for the stupidity of
its inhabitants, like Abdera among the Greeks, or Schildburg in
Germany. Here he meets with a schoolmaster, instructing, in the
open air, his pupils, and, expecting to be entertained by the blunders
of teacher and disciples, he draws near to assist at the losson or
class, as we would term it, when he finds to his astonishment that
the lads are able to accomplish the most surprising feats. “ Ono of
them,” to quote once more Mr. Chenery’s succinct summary, “ recites
a poem consisting entirely of unpointed letters; tho next writes out
some which not only have every letter pointed, but are full of
assonances and alliterations; a third produces lines of which the
words consist alternately of pointed and unpointed letters; a fourth
gives verses in which there is tejnis, or homogeneity in sound or in
letters between each two successive words; the next produces a
couplet each line of which begins and ends with the same syllables.
Then the nature of the exercises changes, and some lines are given
containing words which ought to be written with the letter Sin, but


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.\


147


about which some Arabs are doubtful. Then come the words which
should be written with Sad; then those that may be written with
either. One pupil gives in verse the rules for writing the verb
whose last letter is weak. Another repeats a poem comprising all
the words in the language which contain z ; this table is especially
useful since a common mistake among the Arabs was to confound z
with z [Chenery gives the two letters in Arabic characters, but
would transliterate the second one by as in “ Tum&dir,” vol. i.,
p. 387], the old Semitic language having a less variety of sounds
than the cultivated Arabic, as may be seen by a comparison with
the Hebrew. It need not be said that the schoolmaster is Abu
Zayd.”

The linguistic artifices mentioned above, like tfhose which have
preceded in former Assemblies, defy the resources of the translator.
Ruckert, in his spirited and ingenious imitation of Hariri, substitutes
similar feats in German, giving for instance a number of verses, in
which the sounds respectively of g and ch (as pronounced in Scotch)
change entirely the meaning of certain words; another piece, in
which the leading words are only distinguished by d and t alter¬
nately ; a third, in which the meaning of words is altered by
eliminating the letter $, and so on, with an astonishing amount of
inventiveness. My less ambitious object being to render the
Original into English as faithfully as the difference between the two
idioms will allow, I had to content myself, like Ghenery in similar
cases before me, with simply translating the wording of the text.
The memorial verses on Arabic orthography, however, I have tried
in a certain measure to reproduce because I thought that it might
be a useful exercise for the student to learn them by heart. The
insertion of Arabic vocables in transliteration of needs increased the
number of lines in these pieces, and, as the last of them is rather
long, I give only half of it in full for fear of exhausting the patience
of the general reader, relegating the remainder of the words, to¬
gether with their explanation, to the Notes.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related: An over¬
powering longing and a most ardent desire carried me
to Aleppo, and at that time my back was light and I
quick of execution; so I took travelling gear and sped
thither with the speed of the bird, and ever since I had
put up at her dwellings, and was enjoying her spring

10—2


148


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


season, I ceased not to while away my days in all that
which satisfies the wish and quenches thirst, until my
heart had no longer power to addict itself to aught, and
the raven of separation took wing after his alighting.
Then my mind, free of care and sweet wilfulness
[sprightliness], urged me to make for Hims (Emessa),
so'as to pass the summer in her territory and to sound
the [proverbial] stupidity of the people of her soil. So
I hastened towards her with the swiftness of the shoot¬
ing-star when* it falls to stone [the listening" devils].
Now when I had pitched my tent in her boundary, and
found the fragrance of her breeze, my eye spied a
Shaykh whose old age was coming on and whose youth
had turned its back on him, and around him ten
youngsters of one root and of diverse roots, and I
yielded to my eagerness to approach him, so that I
might probe in him the learned folks of Hims. There¬
upon he met me with a cheerful face and greeted me
with [even] a handsomer greeting than I had given
him. Then I sat down with him to test the fruit of his
speech, and to fathom the essence of his clownishness.
Forthwith he tarried not to point with his little staff to
the oldest of his chicks, and said to him : “ Indite the
unadorned couplets, and beware of keeping us waiting.”
Then he crouched as the lion croucheth, and indited
without hesitation :

“Make ready for thy enviers’ weapons sharp, but kindly deal
with him who sets hope in thee,

Cut off thyself from play, avoid wantonness, but ply the camels
and the brown supple spears,

Strive to obtain a lofty place, pillared high, not to enrobe thyself
in gay dalliance,

For lordship means, by Allah, not quaffing wine, nor gain you
glory courting girls full of hip,


FORTY-SIXTH. ASSEMBLY .


149


Hail to one free of hand and mind, large of heart, whose only joy
is giving joy to the good,

His water-pond is sweet to those seeking it, nor waste his wealth,
when one in need begs for it,

Expectant hope is not refused at his door, and not put off: delay¬
ing hope deems he vile.

Ho follows not the call of loose sportiveness, nor is the winecup
ever seen in his palm,

Stern discipline and self-reproof make him rule over his heart
and master his lust and greed,

And praise he wins through knowing that one-eyed wives are not
endowed alike with wives sound of sight.”

•

Said he (the Shaykh) to him (the boy :) “ Thou hast
done well, 0 thou little full-moon, 0 thou head of the
fraternity,” whereupon he said to the next, who seemed
to be a brother of the former, “ Come near, 0 Nuwairah
(my little luminary), my moonlet of the little halo.”
Then he came nigh and tarried not, until he was as
close to him as the receiver of a gift, when the Shaykh
said to him : “ Display the bridal couplets, even though
they be not of the choicest.” Then he mended his
reed-pen, and nibbed it, whereupon he took the tablet in
his lap and wrote :

“Fair Tajanni lias maddened me and bewitched me with her
thousands of wily tricks and beguilements,

Has enamoured me with the droop of her eyelids, as a doe’s,
draining mine of tears through her love-charm.

She approached me, adorned and richly attired, and crazed my
senses with forms that gleam through her movements;

Then I fancied she favoured me and would soothe me by her
spooch, but an idle droam proved my fancy.

After using with me her heart’s cruel falsehood, like one faithless,
who would appease rightful anger,

She forsook me, and let me go, softly weeping, and in sorrow that
ceaselessly breedoth sorrow.”

When the Shaykh looked at that which the hoy had
deftly devised, and scanned attentively that which he


150


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY,


had written down, he said to him : “ A blessing has
been bestowed on thee amongst the fawns, as there has
been a blessing bestowed on yonder olive-tree.” Then
he called out: “ Step nigh, 0 Qutrub.” Forthwith
approached him a lad, resembling a star of a dark
night or the likeness of an ivory-figure, whereupon lie
said to him : “ Put this into mongrel couplets (the
alternate words of which consist of dotted and undottcd
letters), and avoid blunders.” Then the hoy took the
reed-pen and wrote :

“Be bountiful, bounty is a jewel, and disappoint none who hopes
for shelter;

Refuse not him who implores assistance, be he prolix in his suit,
or modest;

And think not that time will leave for ever the miser to starve
upon his riches;

Be lenient: men of worth condemn not, their hearts expand with
the joy of giving ;

Betray no trustworthy friend and crave not for coin that, when
tested, proves deficient.”

Said the Shaykh to him : “ May thy hands not
wither nor thy knives get blunted.” Then he called
out: “ 0 Ghashamsham, 0 thou [essence of the] perfume
of Mausham.” Forthwith there stood ready to his
bidding a lad like the pearl of the diver, or the young
buffalo of the hunter, when he said to him : “ Write
down the twin-couplets, and may no mishap befall
thee.” Then the boy took from him the straightened
reed, and penned without stopping :

“ Zaynab’s stature, erect and lithe, kills beholders, and a bane is
her rounded bosom to lovers,

Helping hosts are her neck to her, and her grace, and languid
eyes that dart glances of deadly sharpness,

Proudly bearing herself she swayed full-blown power, now my foe,
now with glowing cheeks drawing nigh me


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY. 151

In the morn or at night, to leave me again in sore distress at the
cruelty of her doings,

Then she came, may I be her ransom, and cooed, and with her
greetings appeased her lovelorn and loved one.”

Thereupon the Shaykh began to scan carefully that
which the boy had set into lines, and let his glance
run over it, and when he had found his writing
beautiful and his punctuation correct, he said to him :

“ May thy ten [lingers] not dry up, nor thy odour be
found foul.” Then he called a lad of bewitching looks,
who [on removing his face-veil] displayed blossoms of
a garden, and said to him : “ Recite the two bordered
couplets, that silence every speaker, and are sure not to
be matched by a third.” Said the boy to him : “ Listen!
and may thy hearing never become hard, nor thy
collected senses be scattered,” and recited without
tarrying and without delay :

“ Make thee a mark, whose traces show fair to sight, give thanks
for gifts, though trifling as sesam-seed,

And shun deceitfulness with all might and main, that thou mayst
gain then lordship and weight with men.”

Said he to him : “ Thou hast excelled, 0 imp, 0
father of despoilment.” Then he called out: “ Pro¬
pound, 0 Yiisin, that which is difficult of words written
with bin." Thereupon he rose and tarried not to indite
with a nasal voice :

“ In MiV/.s', which means ‘ writing-ink,’ and imsuh, ‘ the wrist of the
hand,’ the Sin is used whether thoy be written or read aloud.

“And so in ijaxb ‘hard’ (of dates), and bdsiqah ‘ lofty palm,’ in
sitfhim ‘ foot of a mount,’ in buk/is ‘ defect,’ 'iqdr ‘ force !’

In iqtahis ‘ borrow fire I’ tuqnsmd ‘ I hoard it said,’ muxaitir ‘ cus¬
todian,’ shtuath ‘ unltroke,’ jams ‘ bell.’

Qui-Ih, or else qdrix ‘cold’; learn this from me as correct,
lighting thy torch at the fire of knowledge sound and approved.”


152


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


Said he to him : “ Thou hast done well, 0 unrest, 0
cymbal-heater of the troop.” Then he said : “ Get thee
up, 0 'Anbasah (a name of the lion) and explain the
S&ds that are [vulgarly] confounded with Sin.” There¬
upon he leaped up with the leap of the roused lion-
whelp, and forthwith indited without stumbling :

“ ith SM is written qabcixt ‘ I took with the finger-tips,’ and
afikh ‘ be listening that thou may’st receive the news/

And basaqt ‘ I spat/ and simdJch 1 the ear/ and sanjah ‘cymbal/
and qass and sadr ‘ the breast/ iqtass ‘ he traced/

Bakhast ‘I gouged his eye/ and fursah ‘the proper time/ and
farisah ‘ muscles beneath the arm that quake in fear/

And qasccrtu Hindcin ‘1 guarded Hind/ fishu 3 n-ncisdr& ‘ paschal
feast of the Christians who look out for it/

And qarast ‘I pinched/ and the wine is qdrisah, ‘tart of taste/
when it pricks the tongue, and all this is orthography/’

Said he: “ Allah keep thee, 0 my son, thou hast
indeed given coolness to both my eyne.” Then he bade
get up one small of body as a chess-pawn, and swift of
motion as a falcon, and commanded him to stick to his
way, and rehearse the words that are differently written
with Sin or Sad. Then the boy rose, trailing his coat-
flaps, and forthwith indited, gesticulating with both his
hands:

“ If so . thou - ^ite with Sin, the words I will tell to thee, and

if thou wilt, let them be correctly written with Sad :

Maghs ‘gripes/ and faqs ‘breeding young/ mustdr ‘new wine ’
mummalis . *’ 5

‘Slipped from the hand/ sdligh ‘shedding teeth/ sirdt ‘path of
truth/

Saqah ‘approach/ sdmighdn ‘ the corners twain of the mouth/

Saqr ‘hawk/ saiciq ‘wheat in broth/ misldq ‘glib-tongued ' •’ thus
they teach/ 7

Said he to him : Well done, 0 thou mite, 0 thou
eye of a fly.” Then he called out : “ 0 Daghfal (young


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


153


elephant), 0 Abu Zanfal (father of mischief).” Forth¬
with a boy stood ready to his bidding, fairer than an
[ostrich’s] egg on the green-sward. Then he said to
him : “ What is the rule with regard to the spelling of
the verbs terminating in a weak letter ?” He replied :
“ Listen, may thy echo never be deaf, nor thy enemies
endowed with hearing,” whereupon he indited, needing
no prompter :

“ If ever thou art doubtful of spelling a final weak, then put such
a verb into the second of preterite :

If its Ta is preceded by Ya, let a Ya it be, if not, put an Alif last,
in order to write it right:

And think not that verbs of three or more letters of this class,
or such as contain a Hamzah, will differ in that respect.”

The Shaykh rejoiced at that which the boy had pro¬
pounded, saying to him : “ I commend thee to the
protection of Allah from the eye of the envier, and fnin
would be made thy ransom,” whereupon he said:
“ Hither, 0 Ka'kfi, 0 thou bird, cautious as to where
thou sippest water.” Then came forward a lad brighter
than the fire of hospitality in the eyes of the son of
night-faring. He said to him : “ Explain the distinction
between Zfid and Za so as to cleave thereby the hearts
of the adversaries.” The boy bestirred himself gleefully
at his speech, and forthwith indited with a loud voice :

“ Thou who askest about the two letters Zad and Za, in order
to make no error in writing:

Let suffice thee to know by heart those in Za, so hear them like a
man wide awake and retain them,

Namely zamyd ‘with blackish lips,’ al-mazdlim ‘ plaints for justice/
izldm 4 producing obscureness,’

Zalrn ‘ the whiteness of teeth/ zubd ‘ points of weapons/ al-lahdz
‘ the eye-corner next to the temples/

And ‘am ‘kind of lizards/ and az-zalim ‘male of the ostrich/
or ‘wronged/ and also ‘ the wronger/


154


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


Zabyun i antelope/ shaizam 4 tall/ zill c a shadow/ and laza £ blaze/
shiwdz £ a flame burning smokeless/

At-tazanni 4 opinion/ al-lafz 4 tbe word/ and nam 4 a poem/ and
nt-tagriz 4 panegyric/

Qaiz 4 tbe summer/ zumd 4 athirst/ and lamdz 4 taste on the tip of
the tongue/ Idzd 4 shares of fortune/

An-nctzir 4 what resembles/ zir 4 foster-mother/ jdhiz 4 goggling/
an-naziriin 4 the beholders/

And tashazzi £ a splitting up/ zilf £ the hoof of ruminants/ and
iqdz ‘ awaking a sleeper/

*Azm £ a bone/ and zuribub £ the bone of the hip/ and ash-shazd
* bone of arm or leg/ zahr f the backside/

Ash-shizdz ‘yoke for carrying/ haftztin £ those who preserve/
ilif&z £ provoking to anger/

Al-Jbcbzir&t ‘the lofts for dates/ al-mazannah c likely place where
a thing is found/ zinnah ‘ notion/

Kdzimun £ folks in silent wrath/ cd-waztfdt 4 daily rations/ mughtdz
4 enraged/ kizzah 4 surfeit/ ”

Said the Shaykh to him: “ Thou hast done well, may
thy mouth never be harmed, nor he be benefited who
speaks thee harshly, for, by Allah, thou art, despite thy
tender youth, a safer keeper than the earth, and more of
a collector than the day of mustering (resurrection).
Now I have made thee and thy comrades drink from
my pure draught, and have straightened you as spear-
shafts are straightened, so think of me, and I will think
of you, and give me thanks, and be not ungrateful.”
Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Then I wondered at
what he had displayed of ingenuity blended with stolid¬
ness, and what he had shown of sagacity mingled with
foolishness, and my glance ceased not to look up and
down at him, and to scan and scrutinize him, but I was
like one who tries to see in the dark, or who wanders
in a trackless desert. So when he found my awakening
tardy and my bewilderment evident, he blinked at me
and smiled, saying : “ There remains none who reads


FORTY-SIXTH ASSEMBL Y.


155


feature?.” Then I pondered as to the purport of his
speech, when lo, I found him to be Abu Zayd by dint
of liis smile. Thereupon 1 began to blame him for
making his home in a den of fools and choosing the
trade of a clown. Then it was as if his face had been
strewn with ashes, or imbued with blackness, save that
he was not slow to indite :

“ If Hims I have chosen, and trade as buffoon, it was to be blessed
with the portion of fool-borns,

For our age selects but the fool for its favours, and houses its
wealth in the pools of the hollows,

Whilo brothers of wisdom obtain from their age not more than
the donkey tied up in the courtyard.”

Then he said : “ But teaching is the most honourable of
crafts, and the most profitable of merchandizes, the
most successful of intercessions, and the most excellent
of eminences, and its possessor is lord of a rule obeyed,
and of awe widespread, and of a dock | subjects] sub¬
missive to his sway, he guards with the guardianship
of a prince, and fixes allowances as a Wazir fixes them,
and ordains with the authority of the powerful, and
resembles the owner of a great kingdom, save that in a
short while he reaches his dotage, and becomes noted
for far-famed foolishness, and shifts about with small
wits in his dealings, and none can enlighten thee, better
[in this matter] than one who speaks from experience.”
Said I to him : ‘‘ By Allah, thou art the son of the
days and the pattern of patterns, and the wizard who
beguiles understandings, who has access to every
branch-path of speech.” Thereupon I ceased not to
attend at his assembly, and to plunge into the current
of his river, until the bright days passed away and grey


156


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY


events took their stead, when I sepai'ated from him with
tears in my eyne.


THE FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ OF HAJR”

Another lively scene of fictitious altercation between Abu Zayd»
who for once has assumed the popular character of a cupper, and
his precocious sod, for the purpose of replenishing their exhausted
pockets- The chi$f merit of the composition lies again in the
marvellous forcibleness and comprehensiveness of diction, which
runs through all the notes of the oratorial scale, from outspoken
vulgarity redeemed by an amusing touch of quaintness in the
numerous proverbial sayings, to the enouncement of sublime moral
precepts in the most elaborate forms of versification. To quote one
instance of the latter, there is a poem of considerable length, the
permanent rhyme of which consists of two words, consecutive words
each time, of exactly the same sound, but totally different meaning,
as: Izd md ’Uahabat ahsh(Vu-hu hi ’t-faicd tawd , “when his entrails
burn with hunger (tawd), he bears it silently” (tawd). That Hariri
himself attached some value and importance to this Assembly, may
be gathered from the fact, that he accompanied it with a short com¬
mentary of his own, the substance of which will bo found embodied
in the notes to this volume.

AI Harith, son of Hammfun, related: l needed a
euppmg, while I was staying in Hajr al-Vemameli,
and accordingly was directed to a Shaykh who cupped
skilfully. So I sent my slave-boy to summon him into
my presence and kept waiting for him, but he was slow
to return after he had gone, so that I began to fancy
that he had run away, or met with accident after
accident. Then he came back like one who has failed
in his errand and disappointed his master. Said I to
him : “ Woe betide thee, for the tardiness of Find, and
thy fire-shaft missing to give a spark." Then he pre¬
tended that the Shaykh was busier than the woman of


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


157


the two butter-bags and in the midst of a battle like
the battle of Ilunain. Now I loathed to go to a cupper’s
place, and I. was at a loss between sallying forth and
lagging behind. Finally I. saw that there was no
rebuke upon him who goes to the privy. Thereupon,
when I had reached his shop and got sight of his face, I
perceived an old man of cleanly aspect, surrounded by
ring upon ring of onlookers and throng upon throng [of
customers]. Before him stood a youth like [the sharp
sword] Samsamah, about to be cupped, the Shaykh
saying to him : “ I see thou hast stretched forth thy
head, before thou bringest out thy scrap, and hast
offered me thy nape without saying to me * This is for
thee.’ But I am not of those who sell ready goods for
owed money, nor look out for the shadow after the
substance. So if thou dole out thy coin, thou wilt be
cupped in both thy neck-veins, but if thou deem stinting
better, and hoarding more becoming in thyself, then read
the Sura, ‘he frowned and turned away,’ and vanish from

out of my sight, or else-Then the youth said:

“ By Him who has forbidden the forging of lies, as He
has forbidden the chase in the two sacred precincts, I
am more penniless than the babe two days old, so trust
to the flow of my mountain slope, and grant me a delay
until times have mended with me.” Said the Shaykh
to him: “ Fair promises are like the shoot of a tree, that
has an equal chance that it perish, or that the fresh dale
be gathered from it. So what will teach me, whether 1
am to reap fruit from thy tree, or to derive from it. an
ailment? Furthermore what relying is there that, when
thou hast gotten thyself far away, thou wilt fulfil what
thou promisest ? For in sooth, treachery has become


158


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


as the whiteness in a horse’s forefeet amongst the adorn¬
ments of this generation, so rid me, by Allah, of thy
bothering, and take thee off to where the wolf howls. ’
Then the lad advanced towards him, overcome with
shame, and said: “ By Allah, none breaks faith, save
the mean, the contemptible, and none resorts to the
pond of treachery but the worthless, and if thou knewest
who I am, thou wouldst not let me hear ribald talk ;
but thou hast spoken in ignorance, and where it behoved
thee to prostrate thyself, thou hast foully aspersed, and
how abject are exile and poverty, and how beautiful is
the speech of him who said :

“ The stranger, who trails his skirt pompously, meets but with
scorn, how will he fare then abroad, if food and drink fail him ?

But no distress brings disgrace upon the high-minded man :
camphor and musk, well ye know, though pounded spread fragrance.

The ruby is often tried in Ghada-fire’s fiercest glow, the fire abates
but the ruby still remains ruby.”

Said the Shaykh to him : “ 0 thou bane of thy father,
who causest thy kindred to wail, art thou in a place to
brag of, and of an account to be blazed forth ? or in the
place of a hide to be flayed, and of a nape to be cupped?
And granted thy house be such as thou claimest, results
therefrom the cupping of the hind-part of thy neck 1
By Allah, if thy father lorded it over Abd al-Manfif, or
if 'Abd al-Madan humbled himself to thy maternal
uncle, hammer not cold iron, and seek not that ■which
thou wilt not find, and boast when thou boastest, of thy
belongings, not of thy forefathers, and of thy gatherings,
not of the roots from which thou springest, and of thy
own qualities, not of thy rotten bones, and of thy
valuables, not of thy pedigree. Yield not to thy
ambition or it will abase thee [bring thee to fall], nor


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY. 15 £>

follow thy lust lest it lead thee astray. I commend to-
Allah him who said to his son :

“ Be upright, my dear son, for the straight tree will spread ita
roots, whereas, when it grows crooked it speedily pines away,

Obey not abasing greed, but behave as a man who bears in silence
the pangs of hunger, that gnaw at his vital parts;

And battle against lust that destroys thee, for many who had
soared to the stars, enslaved by lust, fell and came to grief.

Bo helpful to thy kinsfolk, for shameful it is to see the pinch of
distress in those depending upon the free.

And keep to the friend who when the times turn their back on
thee, betrays not, but proves faithful, when matters go wrong with
thee.

And pardon if thou art strong, for no good is in a man who
needlessly wounds, when power of wounding is in his grasp

And guard thee of complaining, thou hoarost no man of sense
complain, but the fool, who snarls and growls while ho checks-
himself.”

Then the lad said to the onlookers : u How wonderful!
What a strange rarity I the nose in the sky and the.
rump in the water ; words sweet as wine and deeds
hard as Hint stone.’ 1 Then he assailed the Slmykli with
a sharp tongue and in burning rage, saying : “ Out
upon thee for a fashioner of fine speeches, who swerves
from the road of kindliness. Thou preachest benevo¬
lence and actest with the ruthlessness of the eat. And if
the briskness of thy trade is the cause of thy crustiness,
then may Allah strike it with slackness and allow it to
bo spoiled by thy enviers, until thou art seen more
bereft of customers than the cupper of Sfihat, and
narrower, as far as thy livelihood is concerned, than
the eye of the needle.” Said the Shaykh to him : <c Nay,
may Allah visit thee with blisters all over* thy mouth,
and heat of the blood, until thou art driven, to a cupper
of mighty roughness, heavy in charges, with blunt


160


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


cupping-knives, snotty and breaking wind at every
moment.” How, when the youth saw that he was com¬
plaining to one who would not be silenced, and intent
on opening a door that would be kept locked, he
desisted from bandying words and made ready for
departure. But the Shaykh knew that he deserved
blame for what he had said to the youth. So he felt
inclined to pacify him, and vouchsafed to submit to his
claim and not to ask a fee for cupping him. The lad,
however, would* not hear but of going and fleeing from
his presence, and the twain ceased not from argument
and abuse, and tugging each other about, until the
youth quaked from the strife and his sleeves got torn.
Then he cried aloud over his exceedingly great loss,
and the rending of his honour and his rags, while the
Shaykh began to make excuses for his excesses, and to
quiet the other’s tears. But the youth would not listen
to his apologies nor abate his weeping until the Shaykh
said to him : “ May thy uncle (meaning himself) be
thy ransom, and that which grieves thee pass over.
Art thou not tired of wailing ? Wilt thou not learn
forbearance ? Hast thou not heard of him, who
exercised forgiveness, taking after the speech of him
who said :

“ Quench by thy mercy the fire of anger that recklessly a churl
has kindled in thee, and pardon his trespass,

For mercy is far the best of jewels that grace the wise, and
sweetest fruit, culled by man, is ready forgiveness.”

Then the youth said to him : “ Forsooth, if thou wert
to look at my sordid life, thou wouldst excuse my
flowing tears. But the smooth-skinned make light of
what the back-sore feels.” Then it was as if he became


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


161


ashamed, and he left off weeping, regaining his com¬
posure, and he said to the Shaykh. : “I have now con¬
formed with thy wish, so patch up what thou hast
rent.” Said the Shaykh : “ Get thee.gone ! thou over-
taxest the flow of the streamlets of my bounty : spy for
another’s lightning, than mine.” Then he rose to go
from row to row, and begged for the gift of the
standers-by, inditing while he was wending his way
between them :

“ I swear by Mecca’s holy house, whither flock in pilgrim’s garb
the pious from far and wide :

If I possessed but food for one day, my hand would never touch
the lancet or cupping-cup.

Nor would my soul, that craves for fair fame with men, con¬
tentedly put up with this sign of trade,

Nor had this youth complained of harshness from mo or felt the
lacerating prick of my sting.

But, lack-a-day, foul fortune’s fell fitfulnoss, loft me to grope my
way in pitch-darkest night

And povorty brought me to such piteous pass : the blazing pit of
hell I would fain prefer!

Is there a man then whom compassion impels, and tender feelings
prompt to prove kind to me V‘

Said A1 Harith, son of Hammslm : Thereupon I was
the first to commiserate with his misfortune, and doled
out to him two dirhems, saying [within myself], “They
arc of no account, even though he should be a liar.”
JSo he rejoiced at the first-fruit of his gathering, and
augured well from them for the obtainment of what lie
needed ; and the dirhems ceased not to pour upon him,
and to come to him from all sides, until he had become
possessed of verdant plenty, and a well-filled saddle¬
bag. Then he cheered up at this, and congratulated
himself on the event, saying to the youth : “ This is a
von. n. 11


162


FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


spring-growth of thy sowing, and a milk-flow of which
one half belongs to thee ; come then to take thy share,
and be not abashed.” Thus they divided the money
between them to the nicety with which the fruit of the
dwarf palm splits in two, and rose in perfect agreement,
and when the bond of conciliation was tied between
them, and the Shaykh bethought himself of going, I
said to him : “ My blood is heated, and I had directed
my steps to thee, so wouldst thou please to cup me and
rid me of my .ailment ?” Then he turned his glance
upon me and scanned me sharply, whereupon he came
close up to me and indited :

“ What think'st thou of my cunning and beguiling, and what
occurred ’twixt me and my kid yonder %

That I come off as victor in the contest, and feed on fertile
meadows after famine %

Tell me, my heart’s core, tell me, pray, by Allah, hast ever thou
set eyes upon one like me 1

To open by my spell each fastened padlock ? to captivate all
minds by charm of witchcraft ?

To blend the serious with the sportive humour ? If A1 Iskandari
has been before me,

The dew precedes the shower, but the shower excels the dew in
fructifying bounty.”

Said the narrator: Then his poetry roused my atten¬
tion and made me perceive that he was our Shaykh,
whom every finger points out. So I rebuked him for his
lowering himself and stooping to self-abasement. But
he took no notice of what he heard, and minded not my
rebuke, saying: “Any shoe suits the bare-footed who
walks on flints.” Wherewith he stepped away from
me contemptuously, and started off, he and his son, like
two racehorses.


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


163


THE FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“ THE HARAMIYEH.”

This Assembly, the first composed by Hariri, is based on a fact,
which has been reported to us by two independent witnesses. A1
Fajandihi relates, that Ibn Qitri, who was Kadi of Al Mazar, a town
in the neighbourhood of Basra, had repented of his former indul¬
gence in wine, but relapsed into his sinful habit. One day he
happened to be present in the mosque of the Bend Haram in Basra,
that is, of the quarter in which this Arab tribe had settled, when
'Omar founded the City, and here he was mysteriously moved to
sincere penitence, which prompted him to ask whether any member
of the congregation could point out to him an atonement for his
transgression. Then a stranger stepped forward, who claimed to be
a fugitive citizen of Serftj, which had then fallen into the hands of
the Greeks (here mistaken for the Franks of the first Crusade), and
that his daughter had been made a captive by the enemy, from
whom, in his destitute condition, ho was unable to ransom her. lie
wound up by saying to Ibn Qitri: “ Thy sin will bo atoned for if
thou bestow alms upon me, sufficient to set her free,” and the Kadi,
belioving his statement to be true, presented him with twenty gold
denars, part of which was forthwith spent by the rogue on wine in
a tavern at a safe distance from the mosque. According to Abft 1
Kasim'Abdallah, Hariri’s son, the latter, who lived in this quarter
and is therefore surnamed Al-Harami, assisted at the scene and had
previously to it, like the rest of the company, been much impressed
by an eloquent address of the ragged stranger, who on their inquiry
after his name, had called himself Abft Zayd the Serftji. Hariri
wont home and wrote the present Assembly, in which Abft Zayd is
supposed to dictate his tale to Al Hfirith, a form of narration sub¬
sequently abandoned by Hariri, apparently for obvious reasons of
clearness and stylistic convenience

Al Hurith, son of Ilammfim, related in the words of
Abft Zayd : I censed not since I bestrode my stout
camel and departed from my spouse and my sprigs, to
crave for the sight of Basra with the craving of the
oppressed for help, since the possessors of knowledge
and the lords of tradition agreed upon the eminence of

11—2


164


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


her schools and scholars, and the glories of her tombs
and martyrs, and I begged of Allah to make me tread
her soil, so that I might feast my eyes on her, and that
he would let me alight in her, so as to wander about
her wards and outskirts. Now when good luck had
landed me there and my glances pastured in her freely,
I saw in her all that fills the eye with delight and
makes every stranger forgetful of his native place. So
I set out one morning when the taint of darkness was
vanishing, and •Abu Munzir was calling out his admoni¬
tions to the sleepers, to stroll about in her precincts,
and to satisfy the hankering I had to penetrate into the
midst of her. Then my traversing her roads and my
sauntering in her streets brought me into a quarter
noted as sacred and named after the Benu Har&m; that
was possessed of Mosques much visited and of tanks
much frequented, of buildings of solid structure and
mansions of pleasing aspect, of choice excellencies and
numerous rarities.

Thy heart’s desire of holy things and worldly

thou findest there, and neighbours of motley tendence,

One all wrapped up in scripture’s wondrous verses,

the other thrilled by tunes of the trembling lute-string,

One skilled in solving deeply hidden meanings,
the other bent on loosing the bonds of captives.

How many there, who wear their eyes by reading
or wear their trays by feeding the needy stranger,

How many places of resort for learning,

and seats of bounty, lavishing sweets of harvest,

And mansions where not cease from morn to evening
the warblings of the peerless maiden minstrels.

So join, if thus inclined, this one in prayer,
or, if thou wilt, that one in broaching wine-casks,

For there without restraint thou mayst indulge in
the wise mans converse or the toper’s tankard.


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


165


Said lie: Noiv while I was scouting her thorough¬
fares and gazing at her fairness, I perceived towards
sundown and the approach of eventide, a mosque,
renowned for its beauties, and deriving splendour from
its frequenters, where the people assembled in it had
started the discussion of interchangeable letters and
were running a race in the course of debate. So I
turned towards them, in order to ask for rain from their
cloud, not to borrow light from their grammar-lore.
Then it was not but as the snatching of a fire-brand of
one in haste, that the voices rose for the prayer-call,
followed by the sallying forth of the Imam, when the
blades of speech were sheathed, and the loops loosed for
standing up, so that devotions diverted us from asking
for food, and worship from seeking bounty. l>ut when
the due of obligatory prayer was discharged, and the
people nigh dispersing, there emerged from the congre¬
gation an elderly man of sweet eloquence, who possessed
of graceful gifts an easy flow of speech, and the fecundity
of a Hasan. Said he: “0 my neighbours, whom 1
have chosen before the branches of my own tree, and
whose precincts I have made the house of my refuge,
whom 1 have taken for my kith and kin, and made my
stay for the time of my presence and absence, know ye
that the vestment of truth is brighter than costly
raiments, and that ignominy in this world is lighter to
bear than ignominy in the world to come, that religion
is the imparting of sincere advice, and guidance the
indication of sound faith, that the consulted has a claim
to confidence, and that the seeker of right direction is
entitled to be counselled, that he proves to be thy
brother, who reproves thee, not he who finds for thee


166 FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY:

excuses, and that thy friend in truth is he who tells
thee truth, not he who says ‘ true’ to all thou sayest !”
Quoth those present: “ 0 thou, our loving friend and
cherished intimate, what is the secret of thy riddling
speech, and what the explanation of thy concise address,
and what desirest thou to be accomplished by us ? For
by Him, who has bestowed upon us thy affection, and
made us the sincerest of thy friends, we shall not
withhold from thee our advice, nor be sparing in our
gift.” Then he replied : “ May ye be rewarded with
good and preserved from harm, for ye are of those of
whom a companion need not complain, and from whom
dissimulation proceedeth not, in whom no expectation
is disappointed, and from whom no secret should be
concealed. So I will disclose to you what rankles in
my breast and consult you on the matter that exhausts
my patience. Know ye then, that while my fire-shaft
yielded no spark and luck kept aloof from me, I was
sincere in my purpose of covenant with Allah, and
pledged my vow to Him, that I would never buy wine
nor associate with boon-companions, nor quaff strong
drink, nor don the garb of inebriety. But my misleading
lust and my abasing and deluding sensuality prompted
me to keep company with mighty topers, and to pass
round the cups, to put away gravity and suckle myself
with grape-wine, to bestride the back of the ruddy one,
and be forgetful of repentance, as we are forgetful of the
dead. Nor was I contented with this once, of which I
have told you, in my obedience to Abu Murrah, but I
was addicted to the old vintage even on the fifth day
and allowed myself to be thrown prostrate by the bright
wine during the sacred night. Therefore behold me


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


167


contrite for my abandoning the way of return to God,
and exceedingly penitent for my indulgence in constant
drink, greatly in fear from the breach of my covenant
and openly confessing my excess in quaffing the
fermenting must.

Is there then an atonement, ye know of, 0 friends of mine,

To bring far from my sin me, and near to my Lord again V*

Now when he had loosened the knot of his utterance
and satisfied his need of complaint anejit his distress,
my soul whispered to me, This, 0 Abu Zayd, is an
opportunity for catching game, so tuck up the sleeves
from thy arm and sinew. Whereupon I rose from my
roosting-place, as rises the alert, and sallied forth from
my position in the row of worshippers with the swift¬
ness of an arrow, saying :

Thou, distinguished by noble rank, great in glory and princeliness,
who desirest a guiding hand to the path of eternal bliss,
l am able to cure the ill, that deprives thee of peaceful sleep :

listen then to a wondrous case, fraught for me with perplexity.

Onco I had in SenYj my home, seat of faith and of righteousness,
where obedience was paid to me for my wealth and my lordly
state.

Throngs of guests were resorting to my abode and received my
boon,

for with presents I purchased praise, kept my honour by bounty
bright,

Oaring naught that my treasures went in profuse liberality,
and I kindled the fuc aloft, which the miser is fain to quench,
That the strayer might find with me hoped-for shelter and resting-
place ;

none athirst watched my lightning's flash and remained still a
prey to thirst,

None, nor came one to borrow fire from my shaft, and it failed to
flame;

while the times were in league with me spread I round me
prosperity,


168


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


Till the Lord wrought a change in what through His favour had
been my wont,

for He settled the Greeks in our country after a feud that rose,
And they seized on the households of all believers in one true God
and deprived me of all my goods either hidden or free to view.
Thus became I an outcast in distant lands and a fugitive,
who beseecheth men’s bounty while ere it had been besought
of me,

And such misery is my lot, that it makes me to wish for death :
for the height of calamity, which has robbed me of all my
cheer,

Is my daughter’s captivity, who was captured for ransom’s sake,
cast a glance then upon my woe, and to help me stretch out thy
hand,

Ay, protect me from fortune fell, that has wronged me and been
my foe,

aiding me to redeem my child from the hostile’s degrading bond.
By such acts are the sins wiped out of a servant who has rebelled,
is repentance accepted from one renouncing all worldliness,

And they are an atonement for him who, guided, has swerved
astray.

though I spoke this in strains of verse yet my speech leads
aright and true ;

So accept the advice I give, and my guidance, with thankful heart,
and bestow what may be at hand, winning praise from my
gratitude.

Now when I had finished my long and rapid im¬
provisation, and he whose help. I implored, was satisfied
of the truth of my words, his eagerness instigated him
to display generosity in my assistance and zeal incited
him to take trouble in relieving my distress. So he
dealt out to me a ready dole forthwith and was profuse
in ample promise, so that I returned to my nest gleeful
at the success of my stratagem, for by fashioning my
artifice I had obtained the sipping of my sop, and the
weaving of my poem had gotten me the enjoyment of
my pudding-pie. Quoth A1 Harith, son of Hammam,
“ Then I said to him : ‘ Praise to Him who has created


FORTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


16 <>


thee, how mighty is thy trickery and how vile are thy
inventions/ Put he burst out laughing exceedingly
and indited without hesitation :

4 Live by deceit, for we live in times whose sons resemble the
forest lions.

Set allow the rills of wile so that’ the mill of life may briskly
turn round.

And hunt for eagles, if the chase should fail content thyself with
a tuft of feathers ;

Try to cull the fruit, if the fruit escape thee, bo satisfied with the
leaves remaining;

And ease thy heart from distracting thoughts at the frowns of
fickle and adverse fortune,

For the ceaseless change of vicissitudes proclaims the doom of our
life’s unstableness.’ ”


TILE TORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED

“ of sasAn.”


According to most commentators, Sasan, after whom this Assembly
is named, was the eldest son of the king of part of Western Persia,
who was disinherited by his father in favour of a daughter and her
progeny, and fled in high dudgeon from his father’s court, to lead
the life of a nomad shepherd amongst the Kurds. Thus he became
the bnuhidihd of beggars and vagrants, and the hero of popular tales,
like the “king of the gipsies/’ Othors state that, under “ the race
of Susan,” the Persian kings of the last Dynasty are meant, many of
whose descendants were, after the conquest of the country by the
Arabs, reduced to the utmost poverty and excited popular com¬
miseration by their tragic downfall. Alluding to this prince of
beggars or beggared princes, Abfi Zayd urges his son to practise
mendicancy as a fine art, which he himself had found preferable to
all other recognised moans to gain an enjoyable livelihood.


A1 Harith, son of Ilammfim, related : The report
reached me, that Abu Zayd, when he neared the
(number of years indicated by the) clenched fist (ninety-
three), and the fetter of old age robbed him of the
power of rising, sent for his son, after having col-


170


FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


lected his thoughts, and said to him : “ 0 my son,
behold the time for departing from the threshold and
for having my eyes anointed with the kohl-pencil of
demise has drawn nigh, and thou, praise be to Allah,
art my heir apparent, and the leader of the flock of
S&s&n after me, and for one like thee it needs no
tapping with the staff, nor awakening him by the
throw of pebbles, but he is called upon to exhort men’s
minds, and made to be a furbisher of their thoughts.
So I bequeath thee that which Seth bequeathed not to
Nabat, nor Jacob to the tribes. Preserve then my
bequest and eschew disobedience to me; pattern thyself
after my likeness, and ponder well my saws, for if thou
be guided by my counsel and take light from my
morning, thy alighting-place will be rich in herbs and
thy smoke (i.e., the smoke of thy fires of hospitality)
will rise aloft, whereas, if thou be forgetful of my surah,
and cast from thee my advice, the ashes of thy trivet
will be few, and thy people and kin will make light of
thee. 0 my son, I have tested the true states of things
and experienced the vicissitudes of fortune, and have
seen a man held worth his wealth, not his pedigree, and
inquiry is made after his gain, not after his deserts.
Now I have heard that the means of livelihood are
ministry and commerce, and husbandry and handicraft.
So I have plied these four to see which of them is the
most fitting and profitable. But I have not proved
living by them praiseworthy, nor found ease of life
plentiful in them, for the opportunities of rulerships
and the perquisites of administrations are like the en¬
tanglements of dreams and like the shadows vanishing
. with the darkness, and a sufficient anguish for thee is


FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


171


the bitterness of being weaned therefrom. And as for
the goods of trade, they are subject to risks, and a butt
to depredatory inroads, and how like they are to swift¬
winged birds. And as for the undertaking of farms and
applying one’s self to tilling the ground, it is a source
of demeanment and a drag impeding advancement, and
rarely is its pursuer exempt from despisal or blest with
tranquillity of mind. And lastly as for the crafts of
artisans, they yield not more than the merest pittance,
and sell not briskly at all times, and most of them are
dependent on the prime of life. And I see naught easy
to win, sweet to taste, and in its acquirement pure of
nature, but the craft of which S&s&n has planted the
roots and diversified the branches, whose light he has
made to shine in the East and West, and whose beacon
he has kindled to the sons of dust. So I engaged in its
battles, sporting its badge, and chose its mark as my
ornament, since it is the merchandise that never slacks,
and the spring that never sinks, and the lamp to which
all .resort and by which the blind and the one-eyed
obtain light. And those who exercise it are the most
powerful of tribes, and the luckiest of folks, no touch of
oppression overtakes them, no drawing of the sword
harasses them, they fear not the sting of biting vermin,
nor submit they to anyone either near or far, they are
not in awe of him who lightens and thunders, nor care
they for him who (in his fretful anger) rises and sits
down again. Their assemblies are pleasant, their hearts
at ease, their food is sped before them, and their times
pass brightly. Wheresoever they alight, they pick up,
and where they slip in, they, strip off, they make no
country their home and fear no king, and they differ


172


FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


not from the birds that are hungry in the morning and
full at eventide.” Then his son said to him : “ 0 my
father, thou hast spoken true in what thou hast said,
but thou’hast stitched together, not ripped open. So
explain to me how I may gather in a harvest, and from
which end the shoulder is to be eaten.” Said he : “0
my son, bestirring one’s self is the door to it, and
alacrity its array, and sharpness of wit its lamp, and
pertness its weapon ; be thou more on the move than
the Qutrub, and travel swifter than the locust, be
brisker than the gazelle by moonlight, and more
aggressive than the tiger-wolf, rub the fire-shaft of thy
fortune by thy effort, and knock at the door of thy
sustenance by thy activity, cross every mountain-pass
and dive into every deep, forage over every pasture-
ground and sink thy bucket into every fountain, weary
not of begging, and be not loath of exertion, for it was
written on the staff of our elder Shs&n : ‘ He gets, who
begs, he who roves, makes sure of his loaves.’ But
beware of sloth, for it is a presage of calamities and the
garb of the indigent, the key of poverty and the germ
of affliction, the token of weakness and folly, and the
habit of the helpless, the dependent. He gathers no
honey who has chosen laziness, nor fills he his palm
who deems ease a smooth bed. So step boldly forward,
though it be against the lion, for daringness of the soul
gives speech to the tongue and freedom of motion to the
rein, and by it eminence is reached and affluence
obtained, even as cowardice is the twin of sluggishness,
and the cause of failure, and a hindrance to action, and
a disappointment to hope. Therefore it is said in the
proverb: ‘ One who dares, fares well, he who fears, will


FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


173


fail.’ Sally then forth, my son, with the earliness of
the raven, and the boldness of the lion, and the prudence
of the chameleon, and the cunning of the wolf, and the
greed of the pig, and the nimbleness of the gazelle, and
the craftiness of the fox, and the patience of the camel,
and the blandishments of the cat, and the diversity of
colours of the humming-bird. Beguile by the gilding
of thy tongue and deceive by the sorcery of thy
eloquence ; inquire after the state of a market before
bringing thy goods to it, and coax the teat before
milking ; ask the travellers before visiting a pasture-
ground, and make it smooth for thy side, before thou
liest down ; sharpen thy sight for taking omen from
the flight of birds, and train thy perception for drawing
inferences ; for he who is right in reading characters
will have the laugh for a long time, while the prcv of
him, who errs in his guess, will be tardy. Make, my
son, thy burden light, and little thy dalliance, be
averse to a repeated draught and content with a drizzle
instead of a downpour, extol the value of the paltry and
be thankful for a trifle, be not disheartened at a refusal,
nor deem it far from possible that the rock should ooze,
and despair not of the mercy of Allah, for none
despaireth of Allah’s mercy but the faithless. And if
thou have to choose between a mite ready at hand, and
a pearl promised thee, incline to the ready, and prefer
the day that is to the morrow that is to be ; for delay
leads to losses, and intentions are subject to change,
and promises are prone to be postponed, and between
them and their fulfilment lie mountains, ay, what
mountains! Display then the patience of men of
purpose, and the forbearance of the considerate, shun


174


FOBTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


the harshness of one who exceeds hounds, and assume
the habits of a cheerful disposition, keep tight the
strings of thy purse, and blend lavishness with par¬
simony, hold not thy hand tied to thy neck, nor open
it to its full extent. And when a country disagrees
with thee, or a trouble has befallen thee therein, cut off
thy hope from it and speed away from it thy camel,
for the best of countries is that which betters thy state,
and deem not departure burdensome nor hate removal,
for the chiefs of our sect, and the elders of our tribe
have agreed thereon, that motion is a blessing and the
change of places like a promissory note, whereas they
blame him who holds that peregrination is a bore and
migration an infliction, and they say that it is an excuse
of those who are contented with a paltry pittance and
gratified with poor fruit and bad measure. But if
thou have resolved on journeying abroad, and got ready
for it thy staff and thy wallet, make choice of a helpful
companion, ere thou settest out, for the neighbour before
the house, and the fellow-traveller before wayfaring.

There is, my son, a bequest for thee, such as none afore was
bequeathed yet,

One bright and fraught with the essence of choice rules and
maxims that guide aright.

I selected them as a counseller sincere and earnest in his advice,

So act according to what I teach, as a wise and well-conducted
wight,

That admiringly all people say: ‘ This in truth is yonder lion’s
whelp.’ ”

Said he : “0 my son, I have given thee my last behest
and made it right complete. Now, if thou follow it,
well done ! but if thou trespass against it, out upon
thee ! And may Allah be my substitute with thee, and


FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.


175


I trust thou wilt not belie what I think of thee.” Then
his son said to him : “0 my father, may thy throne he
never brought low, nor thy bier uplifted. Thou hast
indeed spoken true, and taught aright, and bestowed on
me that which never yet father has bestowed on son,
and if I be spared after thee, but may I never taste thy
loss, I will forsooth mould my manners after thy
manners, the excellent, and follow thy traces, the
illustrious, so that it may be said how like is this night
to yesterday, and the morning cloud ta the cloud of
even.” Thereupon Abu Zayd rejoiced at his answer
and smiled, and said : “ He who resembles his father,
wrongs not” (i.e., his mother’s fair fame).

Said Al Harith, son of Hammfun : It has come to
my knowledge that when the sons of Susan heard these
beautiful mandates, they prized them above the man¬
dates of Lokman, and learnt them by heart, as the
mother of the Koran is leanit, so that they reckon them
to this time the best that they can teach their children,,
and more profitable to them than a gift of gold.


THE FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY, CALLED “OF
BASRA.”

This last and crowning piece of Hariri’s work is remarkable in two
directions, which both bring it in close relation to the forty-eighth.
In the latter the author extolled in eloquent strains the quarter of
Basra, which was inhabited by him ; here he out-soars the highest
flights of his oratory in a magnificent encomium of his native town
itself. But the present Assombly is still more admirable as a
counter-part of that of the Bend Ilarum with regard to the hero of
the romanco, who, having given there an account of an incident,
which ominously inaugurated his questionable career, is now repre¬
sented as redeeming, under the touch of divine grace, his life of


176


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


venturesome expedients, frequently bordering on crime, by sincere
repentance and transports of pure and unremitting devotion.

A1 Harith, son of Hammam, related : 1 was one day
wrapped up in sadness, whose brunt was fierce, and
whose impress was visible in me, and as I had heard
that resorting to the assemblies of invocation removes
all veils from man’s thought, I saw for the putting out
of the live coal within me, naught but making for the
cathedral mosque of Basra, whose chairs were at that
time well filled, whose fountains were frequented, so
that the flowers of speech might be culled in its meads,
and the whir of pens was to be heard in its precincts.
So I sped thither without delay and without swerving
to the right or left, and when I had set foot on its
gravel and got sight of its uttermost end, I espied a
man in out-worn tatters upon an elevated stone, round
whom throngs were crowded of uncounted number, and
not engaged in child’s work. Therefore I hasted in
his direction and sought access to him, hoping to find
with him the cure of my disease, and I ceased not
shifting places, heedless of knocks and blows, until I
was seated opposite to him, where I was safe of mis¬
taking him, when, lo, it was our Shaykh the Seruji, no
doubt in him, nor any disguise to conceal him. Then
at his sight my grief subsided, and the hosts of my
cares were scattered. But when he perceived me and
glanced at the place where I was sitting, he said : “0
ye people of Basra ! may Allah keep and guard you,
and strengthen your piety ; how far spread is the
fragrance of your fame, and how surpassing are the
virtues that distinguish you ; your country is the most
eminent of countries in purity, the richest of them in


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


177


natural gifts, the widest in expanse, and the most fertile
in pasture-grounds ; she boasts over them the cor-
rectest kiblah, the broadest stream, the greatest number
of rivers and date-palms, the most exquisite beauty in
detail and aggregate, being the gateway to the sacred
land and fronting the door (of the Ka'beh) and the
station (of Abraham), one of the two wings of the
world, and a city founded on the fear of Allah, that
never was defiled by flames of the fire, whose people
never circumambulated idols, and prostrated themselves
on her ground to none but the Merciful ; possessed of
shrines much visited and of mosques thronged with
worshippers, of schools far celebrated, and of tombs
resorted to by pilgrims, of monuments revered and
enclosed precincts. In it meet the ships and the
saddle-beasts, the fish and the lizards, the camel-driver
and the sailor, the hunter and the tiller, the harpooner
and the lancer, the herd and the swimmer, and to it
belongs the spectacle of the tide that rises and the tide
that ebbs. But as for you, ye are of those whose
excellencies not two contest, no enemy gainsays. Your
community are the most obedient lieges to their Lord,
and the most grateful for benefits bestowed on them.
Your ascetic is the most devout of mankind, and the
brightest light on the road of truth ; your scholar the
most learned of all ages, and the supreme authority for
all times, and from amongst you came forth he who
created and laid down the lore of grammar, and he who
devised the measures of poetry, and there is no boast of
man, but to you belongs the foremost hand in it, and
the winning arrow ; there is no glory, but ye are the
most worthy of it, and the most deserving. Withal ye
VOL. ir. 12


178


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


have Muezzins far more than the people of any town,
and in worship ye observe the nicest rules, and from
you pattern is taken in performing the ceremonies of
'Arafat, and became known the morning bounty in
the sacred month, for when the slumbers are still and
the sleeper is soundly asleep, there is heard amongst
you a recitation that rouses the somnolent, and rejoices
the wakeful, and the smile of morning dawns not, nor
breaks forth its light in season hot or cold, but the
prayer-call summons you with a murmur, like the
murmur of the wind on the sea-waves. Wherefore
Tradition has disclosed concerning you, and the
Prophet, be peace upon him, has declared aforehand
that your murmur in the mornings would be. like the
murmur of the bees in the deserts ; honour then to you
for the prediction of the chosen one, and hail to your
city, though it be effaced and nought remain of it but
an outline.” Then he checked his tongue and put an
end to his speech, so that their eyes glanced at him, and
he was suspected of falling short, nay, taunted with
inability to proceed, but he sighed the sigh of him who
is dragged to execution, or whom a lion’s claws have
clutched, when he said: “As for you, 0 people of
Basra, there is none among you but he is worthy of
renown alike for learning and liberality ■ but as for me,
he who knows me—well, I am such, and the worst of
acquaintances is he who injures thee ; hut to one who
knows me not, I will now disclose truly my character.
It is I, who have fared in Nejd and Tihameh, in Yemen
and Syria, in the desert and the sea, in deepest night
and early morning. In Seruj I was reared, and in
the saddle I got my training. Forsooth, I have entered


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


179


straits, and opened roads that were closed, and witnessed
frays, and soothed tempers, and curbed the restive and
pressed nostrils in the dust, and melted the frozen, and
softened rocks. Ask of me the East and the West, the
hoofs (of camels) and (their) humps, assemblies and
hosts, tribes and squadrons, and gather clear tidings of
me from the reporters of traditions and the story-tellers
at night-talks, from the drivers of caravans, and the
sharp-sighted diviners, that ye may know how many
mountain-passes I have threaded and veils I have rent,
how many perils 1 have braved and fights I have
fought, how often I have beguiled the minds of men,
and devised novelties and snatched opportunities, and
made lions my prey, how many a high-flown I have
left prone, how many a hidden one I have brought out
by my spells, how many a flint I have ground until it
split, and made spring its sweet water by my wiles.
But there has passed what has passed, while the bough
was fresh and the temple raven-haired, and the raiment
of youth yet new ; whereas now the skin has withered,
the straight grown crooked, the dark night waxed light,
and naught remains but repentance, if it avail, and to
patch up the rent that has widened. Now, I had been
apprised by reports well supported, and by traditions
authenticated, that on every day a glance from Allah,
be He exalted, falls upon you, and whereas all men’s
weapons are of iron, your weapons consist in prayers,
and the profession of one God. So I repaired to you,
jading my saddle-beasts, and travelling from station to
station, until I stood in this place before you, though
thereby no obligation be laid upon you, since I sped not
hither but for my own need, and toiled not but for my

12—2


180


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


own tranquillity, and I crave not your gifts, but bog for
your prayers, nor ask I for your wealth, but solicit
your supplication. Pray then to Allah, may lie be
exalted, to accord me grace for repentance and readi¬
ness for my return to Him, for He is the Most High in
dignity and answers prayers, and He it is who accepts
penitence from His servants and forgives transgressions.

“Allah’s forgiveness I crave for sins that, woe me ! I have wantonly
committed.

How oft I hava plunged in seas of error, and morn and eve walked
in paths of folly,

How oft I have followed passion's promptings, been arrogant,
greedy and deceitful,

, How oft I have spurned the curb in rushing headlong and un¬
checked to fell rebellion,

How oft I have reached the bounds of trespass, and never ceased
from careering onwards.

Would that I had been afore forgotten, and never gatherod what,
alas, I gathered,

Eor better far death to him who sinneth, than to pursue such a
course as I sped!

But, 0 my Lord, grant to me forgiveness: Thy Mercy is greater
than my trespass.”

Said the narrator: Forthwith the congregation com¬
menced to aid him with their prayer, while he turned
his face heavenward, until his eyelids brimmed with
tears and his agitation became conspicuous, when lie
cried out: “Allah is greatest! the sign of acceptance
has appeared and the veil of doubt is removed. May
ye then, 0 folks of dear Basra, be rewarded with the
reward of Him who guides out of perplexity.” Then
there remained none among the people wlm rejoiced
not in his joy, doling out to him what he had ready at
hand. He accepted the bestowal of their bounty, and
began to expatiate in thanks to them, whereupon he


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


181


descended from the stone and wended towards the
river hank. But I followed in his wake, to where avc
found ourselves alone and were safe of being spied and
intermeddled with. Then I said to him : This time
thou hast done marvels, but what is thy view as to
repentance ?” Said he : “I swear by Him who knows
all hidden things and forgives transgressions, my case
is indeed a mfracle and the prayers of thy fellow-people
have been answered.” I replied: u Enlighten me more,
so may Allah grant thee more of welfare !” Said he :
“ Truly, I had stood before them in the stead of a
doubter, a deceiver, and, lo, I have turned from them
with the heart of the contrite, the devout. Weal then
to him to whom they incline their hearts, and woe
to him on whom they call down their imprecations.”
Thereupon he bade me farewell, and went away, leaving
me in unrest, so that I. ceased not tormenting mv
thoughts on his account, and looking out for means of
testing the truth of what he had stated. But every
time I sniffed for tidings of him from wayfarers and
roamers in foreign lands, I was like one who talks to
dumb brutes, or hails a mute rock, until after a length
of time and reaching the pitch of anguish, I met with
some travellers returning from a journey, to whom I
said: “ Is there any rare news ?" Quoth they :
“ Indeed, we have news rarer than the 'Anka and more
marvellous than the sight of Zarkfi.” Bo I asked them
for explanation of what they had said, and that they
would mete to me what had been meted to them. Then
they told me that they had made a halt at Seruj, after
the wild asses had left it, and had seen there its
renowned Abu Zayd, who had donned the wool cloth,


182


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY,


and was leading the rows of the praying ami had
become a famous devotee. Said I to them : £l Mean ye
him of the Assemblies ?” Quoth they : “ 'i ea, him
now of all miraculous endowments.” Forthwith longing-
urged me towards him, for I saw in him an opportunity
not to be lost. So I set out in all readiness and made
for him full earnestly, until I alighted at his mosque
and the place of his worship, when, lo, he had discarded
the society of his associates, and stood upright in his
prayer-niche, Wearing a cloak stitched together with a
tooth-pick, and a patched wrapper. So 1 was struck
with awe of him, like one who has broken in upon
lions, and found him amongst those whose token is the
trace of prostration in their faces, and when he had told
his rosary, he greeted me with his forefinger without
uttering a word of talk, nor asking for tidings old or
new. Then he proceeded with his recitation from the
Koran, and left me wondering at his devotion, and
envying those whom Allah leads aright amongst his
servants, and he desisted not from adoration and
humiliation, from prostrating himself and bowing down,
from self-abasement and contrition, until he had com¬
pleted the performance of the five prayers, and to-dav
had become yesterday, when he betook himself with me
to his abode, and gave me a share in his loaf and olive-
oil- Thereupon he rose to enter his Oratory, and
remained alone in converse with his Lord, until, when
the morn shone forth, and the wakeful worshipper was
entitled to his reward, he followed up his vigil with
prayers of praise. Then only he reclined in the posture
of the seeker of repose, and began to chaunt with an
impressive voice :


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY .


183


“ Good-bye, my soul, to memories

of vernal camps, and tryste therein,
And fond farewell to traveler fair,
yea, bid good-bye to them for aye.
Bewail the time that passed away,

when thou hast blackened pages bright,
And never ceased to steep thyself
in deeds of shame and heinousness.

How oft the night was spent by thee
in sins that none afore has dared,

From lust, indulged without restraint
on wanton couch, in chamber still.

How often spedst thou on thy steps *
to unheard-of depravity,

And brokest repentance, slowly vowed,
in swift forgetting sport and play;

How often madest thou bold, 0 slave,
against the Lord of heavens high,

Not heeding Him and proving false,
ay, false to thy pretended faith ;

How often flungst thou, liko a shoe
outworn, aside His stern command,
Ungrateful for His benefits

and reckless of His tardy wrath ;

How often, running pleasure's course,
and glibly speaking lies prepense,

Wast thou neglecting carelessly
the duties of His covenant.

So don the garb of penitence,
and shower tears of blood, before
Thy foot commits a fatal slip,
before thy fall has come to pass;
Humbly confess thy sins and Hy
for refuge where the guilty flies ;

Kosist thy lewd propensities
and turn from them with purpose firm.
How long in thoughtlessness and sloth
wilt thou let drift life's better part,

To what biings loss as only gain,
and never check'st thy mad career.
Pereeivost thou not the mingled hue
that streaks with hoary lines thy hoad,


184


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


Yet he whose ringlets blend with grey
is warned of his approaching death.

Woe thee, my soul, redemption seek,
obey, be true, be well advised,

Take warning from those gone before,
in generations passed away,

And fear the stealing on of fate,
be wary, lest thou be deceived.

Walk in the path of rectitude,

for swift, remember, comes thy doom:
To-morrow will thy dwelling be
the bottom of a lonely grave ;

Alas, that house of sore dismay,
that station, waste, disconsolate,

That goal of pilgrims of long syne,
of countless pilgrims yet to come ;

A house whose inmate will be seen
encompassed, after ample space,

Within the bond of cubits three,
to hold him in their narrow grip.

Who there alights, it matters not
if he a wit be, or a fool,

If poor, or if possessed of all
the riches of a Tobba' king.

And after it the roll-call comes,

that musters timid wight, and bold,

And teacher and disciple, and
the ruler and the ruled alike.

Then 0 the bliss of him that fears
his Lord, and earns the thrall’s reward,

Safe from the dread account and from
the terrors of that awful day.

But 0 the loss of those who have

sinned and transgressed beyond all bounds,
And kindled discord’s blazing fire,
for sake of worldly goods and joys.

0 Thou, in whom my trust is placed,
how grows my fear with every day,

For all the slips and falls that fill
my ill-spent life with guilt and crime.

But, Lord, forgive Thy erring slave,
yield mercy to his welling tears,


FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.


185


For the most Merciful art Thou,

and Best to whom are prayers raised.”

Said A1 Harith, son of Hammam : Thus he ceased not
repeating these words in a low voice and mingling
them with sobs and sighs, until I wept by reason of
the weeping of his eyne, as I had wept heretofore anent
him. Then he sallied forth to his mosque, cleansed by
his night-wake, and I went in his track, and prayed
with those who prayed behind him, and when the
people present dispersed and separated hither and
thither, he took to muttering his lessons and casting
his day in the mould of his yesterday, while he wailed
with the wailing of a bereft mother, and wept as not
Jacob wept, so that I saw clearly that he had joined the
seven saints, and that his heart was imbued with the
love of seclusion. So I formed within me the resolution
to depart and to leave him all by himself in this state.
Then it was as if he had read my purpose or had
revealed to him that which I kept concealed, for he
sighed like one grief-stricken, after which he quoted
(from the Koran): “If thou make a resolution, put
thy trust in Allah.” Thereupon I testified to the
truthfulness of my informants, and knew for certain
that in our dispensation inspired ones are found. So I
went nigh to him, to put my hand in his, and said :
“ G-ive me thy bequest, 0 servant sincere of counsel,”
when he said : “ Keep death before thy eye, and this is
the parting between me and thee.” With this he bade
me farewell, while the tears streamed from the corners
of my eyes, and my sighs rose from within my entrails,
this being the last of our meetings.


NOTES TO THE ASSEMBLIES OF HARIRI.


THE TWENTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.

Hariri himself accompanies this Assembly with a short com¬
mentary ou the idioms and Arabic proverbs occurring in it, and his
explanations included amongst the following notes are marked with

(H.).

In the prime of my life. —Arabic fi rayyiqi zamdni, also nViq, which
means, in the beginning or early part of it. Another spelling of the
word is raiq, without tashdid.—(H.)

The people of the hair-tents.—Wabar means originally “camel-hair,”
or as the Arabic lexicographers put it, “that which in the camel
corresponds to the wool of the sheep, and is opposed to madar , a
clod of clay or mud. Hence ahlu J l wabar designates the dwellers in
tents made of a tissue of camel-hair pitched in the desert, and ahlu
I-madar> the dwellers within mud-walls, the inhabitants of villages
and towns.” By a still bolder metaphor, wabar and madar are used
for those dwelling-places themselves, as in the phrase : <c the like of
this I have not seen in desert or town.”

So that I might take after the bent of their forbidding (lofty) souls , i.e.,
that I might follow their example. The verbal noun “ taking ” (here
translated by bent) is in Arabic ahz or ihz. —(H.).

A string of the groaning. — Al-hajmah (exclusively applied to camels)
is a drove of about a hundred (H.). According to other commentators
it is from forty to a hundred, or between ninety and a hundred, while
a number beyond this is called hunaidah.

A flock of the bleating.—As-sallah is a herd of sheep (H.). As to
“the groaning” and “the bleating,” Hariri quotes the saying: Ma
la-hu raghiyatun wa ta ziighiyatun, for “ he has neither camel nor
sheep.”

Stead-holders of kings , £e., they took the places of kings in their
absence (H.). liidf pi. ardaf, is one who rides behind another on


188


NOTES.


the same beast, hence, metaphorically, one next in rank, a successor,
or substitute, one who sits at the right hand of the king, a waztr or
minister, and ricldfah in pre-Mohammedan times corresponds to the
mizdrah , or office of wazir in Islam. The phrase means that each of
them was worthy of and fit for such dignity.

“ Sons of saws ’’ men who owed their fame to their choice sayings,
eloquent speakers, to use the paraphrase of Hariri, who adds : “ It is
said of a great orator, he is a son of speeches.”

No arrow struck my (smooth) rock, a proverbial expression for lt no
slander was suffered to injure my fair fame.”

Or throw the halter over her hump , Le., allow her to wander and
graze where she pleased.

So I sprang upon a swift-paced steed .—Tadassur is synonymous
with wusub, to jump or leap upon the back of the horse, and mihzar
or mahzir, fleet of course, is taken from hazr, running with a high
step.—(H.)

Expiating every copse and treeless spot.—Igtird = tatabhi, following
up, travelling from one place to another; shajrd’, a place grown
over with trees, mardcV , one deprived of vegetation. Hence, amrad ,
hairless in the face, beardless.—(H.)

When the crier calls to prayer and salvation , in Arabic haiala , a verb
formed from the initial words of the Muezzin’s call, hayya c ald
’l-saldti , hcuyya \da ’l-faldh . The infinitive is hai'alah, and similar
formations are hailalah , saying Id ildha ilia ’ lldhu , there is no God
but the God; liamclalah , saying al-hamclu li ’ lldhi , praise is due to
God; hauqalah , saying Id haula wa la quwioata illd hi ’ lldhi , there is
no power and no strength save in God; see basmalah , saying bVsmi
’lldhi, in the name of God; hasbalah , saying hasbund ’lldhu, God is
our sufficiency; sabhalah , saying subhdna ’lldhi, adoration be God’s ;
jalafah saying ju iltu fiddka , may I be made thy ransom.

Jnd Us going to the watering-place found no return , i.e., did not
obtain its object, as animals return from the water only after having
quenched their thirst.

Until the heat waxed blinding , lit., until there came the time of the
little blind one’s stroke or knock, a most idiomatical expression
which sorely taxes the ingenuity of the interpreters. Grammatically
c umaiy is the diminutive of amd, blind, and the K&mfis says that it
means by itself the noonday heat, in which case the effect would


NOTES.


IS!)


stand for the cause, the blind for the blinding. Other explanations
are (1) that'Uraay is the name of a famous depredator, who used to
strike by his inroads upon people at mid-day, when they were too
languid to offer much resistance. (2) That the word is applied to
the young of the gazelle, which by the excess of the heat becomes
frantic, and butts at or knocks against anything near it. In the
Arabic Dictionary Muhit, I find the statement that in poetry the
form sttlcktdit e umi/in (pi. of a aid) is used, the stroke or knock of the
blind, either with the same reference to the gazelle, or to people
blinded by the heat and groping their way by knocking their sticks
on the ground. I concludo this note, Arabic fashion, with “Uod
knows best.”

Would hare made Ghaildn oblivious of Mat yah .—Ohailnn was a
renowned poet of the Bedouin Arabs, whose nickname zri ’l-nnamah,
“the ono with the rope,” was given to him by Maiya or JMaiyah,
daughter of Kays, when he first saw her, carrying a rope on his
shoulder, and asked lior for a draught of water to drink, whereupon
she said, “ 0 thou with the rope,” which simple words, falling from
lovely lips, forthwith enslaved him for life.

Longer than the shadow of a lance .—A long day is compared with
the shadow of a lance, which by the Arabs is considered as the
longest thrown by the setting sun, probably on account of its accom¬
panying slenderness, as a short day is likened to the claw (lit.,
thumb) of the Kata bird. A poet, quoted in Hariri’s commentary,
says: “ Many a day, like the shadow of the lance, has been shortened
for us by the blood of the wine-bag and striking tint strings of
lutes.”

Hotter than the tears of the bereft mother .—It is said that the tear of
grief is hot, and the tear of joy is cool, whence the prayer: “ May
Allah cool his eye and the imprecation: “ May Allah heat his eye,”
for : May He make him shed tears of joy or of sorrow respectively.

—(H.)

Shahb would //rip me. —Shaub, a diptotc, not taking the art icle,
is a name of death, moaning the “ Separator.”

My botm-companion a booklet— The Arabic jir.tlzah, a scrap, is used
both for scrolls, in which beggars state their case, to enlist the
sympathy of the charitable, and leaves of paper containing informa¬
tion. Adopting the latter moaning, I translate it by booklet, in


190


NOTES.


accordance with the saying of an Arabic poet, that a book is the
best companion for a man to while away the time, as the saddle of a
fleet horse is the best resort for him to make him independent of
space.

For some end Kosayr mutilated his nose. —Kosayr bin Sa'cl was a
freedman of the King of Irak Jathimet al Abrash, and after his
master had been treacherously murdered by Queen Zebba, resolved
to revenge his death on her. This he accomplished by having the
tip of his nose cut off by his master’s nephew e Amr, pretending that
the latter had done so because he suspected him of complicity in
the betrayal of Jathimet, and thereby gaining her confidence, which
soon procured him an opportunity of putting his purpose into
execution. Abu Zayd means that Harith must have a good reason
for his lonely journey in the desert during the noonday heat.

In the two months when the camels ail from thirst , lit., the two
months of the thirst-stricken camel, meaning the hottest summer
months, as we would say the dog-days, when the skin of camels and
sheep dries up in consequence of their excessive- thirst.

A night such as Ndbighah sings of alluding to the following line of
this poet: “ I passed a night as though one of the spotted snakes
had assailed me, the poison of whose fangs is piercing.”

Like AsJiab, a servant of the Khalif 'Othman, proverbial amongst
the Arabs for his covetousness, which according to his own con¬
fession was surpassed only by that of his equally proverbial sheep.
The latter had mounted on his roof, and on seeing a rainbow took
it for a rope of the plant gatt (apparently a favourite dainty with
sheep), jumped at it and broke its neck.

Donning the leopard's skin , a proverbial expression for insolent and
bold, the leopard (namir) being considered as the boldest of animals
and the least patient of injury. Hence the verb tanammara is
derived, he became like a leopard.—(H.)

Of the two good things , allusion to Koran, ix. 52.

One woe is lighter to bear than two 3 meaning that it is easier for
Harith to put up with the loss of his horse than to lose both horse
and camel together.

After hap and mishap. —Thus I translate, in order to maintain the
alliteration of the original, the words bada ’llataiyd wa IlaU 3 which
t is impossible to render literally. Allataiyd is the diminutive of


NOTES.


101


allaU, fem. of the relative pronoun allazi. Their idiomatical import
in this place is, according to Hariri’s own commentary, either to
serve as synonyms of calamity ( ddJdyah <), or to signify misfortunes
small and great.


THE TWENTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.

Li accordance uith tradition , alluding to the saying of Mohammed
that he who bathes before Friday prayers will have his sins
remitted.

Seeking in the sap of my youth help against the glamours of the mirage ,
i.e ., finding in the freshness and vigour of youth a safeguard against
the allurements of sensual pleasure, which are deceptive as the mrdb,
or resemblance of water in the desert. With regard to this latter
word, that which I translate with “ sap ” is in the original mu', water,
applied to the face in the sense of brightness and beauty, to youth
in the sense of sprightliness and energy.

JFhen I was entitled to speak of my home , lit., I was master of the
expression 'hall, which in Arabic is equivalent to, I have or possess.
It differs from the synonyms ladaiya or mail, “ I have with me,” by
meaning both “I have with mo” and “at home,” which latter
signification justifies the above rendering.

And offer the best of cattle, for “ a fattened camel,” in allusion to a
tradition handed down by IbnOmar, according to which Mohammed
said : He who has taken on a Friday the bath of purification is as
though he had offered a fattened camel (badanah).

People ceased not to enter in troops into the faith of Allah , allusion to
Koran, ex. 2, “ And thou seest men entering the religion of Allah
by troops/’ The following expression, “ singly and in pairs,” also
occurs in the sacred book, xxxiv. 45, whore, however, instead of
azwdjan (in pairs), the expression mamd , “two by two,” is used.

And the time had come when a person is equal to his shadow, indicating
the time shortly after noon, when the prayer of zuhr is to be per¬
formed, in accordance with the tradition: “ Say the prayer of zuhr,
when thy shadow is like thyself.”

In the wake of his acolytes (k half a 'usbati-hi ).—The word usbah,
troop, is explained by Sherishi “ the company of the innazzins


192


NOTES.


When he gave blessing by waving his right ha.nd , instead of uttering
the words saldmun c alaikum , a practice observed by preachers,
following the doctrine of Ash-ShafTi, to which Hariri himself
adhered.

A guide to the right road for the black hued and the red , i.e., for the
Arabs and the nations unable to speak Arabic, and therefore called
'Ajam, dumb, as the Persians, Greeks, Europeans in general. They
are respectively named black and red, on account of their com¬
plexion, or the colour of their hair.

Of the angel and the frightfulness of his questioning , allusion to the
angels Munkar ai\d Nakir, said to visit the dead in their graves and
to interrogate them as to their belief in the Prophet and his
religion.

Hoio many roadmarks has it effaced , etc., lit., how often has it
effaced a roadmark, but the renderings given seem more in accord¬
ance with the English idiom.

On destroying the songster and the listener to the song , in Arabic
al-musmT wa J s-sdmi\ the one who makes listen to and delights by
his melodies (mutrib), and the listener delighted thereby ( tarib ).

It bestows no riches but to show aversion and to reverse your hopes, in
Arabic Id mawwala illd mdla wa dkasa ’ al-dmdla , the verb nulla
having with the preposition ild the meaning “ he inclined towards,
was favourable,” with the preposition 'aid, he was biassed against
and proved obnoxious. This passage is full of assonances and
alliterations, for the sake of which I would translate in the following
sentences kalama ’l-ausdla , to cut the limbs, somewhat freely by “to
harm,” and la'uma, to stint, by “ to harass.”

And Sirdt your path. —The word Sirdt, which in common parlance
means road, is in the Koran generally accompanied by the adjec¬
tive mustaqim , the straight or right road, that is, the teaching of
Mohammed or Islam. In Sura xxxvii. 23, however, the ex¬
pression occurs: “guide them to the road of hell” (ild sirdt i
’ 1-jaMmi ), and this has probably given rise to the signification in
which the word is used in the traditions and theological writings as
the bridge across the infernal fire, which is described as finer than a
hair and sharper than a sword. The righteous will pass over it
with the swiftness of the lightning, but the wicked will soon miss
their footing and will fall into the fire of hell.


NOTES.


193"

And the plain your goal, or resorting place, in Arabic mt’s-sdhirain
maunduhrm , taken from Koran, lxxix. 14, where as-sdhimh is
explained as the renewed expanse of the earth, on which the
gathering of mankind on the day of judgment takes place, or as the
surface of the earth, to which they are called by the blast of
resurrection from their graves beneath it. This name, which means
,£ the wakeful,” is given to the earth, because it watches over
vegetation day and night, and it is also one of the names of hell,
because its inhabitants never close their eyes in sleep.

Air not the. ferrors of doomsday lying in ambush for you ? — At-jdnmuh
means originally an overwhelming calamity, from tamma-’lmd’, the
water has overflowed, and is, generally with the adjective al-knhrd,

“ the great,” applied to resurrection, as in verse 34 of the Sura just
quoted. Another Koranic expression is alAeutumuh , the crushing,
applied to hell in Sura civ. 4, 5, where it is said that the back¬
biter shall be flung into it. Tn the text it is called £< the firmly
locked,” because no escape from it is possible.

By the fulfilment of fate or befalling of fatality, i.e., the inevitabloness
of death. De Sacy, in his commentary, ([notes to this passage the
following lines of Mutenebbi :

“There is no help for man of that conch where once placed he never
tosses from side to side ;

Thereon he forgets, what erewhile has enraptured him, and the bitterness
that death has made him to taste.

We are the sons of the dead, why then loathe the draught, that needs
must be drained i

We stint to Time our souls, though they be his due,

For these souls arc air of his air, and those bodies are dust of his dust ;

If the lover bethought himself of what the end will be of the beauty
that entrances him, it would not entrance him.

Yet when we see the bursting forth of the rising sun, our minds doubt
not of his setting.

The shepherd in his ignorance dies, as surely as Galen with his leeehcraft.

Nay, at times he will out-live him, and surpass him in the safeness of
ins flock.”

A bride without a spot, implying that the address was composed of
words devoid of dotted letters, as in the feminine termination S the
diacritical points are not considered to be inherent in the letter, but
merely an accidental addition, introduced for the sake of euphony
in the case of a vowel following.

And {the moment) for dispersing on the earth had come y allusion to

VOL. II. 13


194


NOTES.


Koran, lxii. 10 : “And when the prayer is ended disperse yourselves
abroad and go in quest of the bounties of God, and often remember
God.”

In the rank of Al Fuxail, a celebrated devotee and ascetic in the
days of Harun ar Reshid, who according to some authorities was
bom at Samarcand, the scene of the present Assembly, and whose
life is to be found in Ibn Khallikan, i. 580.


THE TWENTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.

The country of Wasit. —A town midway between Kufa and Basra,
whence its name, or rather two towns, on either bank of the Tigris,
and joined by a pontoon-bridge. The old town on the eastern bank
was mostly inhabited by the chiefs of the surrounding villages.
Wasit proper, on the western side of the Tigris, was founded by Al
Hajjdj, who built there a cathedral mosque and a castle, which
became after him the seat of the Governors of Trfik. A proverb
says, “ Thou art heedless as if thou wert a Wasiti,” the origin of
which is told as follows: Al Hajjaj pressed the people into his
service to build the new city, so that many fled and passed the
night amongst the poor in the mosques of neighbouring towns.
His attendants went in pursuit of them, and called out on entering
such places, “ Halloo ! 0 man of Wasit,” and whoever was taken by
surprise and raised his head was seized and carried off.

Not paying overmuch for rent , in Arabic lam undfis ft ujratin , which
phrase, however, admits also of the translation, not stinting its
rent. Another reading is, lam undgish fi ujratin, not being close in
my reckoning as to rent. The circumstances in which Harith finds
himself make the above rendering more probable.

Nor thy adversary keep on foot. —The word zidd, which is used both
as singular and plural, occurs in the sense of enemy, Koran, xix. 85:
“ Those gods (taken beside God) will disavow their worship and will
become their enemies.”

The one of full-moon face and of pearly hue , meaning the loaf or
cake of white bread, whose further description in the following lines
scarcely calls for explanation in all its details. Of pure root , for
instance, refers to the wheat, from which it is made; who was


NOTES.


195


imprisoned and set free, to the process of grinding the corn in the
ifiilk; who was suckled and weaned, to the water mixed with the flour
to make it into dough, and kept from it while being kneaded.

And exchange for him the pregnant that impregnates, etc., meaning
flint and steel, neither of which produces by itself the spark, but
requires the co-operation of the other, so that both attributes apply
to either of them. The following antithetical expressions and
metaphors, as referring to the flint-stone and the spark, are equally
self-evident as those employed in the description of the loaf. It
must, of course, be remembered that A1 Harith was not possessed
of the clue, and might therefore well be puzzled by the seeming
contradictions.

Amongst the rows of market shops, in Arabic naz&'ida 5 l-Jjmvdnit,
where naz/Cid is the pi. of nazid, afa'il (agent), in the sense of fa'41
(patient), “what is placed in rows,” or “piled up.” I refer it to
the market-shops themselves, but it may also apply to their piled-up
goods.

On his homeward way. —This translation is taken from De Sacy’s
commentary, which explains ratodh, as “returning after going,”
while Sherlshi takes it, in my opinion less satisfactorily, in its
usual sense of “evening.”

I knew that this was of Sertiji growth, the feminine of the adjective
of relation, indicating a thing appertaining to or proceeding from
the Seruji; for, “ I knew that it was a trick of Abft Zayd’s.”

And makes come forth the fruit from their sheaths, allusion to Koran,
xli. 47 : “No fruit cometh forth from its coverings, neither does any
female conceive nor is she delivered, but with His knowledge.”

And which of the twain was thy state ? lit., upon which of thy two
descriptions didst thou fly from home, openly or secretly, well
provided for or deprived of means, etc. ?

How to procure a loan or gift, in Arabic qarz, that for which an
equivalent or compensation is returned, and farz, that which requires
no compensation or return.

How then am I to make union between the neck-ring (ghull, a ring of
iron or leather round the neck of a captive, figuratively for a
shrewish wife) ami an empty purse (qull, scarcity, poverty) 'l Zull, son
of Zull, in the next clause, is a proverbial expression, for an obscure
son of an obscure father. Being related to the root zall, to err, go

13—2


198


NOTES .


THE THIRTIETH ASSEMBLY.

Bestriding the back of [a steed like] Ibnu ’n-nadmeh. —The Beyrout
edition of the Assemblies says in a note that Ibnn ’n-na'&meh [son
of the young ostrich] was the name of a celebrated horse belonging
to A1 Haris bin 'Abbad. According to other authorities, it means
a generous horse in general, the road, the sole of the foot, the leg,
and human sweat, and Hariri may have left purposely to his
readers the choice between these various interpretations. Eor the
expression, “with the swiftness of the ostrich,” comp. Ar. Prov.,
ii. 151.

And garlanded [coronated] with begging-baskets , in Arabic muhallal ,
from ikM, a crown, i.e., surrounded with a row of ornamental knobs,
here formed by the begging-baskets, as the draperies of the vestibule
consisted of tattered garments. The various terms for mendicants
employed in the subsequent passage are muqaiyif j one who follows
your track [qifah] to importune you with his solicitations ; mudarwiz,
probably from the Persian darwdz [for dar-bdz ], an open gate, one
who goes from door to door asking for alms, or offering his services ;
mushaqshiq, one who recites verses of poetry alternately with
another, both standing on opposite platforms, and etymologically
related to shiqshiqah , the throatbag of a camel, which has been men¬
tioned before, from the verb shaqshaq , to emit a sound, cry out,
roar; mujalwiz, in the argot of beggars, the rehearser of the merits
and virtues of Mohammed’s Companions before a popular audience
in the mosques.

Reluctantly , in the Arabic idiom mutajarri'an al-ahusas, gulping the
choking draughts.

Then lo! there were in it richly adorned state-chairs , etc.—This
display of furniture indicated, according to Sherishi, that a wedding
was to be celebrated in the house, while the begging-baskets sus¬
pended in the vestibule and the tattered garments hung around it
characterized the building as an inn [finduq] of the beggar tribe,
not appertaining to any distinct owner.

As if he were the (a) son of Md’u ’s-samd [water of heaven], the
surname of a woman from the tribe Namir bin Kasit, so called on
account of her beauty, whose son was Munzir bin Imr al-Kais, king


NOTES.


199


of Hira. It is also a la-gab of 'Amir bin Harisah al-Azdi (father of
'Amr, who emigrated from Yemen after the bursting of the dyke
Arim), and to whom this name was given on account of his
generosity, which was as rain to his people in the times of drought.
Hence his progeny, who reigned in Syria, were called Benu
M& ’as-sama [comp. Ar. Prov., iii., P. 1, p. 310].

The day and nights . . . morning and evening , the former in Arabic
al-malawdn , dual of maid, in the sense of time, the latter al fataydn ,
dual of fata, youth.

When he had sat down on his carpet.—Zurbiyyah or Zirbiyyah , a
word the plural of which, Zarabiyyu , occurs in the Koran, lxxxviii.
16 : “ And carpets spread forth.”

And has sternly forbidden the refusal of supplicants . . . aiid com¬
manded to feed him that begs and him that refuses to beg. —An allusion
to Koran, xciii. 10, “ And as to him that asketh of thee, chide him
not away and to xxii. 37, “ And feed him who asketh humbly,
and him who scorneth to ask though poor.”

Those who know well that the supplicant and the destitute have a claim
on their riches , lit., and in whose riches is a known claim, etc.
Another allusion to the Koran, lxx. 24, 25.

I take refuge with Him from hearing a prayer void of intention ,
meaning the formula biirika ftka, may a blessing be bestowed on
thee, with which beggars are politely refused, and from which, in
consequence of its frequent use, the noun burik, in the sense of
refusal, is derived. To this the commentaries quote the lines:
“ Many a crone, cunning and crafty, and quick to refuse the poor,
thinks that a be-blessed is enough for me, when I come forward,
stretching out my right hand.” The expression, “ void of intention,”
originates in the anecdote that an Arab, who asked alms from some
people, was answered with biirika ftka, whereupon he retorted: “May
Allah consign you to the tender mercies of a prayer, in which there
is no intention.”

“And secure to the poor a share from the rich” i.e ., create the
institution of zakdt , or legal alms, by which the claim of the indigent
for assistance from the rich is acknowledged and vouchsafed. The
same idea is repeated lower down in the words : he made obligatory
the claims on the possessions of the wealthy , and it runs, as Sherishi
remarks, in varied forms through the whole of the address, naturally


200


NOTES.


enough, as the preacher speaks for the edification of the begging
fraternity.

And lowered his wing to the lowly , or showed humility to the
humble, allusion to Koran, xvii. 25.

As well as his elected of the people of the stone-bench , in Arabic
ahl as-suffcih, a name given, to a number of aliens amongst the com¬
panions of Mohammed, the so-called “guests of Islam,” poor
strangers without friends or place of abode, who took shelter on a
stone-bench, roofed with palm-branches, in the porch of the Temple
of Medina.

For He said so that you may know: “ 0 ye men,” etc., quotation from
Koran, xlix. 13.

Abu ’ d-Darrdj Wallaj, son of Khandj, fanciful names, truly
appropriate for members of the craft, which may be translated,
Father of the Tramp, In-slipper, son of Out-goer, the last two epithets
probably meaning one who makes himself at home under all circum¬
stances, and knows how to extricate himself from all difficulties.
Equally graphic are the names given to the wooed bride : Kanbas,
daughter of Abti, e Anbas , somewhat like Spitfire, daughter of the
Sire of the frowning Lion. There is much humour in this Assembly,
which, I hope, will be duly appreciated by my readers.

And if yon fear poverty or want , Allah will give you a sufficiency out
of His abundance , quotation from Koran, ix. 28, In the Koranic
passage the dreaded event is explained as to be brought about
through the breaking off commercial relations, here, of course, it is
apprehended from the increase of family.

By Him who created the heavens one above another , etc., allusion to
Koran, lxvii. 3.

Whose engrossing cares distract the mind ; or, Whose carking sorrow
sore perplexes and distracts me. —A somewhat free translation of the
Arabic khatbu-hd khatbun marijun, lit., whose calamity is a perplexing
calamity (comp. Koran, 1. 5, where the word marty is joined with
amr, “ perplexed therefore is their state.”


NOTES.


201


THE THIRTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.

Travel fills the provision-hags, i.e., increases a man’s wealth, in
accordance with the saying, “ motion produces and rest is barren/ 7
Readers of the “ Arabian Nights ” will remember the numerous
quotations of verses in praise of travel contained in it, to which may
be added, from He Sacy’s commentary, the following lines of
Gurrudurru (for whom see Ibn Khallikan, i; 500):

“ Press on thy camels to the open plain, and. leave fair damsels to abide
in palaces.

For those who cling to their countries are like the dwellers in the graves.

If it were not for resorting to foreign parts the pearls of the seas would
not adorn the necks of beauty.

Rise and bestir thyself briskly in the lands, for he who sticks at home is
looked down upon,

As the Pawn is made little of until, when he moves on, he queens it
right royally.”

The last simile, taken from chess, is a translation into our
phraseology of the game of the Arabic, izd sdra sdra farzdnan, when
he travels, he becomes a wazir.

I made up my mind, etc., in Arabic istajashtu, I asked for an army
(jaish ) and help from it. The following “ started ” is in the original
asadtu, which generally has the meaning of “I ascended,” but must
here evidently be taken in the sense of tawajjahtu, “ I travelled in
the direction of/’

To the mother of cities.—Ummu ’l-qurd, sl name given by the
Mohammedans to Mecca, because she is the first and therefore
maternal city created by Allah, and because the people of all other
towns resort to her (ya’ummuna-hd).

So betiveen night-faring and journeying by day, between trotting and
ambling .—In Arabic baiaa idldjin wa ia’wtbin wa ijdfin ica taqribin,
infinitives of verbs, signifying various modes of travelling on camels,
amongst which %jdf, the verbal noun of the fourth form of wajf,
occurs in the Koran, lix. 6. I have translated it by “ trotting,”
but its literal meaning is “ running in leaps ” {sdra ’l-anaq).

That which rescues on the day of the mutual call, that is, of resur¬
rection, in allusion to Koran, xl. 34 : “ And, 0 my people 1 I indeed
fear for you the day of mutual outcry,” when, according to vii. 42,


202


MOTES.


“ The inmates of Paradise shall cry to the inmates of the fire, ‘ now-
have we found what our Lord promised us to be true ; have
ye too found what your Lord promised you to be true V And they
shall answer ‘Yes’; and a Herald shall proclaim between them,

< The curse of God he upon the evil-doers. 9 59 Other commentators,
however, explain it as the day of assembly, the expression tanada
z l-qaum being synonymous with ijtamau.

Flocking together from the mountain-paths, amidsilina min cd-fijdj,
for which comp. Koran, xxi. 96. .

That piety is the tucking up of sleeves. —In Arabic nazwu 9 l-arddn ,
which is usually called tashmir, and done to show readiness for work,
especially in travelling. The word nazw may also be taken in the
sense of putting off, in which case the sleeves would be pars pro toto,
and the expression would indicate the stripping of the body from
all other garments, in order to don the ihrdm , or pilgrim-cloak.
But as the latter act does not precede, but follow the separation
from family and country, the former interpretation seems preferable.

In making for yonder building, meaning the Ka'bah, to which the
preacher had alluded when he said at the beginning of his address :
“Do ye comprehend what ye are about to face V*

For by Him, who prescribed the rites for the devout. —Here in particular
the ceremonies of the pilgrimage, for a description of which see
the article Hajj in Hughes’ “Dictionary of Islam, 99 pp. 155-159 ;
Burkhardt’s “ Travels in Arabia,” i. 363 : and Burton’s “ Pilgrimage
to Mecca and Medina.”

The girding with the izdr profits [avails] not when one is burdened with
iniquities .—In the original maa ’ l-iztildi hi ’l-auz&r. The last word
is the plural of loizr, “a heavy load," and metaphorically “crime,”
“iniquity,” which occurs in Koran, vi. 164: “No soul shall labour
but for itself; and no burdened one ( wdzirah ) shall bear (yazir)
another’s burden (wizr).”

None prospers by visiting mount t Amfdt .—In Arabic bi-arafaia,
without article and imperfectly declined. In this form the word is
the technical term for the ceremony of visiting the holy mountain,
the name of which latter is 'arafdt, a plural without singular.
Another term for the said ceremony is tarif, verbal noun of the
second form, which is explained as wuqdfun biarifdt, the station on
mount 'Arafat, and which occurs lower down in connection with


NOTES.


203


i/tktfh, the running down or dispersion from it, as in Koran, ii. 194 :
“And when ye disperse from'Arafat.”

For a losing bargain of dissemblers it suffices that they plant and reap
not, lit., the sufficiency of dissemblers with regard to or for deception
is that they plant and reap not, for they are sufficiently punished
thereby. The accusative ghibnan is analogous to that in Koran,
iv. 47 : tea leaf a hi 'Haiti naslran, and God is a sufficient helper, lit.,
suffices as to a helper.

For, lo , no hidden deed shall remain hidden from the Compassionate,

allusion to Koran, Ixix. 18.

And the threader of the pearl-strings that he had displayed, life.,
■recited (umshada-hd). Nasif al-Yazaji objects to the change of vowel
between anshada, the reading of De Sacy and most manuscripts,
and the preceding anshudu , “ I was searching for.” He proposes
nnshadu-hd, aor. pass, of the fourth form, in the sense of “ which had
been recited to me.” In this case the verb would govern two
accusatives, one of which has become nominative in the passive
voice, the admissibility of which seems doubtful, and, moreover, the
change of vowel is not avoided thereby. The editors of the second
edition of Do Sacy, while preserving his reading in the text, remark
in a note, that if an alteration should appear desirable they would
suggest nnshida-ha, when the meaning would be, “which I am
reciting or ({noting throughout my narrative.” Curiously enough
this suggestion is confirmed by my own MS., and it has certainly
much to recommend it.

Until he had climbed up (tauuappda) one of the mountains, to which
comp. Ar. Prov., ii. 840: augaht min ghufrin , “a better climber
than the young of a chamois or mountain-goat.”

He made hand fall upon hand, i.e., he clapped his hands, as to
mark time. The word hvndn, which literally means the finger-tips,
is hero used for hand, as in the Koran, viii. 12, it is used, according
to some commentators, for hands and feet, or the extremities in
general.

(String (lit., tanning) it irith sore repentance Inf ore the hide all through
is rotten , a popular saying, for which comp. Ar. Prov., ii. 346.


204


NOTES..


THE THIRTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.

As the verbal explanations of the legal ambiguities contained in
this Assembly have been, for the convenience of the reader, given
in parenthesis along with the translation, I can restrict myself in
these notes chiefly to some additional illustrations, and the references
to the Koran and the Arabic Proverbs.

When I had completed the rites of the Hajj , and absolved the duties of
[the shout ] Labbaiha , and the out-pour of the blood of the sacrifice. —In
Arabic uaztVifa 'l-ajji wa J s-sctjj , the former being synonymous with
talbiyah the intonation of the prayer beginning with labbaiha [I am
ready for thy service, etc.], which is chanted with a loud voice
during the pilgrimage, especially on the last stage before Mecca; the
latter meaning the shedding of a victim’s blood on the day of
sacrifice, both of which are by a tradition declared to be the most
meritorious parts of the pilgrimage.

With a travelling company of the Benu Shaibah , a tribe descending
from Shaibah, who, according to Sherishi, is identical with f Abd al-
Muttalib, Mohammed’s grandfather. Other authorities say that he was
a son of'Usman, son of Talhah, son of c Abd ad-Dar, son of Kusaiy,
in the custody of whose descendants the keys of the Ka'bah are kept
until the present day.

And to disengage myself from the tribe of those who perform the Hajj
and neglect him [. Mohammed']. —Allusion to a reported saying of
Mohammed’s : “He who performs the pilgrimage, and visits me not,
wrongs me.”

So I was bewildered between fear that made me lag , in Arabic yusab-
bituni , an expression borrowed from Koran, ix. 46 : “ But God was
averse to their marching forth and made them laggards; and it was
said, 4 Sit ye at home with those who sit.’ ”

Banning as if they were flocking to some idol , quotation from Koran,
lxx. 43, where, however, the interpreters differ as to whether the
word nusub is to be taken for “ standard ” or “ idol.”

The father of lies and tricks , in Arabic zCi ’ sh-shugari wa'l-buqari , where
shugar is explained as “downright lie,” and buqtw as an ittib&\ or
complementary apposition based on similarity of sound (comp. Ar.
Prov., i. 162 and 309). The word translated by mischief in the next


NOTES.


205

v

line is fawdqir , pi. of fdqirah , which occurs in the Proverb \miqlk '
bi-hi ’ l-fdqirata , meaning according to Mayd&ni, he has done him an
injury that breaks his vertebrae. Similarly we read in the Koran,
lxxv. 28 : “ As if they thought that some calamity would be inflicted
on them ” (an yuj^ala bihd fdqiratun).

And gathered his garment in the approved style , lit., he wrapped him¬
self up in the deaf fashion ( as-sammtVu ), said to be thus called
because it left no opening, as the ear is deaf when it is stopped up.
The learned in the law of Islam describe it minutely in various
ways, and according to Abu Obayd, quoted in the Sihdh , their
reason for discussing it is that Mohammed commended this manner
of dress, hence my translation of the phrase. The same observation
applies to al-qafda , manner of wearing the turban, which precedes in
the text, and the following al-qmfusd', manner of sitting, has been
described in vol. i., p. 412, which description justifies my rendering
“he was sitting with his hand knitted in front of his knees. ,,

For by Him who has created the heavens , etc. —Allusion to Koran
vi. 79, and ii. 29.

Who are averse to fhe daughters of some one else , in Arabic 'an bandti
gJiairin , meaning lies, falsehood, any deviation from truth. A poet
says: “ When thou comest some one else’s daughters are on the
spot, and when thou turnest thy back they hasten their departure.”
Another form of the expression occurs in the proverb: jd’a bi
7 sh-shuqari wa’l-buqari wa bandti ghiyar , where ghiyar is plural of
gjiairah, probably in the sense of jealousy, the underlying idea
apparently being that lie is jealous of truth.

The cold has thrown him down. —The meaning “ sleep ” given in
the reply of the legist to the word bard, which in common parlance
signifies “ cold,” is borne out by Koran, lxxviii. 24 : “ No sleep shall
they taste therein nor any drink, save boiling water and running
sores,” and by the proverb aJl-bardu yamncdu 'l-barda, cold prevents
sleep. In de Sacy’s Commentary the proverb is quoted manu J l-
burdi Fbardu , when the sense would seem to be, “ the preventive of
(feeling) cold is sleep,” perhaps a grim travesty of the fact that
people overtaken by the cold sleep themselves to death.

What sayest thou with regard to one who has used sand for his ablu¬
tion i in Arabic ta-yammamu, for which practice, allowed by Koran,
v. 9, if water is not available, see Diet, of Isl&m, p. 631.


206


NOTES .


And let him avoid the dirty one, an injunction which is based on a
tradition according to which the Prophet exhorted the believers to
keep their court-yards clean.

And thou art free of blame, words addressed by Kosayr, the freed-
man of Jathimet al-Abrash, to the latter’s nephew, 'Amr bin c Adi,
whom he had urged to expel him with his nose cut off, and who
refused to doit, saying, £< I am not the man to treat thee thus, nor art
thou the man to deserve such treatment.” “Do it,” replied Kosayr,
ct and thou art free of blame,” which answer passed into proverb (see
Ar. Prov., ii. 219, and comp, the Note to Assembly XXVII., p. 190,
above.

A traveller , etc.*— As to the exemption from the fast of Bamad&n
for travellers, etc., the Koran, ii. 181, says : ££ But he who is sick, or
upon a journey, shall fast a like number of other days.”

By Him who has made the chase lawful , ie., by Allah, in allusion
to Koran, v. 3 : “And when all (connected with the pilgrimage) is
over, then take to the chase.”

And also she was menstruous. —This interpretation of the word
zahikat refers to Koran, xi. 74 : £< And his wife was standing by,
and became menstruous; and We announced Isaac to her; and
after Isaac Jacob.” It must, however, be remarked, that Baydawi
and most of the other Commentators explain the word in its usual
meaning and in accordance with our Bible.

Is the buying of (meaning on the 'part of) a caller from a herdsman
allowed ? etc.—With regard to this question, a marginal note in my
MS. remarks : ££ It is said that ad-dd'i, the caller, means the cock;
others say it is used for £ abd ,’ slave, as rdH (herdsman) stands for
saiyid, lord or master, and that the meaning is, may the judge sell
the slave against, i.e., in spite of the unwillingness of a bankrupt
master, who is debarred from the disposal of his property (majhur),
a proceeding which is in perfect accordance with the law.” Baiu
’d-ddH may, however, also mean buying on the part of the caller, in
whatever meaning, the word may be taken (in Assembly xxvii. it is
applied to the Muezzin, which would explain the following d& c i,
collector of the legal alms), and in this case the preposition c old
stands for min, “ from,” as in Koran, lxxxiii. 2, after the word
iktdM : ££ Who when they take by measure from ( r ald ) others, exact
the full.” As for the answer, there is no difference of opinion


NOTES.


207


amongst the commentators; the selling or buying of the dal in the
sense of “ remainder of milk left in the udder,” is forbidden, like-
that of the foetus in an animal’s womb, because it is majhul , an
object unknown as to its quality or quantity, a subtlety in the
Mohammedan Law, which here is obviously more of a theoretical
than practical nature.

Sugar, a hawk, and also date-juice, which it is as unlawful to barter,
for the fruit, as meat for the living animal (see p. 47, 1. 7 from the
bottom).

Yea, and it may be inherited from him when he has died , or people-
may inherit from him after his death, indicating that by his act he
ceases not to be a righteous Moslem. *

What sayest thou with regard to the dead body of an infidel (as article-
of food) ?—This can be taken literally, when the abomination would
be self-evident to excess. But a less repulsive interpretation may
be an animal slaughtered by an infidel, which would be as unlawful
as the carcase of an animal after its natural death, because he had
not invoked the name of Allah on killing it.

May a pitcher be bought from the Benu Asfar 2 etc.—Benu Asfar,.
usually applied to the Greeks, stands here for the enemies of Islam
in general, from whom it would be for a Moslem, if not forbidden,,
at least highly objectionable, to buy offensive or even defensive
weapons, as sword or helmet, which may purposely be of bad make,,
or have been employed against his co-religionists. This translation
takes the preposition \dd in the sense of min (see the note above),,
but as ban is bartering, i.e., giving or taking in exchange, it seems
evident that the same preposition, which in case of buying means
“ from,” has in the case of a sale the meaning “ to,” and the objec¬
tion may be against selling weapons to infidels, or against both
transactions, buying from and selling to them.

lie replied: “ Nay, nor to the co-partner in a yellow she-camel,” —The
point of this is that the right of pre-emption (shufah) applies to
immovables, and the expected answer, if the word saJirtf is taken
in its current meaning, “ field,” would be yes, while Abu Zayd’s
negative reply presupposes for it the more recondite meaning, in
which it can be as little an object of pre-emption as a camel or gold.

This is worthier of acceptance , because not being pregnant.

According to the ivords of the Koran: “Behold to Thee we have


208


NOTES.


returned” in Arabic innd hudnd ilaiha, Sara vii., verse 158. By a
singular mistake, Kodwell translates : “ Verily to Thee we are
guided,” probably misled by Fliigel, who gives it in his Concord¬
ance, p. 203, under hadd, the passive of which, however, would be
hudtnti , instead of under hud , of which hudnd is the preterite active.

A camel tied to the to nib of her master, etc.—If the Arabic baity ah
is taken in this sense, then the word sabr signifies the act of bind¬
ing, and the custom itself, as a superstition of the pre-Islamitic
times, is strongly condemned; while sabru ' l-baliyah in the sense of
patience under calamity is highly meritorious.

And also he helped , strengthened , honoured , in which meaning the
word tazir occurS (Koran, xlviii. 9) : “ That ye may believe on
God and on His Apostle; and may assist Him, and honour Him,
and praise Him, morning and evening.”

Afqar , he impoverished and also he lent a camel to ride upon her bach ,
the connecting link between which two significations is the word
fiqar , vertebrae, inasmuch as poverty breaks a man’s back, while the
camel carries him on hers.

A hind of embroidered stuff, meaning that one who abstains from
wearing such, i.e., from habits of luxury in general, shows wisdom
and discretion, and is therefore eminently fit to be appointed judge.

One who denies a debt. —The interpretation of the’ word Abid, by
“one who denies or repudiates,” is given by some commentators in
explaining Koran, xliii. 81 : “Say ‘if the God of Mercy had a son,
the first then would I be to deny him/ ” where Kodwell translates
“to worship him.”

As if he had committed an open robbery , in Arabic ghasaba , he has
taken with violence, the punishment for which is not amputation,
but imprisonment, etc.

THE THIRTY-THIKD ASSEMBLY.

At a time when I had come to Tifiis, in Arabic Taflisu and Tiflisu,
the well-known city in the Caucasus.

Together with a number of paupers. —In some MSS. met a zumratin
(in others ma*a c usbatin ) mafdlisa, where the latter word is not
dependent on, but in apposition to the former respectively, while
De Sacy and my own MS. read simply met a mafdlisa (an imperfectly
declined plural).


NOTES.


209


Then the people fastened [bound] their loops to him , i.e., they sat down
to listen to him, an idiom for which compare vol. i., p. 412.

Does not eye-witnessing dispense with hearsay ? and the smoke reveal the
fire ? —I have translated amd as interrogative, but it may equally
well be taken as the particle of tantih , and rendered by “ assuredly,”
meaning: “You see with your own eyes, without my telling you,
what my condition is, and my appearance sufficiently indicates the
state of my affairs.”

Yet erewhile I was one of those who possess and bestow. —The word
mdla is explained by the commentators by tamawwala , he was
wealthy, in which sense it would be synonymous with the preceding
malaka , he possessed riches. But it has also the meaning, “ he gave
part of his property to others,” and this interpretation seems to me
preferable, as it conforms in idea with the phrase, rajulun mdlun
ndlun , a man who is rich and bountiful, in which mdlun corresponds
to malaka , and ndlun to mdla.

But calamities ceased not to subvert .—The word translated by
subvert ( tashat) occurs in the Koran, xx. 64 : “ For then will He
destroy you by a punishment.” One of its derivatives is suht or
suhut, anything unlawful, as leading to perdition, especially applied
to usury in Koran, v. 46, 67, 68.

JVho trailed his sleeves along in luxury. —The usual phrase is, he
trailed his skirt, but the length of the sleeves of a costly robe
pictures still more forcibly the extravagance of Oriental habits and
habiliments.

Or to whom the tidings of daughters have been brought. —Allusion to
Koran, xvi. 60, 61: “ For when the birth of a daughter is announced
to any one of them, dark shadows settle on his face, and he is sad:
He hideth himself from the people because of the bad news : shall
he keep it with disgrace, or bury it in the ground V 9 For the
practice of the Arabs of the Ignorance to bury infant daughters
alive, compare the exhaustive note in vol. i., p. 434, to the passage:
“ Give life to one buried alive.” I repeat from it here the final line
of the poem quoted from the Ham£seh in explanation of the reasons
which may have induced a father to put an end to his daughter s
days : “ She desires my life, but I long for her death, through com¬
passion on her ; for to women death is the most generous quest.

Beguiled by the beauty of his delivery , along with his disease.— The

14


VOL. II.


210


NOTES.


Arabic maa dtdihi, together with his ailment, implies that his
listeners, while delighted with his utterance, were at the same time
moved to compassion for him by his well-simulated palsy.

That which was hidden in their belts and concealed in their bosoms.
—The words translated by “belts ” and “bosoms” respectively are
7chuban, pi. of Jchubmh , and suban , pi. of subnah , which the native
dictionaries explain in almost identical terms as those parts of a
garment which serve as receptacles for money and other objects.

So take this trifle , in Arabic subdbah, rest of water at the bottom
of a well, and metaphorically used for anything of small value.

And reckon it neither a miss , nor a .hit, i.e., as a thing neither to
be disdained nor to be made much of, and given more to show our
goodwill towards thee, than to lay thee under the obligation of
thanks.

Made off stumbling on his road, lit., snatching his ways with
stumbling.

And is indulgent with thee. —In the original man yanfuqu ' alai-ka,
which is explained by “ one who buries thy faults in a hole ” (nafaq),

i. e., veils and conceals them. Others take the verb in the sense of
having currency, and therefore being acceptable, so that the meaning
would be, who by the pleasantness of his manners makes himself
agreeable to thee.

And hast met with a pise, so cling to it. —A proverb applied to
one who has obtained his wish, and for which see Ar. Prov., ii. 326.

Then he laughed long, and stood befm'e me a sound or perfect man .—
The Arabic for “ long ” is here maliyyan, which occurs in Koran,
xix. 47 : “Begone from me for a length of time.” The final part
of the clause is an allusion to the same Sura, verse 17 : “ And we
sent our spirit to her, and he appeared before her like a perfect
man.”

With no ailment in his body. —Ailment is in the text qalabah, which
stands originally for an illness which makes a man toss on his
couch, but is used, as here, in a more general sense in the proverb,
md bi-hi qalabah, there is no ailment or blemish in him (Ar. Prov.,

ii. 610).

And at his feigned palsy , lit., at the falsehood or lie of his palsy
( c ald kazibi laqwati-hi). Similar, though with the state of construction
reversed, the Koran says, xii. 18 : “And they (Joseph's brethren)


NOTES.


211


brought his shirt with the blood of lie (i.e., with false blood)
upon it.”


THE THIRTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.

When I crossed the deserts towards Zahid .—This is a prosperous
town in Yemen, the largest and most important after Sana, the
scene of the first Assembly, from which it is about forty parasangs
distant. It is abundantly irrigated, and therefore rich in gardens
and orchards, which grow fruit of various kinds, especially bananas.

Whom I had reared until he reached the full vigour of life, reckoned
by the Arabs from fifteen to forty years of age. The word used for
it in the original is ushudda-hu , which is variously explained as
plural of shadd, like aflus from fids, or of shudd, like awudd from
wudd , or of skidd,ah, like an "uni from ni'ma.h, or lastly as a singular
without plural, like dnuk (tin).

And trained until his straightness had icaxcd perfect, a simile taken
from the straightening of a lance, here to be taken in a moral sense

Therefore needs his good sendees had won him, mg heart, literally had
attached themselves or clung to my heart, a proverbial expression,
for which see Ar. Prov., ii. 510 and iii., P, 2 , 493.

When the sole of his foot was turned up and his voice had been silenced .—
This translation takes tho word na'dnmh in the sense bdtinw dupulam,
mentioned above, p. 198. According to Sherishi it has also the
meaning of “ bier,” and of “ gallows-tree, 7 ' the being raised of either
of which is a popular idiom for death and destruction. Others
explain “ when Ills ostrich had fled," i.e ., when ho had departed life,
in analogy with the saying shrtlat na'Anmtu 'lajaum, tho people's
ostrich has taken himself off, when they leave 4 place or disperse.
As for “his voice had been silenced," sakarnt nahmatudm, it is taken
from tho imprecation “may God silence his voice,” (tskata. HldJm
m'maiu.-hu, whence some commentators propose to read in tho present
passage sakataf, “ was silent,” instead of sahmat, the original meaning
of which is “was at rest,” and tallies bettor with the secondary
signification of mdmtdi, movement or motion \harakak\.

Who 'might he a stopgap for mg needs. — Sadftd, here rendered by
stopgap, is, according to Maydani’s remark on this proverbial

> 14—2


212


NOTES.


expression, a small quantity of milk which has dried up in the udder
and obstructs the flow of the milk (Ar. Prov., i. 61G).

Who gives satisfaction when he is tried. —The final part of the clause
is in Arabic iza qulliba, literally when he is turned about, which is
paraphrased by, when he is stripped, to examine the soundness of
his limbs.

That not every one who undertakes a tcork carries it through , and that
nothing will scratch my skin as well as my own nail. —The first clause of
this proposition alludes to the following couplet, taken from a
poem of Zohayr in praise of Harim bin Sinan :

“Thou earliest through what thou hast undertaken,
while some undertake but fail to carry through.”

The second is an adaptation of the proverb “ Naught scratches my
back as well as my own hand ” (Ar. Prov., ii. 602), to which Shertshi
quotes some lines of the celebrated Imflm Ash-Shafi’i, in which also
the word “ nail ” is substituted for the word “ hand ” of the provorb,
and which exhort, like the latter itself, to self-exertion in preference
to reliance on others.

With the yellow and the while , meaning gold denars and silver
dirhems.

JVho if thou stumble says to thee , “ Rise to thy feet? — La:an or la: for
la'an lalca is an exclamation in the sense of a prayer that ho may rise
sound and safe, addressed to-one who has tripped or fallen, and is
opposed to the imprecatory formula ta'san, fall or perdition on thee,
which occurs Koran xlvii. 9: “ Put as for the infidels, lot tliom
perish !” In a disputed passage of the Hamaseh fa't-tdsu adna, la-Jul
min an yuqtlla la'an is explained by Hariri himself in his Nurrat al-
Ghawwds by “ she is worthier to be prayed for than to be prayed
against,” while Tabriz! in his Commentary reads the initial word
fdn-na'shu, and interprets : “ she has sooner risen than one could
say to her Pise !” The origin of la'an la-ha is said to be the elliptical
idiom laalla-ka “haply thou mayst,” here mentally supplemented
with “ rise in safety.”

And were it not , by God, for life’s straitening stress (zanku adshin ).—
Compare Koran xx. 123: “But whoso turneth away from My
warning, his truly shall be a straitened life,” i.e., a life of misery
(maizshatan zankan).


NOTES.


213


I would not sell him for the realms that Kisrd rules. —To this the
commentators quote the following line of a poet to the same effect:
“ Necessity, 0 Mother of Malik, at times compels a man to part
with belongings which otherwise he would guard with a niggard’s
care.”

I fancied him one of the youths of the garden of delight, and said,
“ This is not a man but an honoured angel." —Allusion to Koran
lvi. 11, 12, and 17 : “These are they who shall be brought nigh
to God in gardens of delight . . . immortal youths go round about
to them with goblets and ewers and a cup from a fountain.” The
second clause is a quotation of the words with which, in Sura
xii. 31, the Egyptian ladies praise the beauty erf Joseph, a quota¬
tion which, as the sequel will show, proves ominous on the present
occasion.

Whether his elocution matched his comeliness, and how his utterance
tallied with the fairness of his countenance. —Literally where his
eloquence was from his brightness of face, and how his tongue or
language from his fairness, the preposition min, from, here meaning
“considered apart from” or “in contrast with.”

So I turned aside from him. —In Arabic zarabtu 'an-hu saffian,
another Koranic idiom, taken from ch. xliii. 4: “ Shall We then
turn aside this warning from you as if with repulsion, because ye
are a people who transgress 2” The accusative §afhan is in this
passage, according to the most plausible explanations, an infinitive of
a verb synonymous with zarab, and corroborative of the idea con¬
tained in the latter verb, which we might here translate “ I struck
out and away from him.”

Then listen: Joseph I am, ay, Joseph I am. —Allusion to Koran,
xii. 90: “They said, ‘Canst thou indeed be Joseph V He said,
c I am Joseph, and this is my brother.’ ”

But he did not soar whither I had soared. — Eallaqa, lit., he de¬
scribed circles (halqah), is applied to a bird, which rises into the air,
and the phrase means here, “ he demanded not such a high price for
the boy as I had expected him to do, and was ready to pay,” and in
similar manner the following, nor held he on to that to which I held on,
signifies, “he showed less eagerness to keep the youth than I was
anxious to take possession of him.”

That every thing sold cheap proves dear, a piece of worldly wisdom


214


NOTES.


which I dare say most of my readers have bought sometime or other
with their own experience.

Both eyes of the lad flowed over with tears , more abundant than the
tear-flow of the clouds , literally, they brimmed over, and not with the
brimming of the tears of the clouds, an idiom for which compare
(vol. i., p. 304) Chenery’s note on the phrase, “ With an earliness
beyond the earliness of the crow.”

The hungry bellies , in Arabic a'l-karishu *1-jiyiCu , an idiom remark¬
able in more than one respect. Karish is, literally, the stomach of a
ruminant, and denotes metaphorically a man's children, family, or
household. In this sense we shall meet with it in Assembly XLYIIT.,
attaJdiiztUrhmi karisfii wa *aibati , which may approximately be trans¬
lated : “ I took them for my kith and kin,” and is used by Hariri
in allusion to a tradition according to which Mohammed applied the
expression to the Ansar, or Helpers, i.e., the Meccans who joined
him after his flight to Medina, and the inhabitants of the latter
town who embraced his cause. The word 'aibah means originally a
chest or wardrobe to keep clothes in, and has become.a popular
metaphor for intimate friends as depositories of a man's secrets
(comp. Ar. Prov., i. 59). In the present passage of our text it is
further to be noticed that the singular karish is followed by the
plural jiyd, for which the native grammarians adduce two reasons.
The most natural explanation is that the noun karish , though gram¬
matically a singular, is here logically a plural, and may therefore
fitly be accompanied by an adjective in that number. The other
view of the case is that the plural of the adjective intensifies its
meaning, and is joined to the substantive singular, in order to
qualify the one subject, as it were, with the aggregate hunger of
several subjects, a rather far-fetched explanation, here only given
as an instance of the subtlety of grammatical discussion in which
the Arabs delight. As another etymological curiosity, I may men¬
tion that the word al- aibah figures in the parlance of the common
people as a corruption of * al-lu'aibah , diminutive of lu'bah , a toy
for children, a doll, from the totally different verb lab, playing,
sporting.

This is Saktibi, not for loan or sale.—Sakdbi , an indeclinable noun
terminating in kasrah , is the name of a famous horse belonging to a
' man of the tribe Temim, who refused to sell it with the above words.


NOTES.


2 15


It was thus called from its swiftness, compared to the rushing of
water when poured out.

My value teas lost to them , and what a value. —Literally, “ they have
lost me, and what a man have they lost,” meaning, according to the
commentators, they have not understood or appreciated my worth.
This is an instance of the rhetorical figure tazmtn, which consists in
the quotation of part of a well-known couplet or number of couplets
to apply it to the circumstances of the quoter. The words are
borrowed from a poem ascribed to Umaiyah bin As-Salt, by others
to 'Abdallah bin 'Amr bin Usman, and the conclusion of the line is :
“lostfor the day of battle or stopping breaches.” The words may
also signify “ They have undone me,” and if taken in this double
meaning, are more particularly addressed to Abu Zayd • if taken in
the sense of “lost,” they contain at the same time another warning
to Harith to be on his guard.

And distinguish him not from the lobes of my liver , in the Arabic
idiom, “ from the slices of my liver,” meaning from my children, in
the sense in which one of the poets says : “ Our children are amongst
us but our hearts walking on the ground.”

I commend thee to the keeping of one who is an excellent master or
patron. —Allusion to Koran, viii. 41 : “ But if they turn their back,
know ye, that God is your patron: Excellent patron and excellent
helper !”

For clear as daylight should it be what Joseph meant , namely, that
my sale was as unlawful as that of freeborn Joseph.

And [had) read to him the Sura , i.e., told him our story, in playful
allusion to the chapter of the Koran in which is related the story of
Joseph. For the following, he who has given a warning is excused ,
comp. Ar. Prov., xi. 119.

For whose wound there is no retaliation. —In Arabic jurhu-hu jubaran,
i.e., whose blood might be shed with impunity, as it is said in tradi¬
tion, that there is no retaliation or blood-money due for the blood
of Ajams, or non-Arabs. The expression jubtlr for the more usual
hadar occurs in the legal maxim founded on another tradition,
al-madanu jubarun, which means that for one who has been killed
by the collapse of a mine no retaliation can be exacted from the
owner or the employer of the man.

Then I gnashed my teeth .— Taharraqtu , the fifth conjugation of


216


NOTES .


Jiamqa , with fathah on the second radical, he kindled, etc., may
mean, “I burned with rage.” But Sherishi explains it, “I ground
my teeth, so that they gave forth a sound, on account of the violence
of my anger,” which- is the signification of the form hariqa, with
medial kasrah of the primitive verb.

Thy money is not lost, if it has taught thee a lesson, in the original:
“Not has gone from thy substance that which has admonished
thee i.e., the money which thou hast lost will not be thrown
away if it teaches thee to be more careful of the remainder, and he
who has roused thee to circumspection and cautiousness has not
done thee an injury (comp. Ar. Prov., i. 435).

He puffed his cheek and cracked it at me in derision.—Azrata , he
produced a sound in bad odour with good company, means here he
produced an imitation of that sound, and has obtained the sanction
of tradition, which reports that Mohammed, on visiting the public
treasury, expressed in this manner his contempt for the gold and
silver coin accumulated therein.

Heretofore the tribes sold Joseph, though they were what people know
they were .—Under the tribes ( asbdt) the sons of Jacob are under¬
stood, and the laconical expression, wa-humu humu , literally, “ and
they (are) they ,” signifies, “ They are what they are known to be,”
i.e., revered patriarchs. The words in the preceding line, “I am
not the first (lit. an innovator) therein,” are taken from Koran,
xlvi. 8: “ Say, £ I am not the first of Apostles (lit., new amongst
them).’ ”

1 am not of those who sting twice and make one tread upon two cinders.
—The first part of this sentence is an allusion to, or rather perver¬
sion of, a reported saying of Mohammed’s : “ The believer is not
bitten twice from out of a snake’s hole.” In the second part,
“upon two cinders” stands for “ twice upon cinders or burning
coals,” and the meaning is, “I am not one who injures the same
person a second time.”

Flinging the remembrance of his deed behind me .—In Arabic, nabaztu
fdlata-hu zihnyyan , which last word occurs Koran xi. 94 : “He said,
‘ 0 my people ! does my family stand higher in your esteem than
I do ? Cast ye Him behind your back,’ ” where Baydawi explains.
zihriyyan by manbuz ward 1 a ’z-zahr.


NOTES.


217


THE THIRTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.

In my roamings I met at Shiraz .—Shiraz, in Arabic an imperfectly
declined noun or diptote, one of the principal cities of Persia, of
which Sherishi gives a glowing account in his Commentary, and
which is familiar to the friends of Oriental literature as the birth¬
place of the Persian poet Hafiz, and many other men of note.

See hoio their fruit would fulfil the promise of their blossom, literally,
how their fruit would be from, i.e., in comparison with their blossom,
an idiom for which see a preceding note, p. 213 above.

Who had well-nigh encompassed the two goals of life, in the original
“ the two lives,” i.e., that of increase of strength up to forty, and that
of decrease up to eighty, according to others, up to sixty and hundred
and twenty respectively. The critics blame Hariri for connecting
in this passage two verbs of identical meaning, hdda yundhizu, as if
we would say, “ he was near approaching.” But I find that ndluiza ,
with the accusative ax-saida, game, is explained by bddara-hu, he
overtook or reached it, and feel, therefore, justified in my translation,
the terms of which seem perfectly legitimate.

A man exists by the two things smallest in him, meaning his tongue
and his heart, or as a poet in the Hamaseh puts it:

“ One half of man is his tongue, the other half his heart; what remains
is but an image of flesh and blood.

“Many a man who pleases thee when silent waxes taller or smaller by
his converse.” (Ar. Prov., ii. 635, 922.)

Counting its aloes as common wood, i.e., being gifted with sur¬
passing eloquence themselves, they made little of its choicest points.
For the word Tchitdb, address, many explanations are given, but there
is little doubt that it applies here to that branch of philological
science which treats of rhetoric or the rules of elevated diction and
composition. The expression fa-flu 3 1-khitM , here translated with
the “chapter or section of rhetoric,” has occurred in the second
Assembly, vol. i., p. 114, towards the end, where I would render it
“ the discrimination of his address,” or “ his discriminate eloquence,”
while Chenery prefers “the sagacity of his judgment,” in accordance
with Koran, xxxviii. 19: “And We established his (David's)
kingdom: and wisdom, and skill to pronounce clear decisions, did


■218


NOTES.


We bestow on him” (comp, the note on the passage, vol. i.,
p. 291).

But he uttered no icord of explanation nor 'made he his meaning clear
by any sign , literally, he explained not with a word, nor cleared
he up by any sign, the Arabic preposition c <m, “from,” in the
terminology of the grammarians here being used li H-istidnah , that
is, standing for “ by means of.”

But ashed what are his endowments , literally, what is his portion
{Jckaldq) , in allusion to Koran, iii. 71: “Verily they who barter
their engagement with God, and their oaths, for some paltry price—
These 1 no portion for them in the world to come !”

Now when he had captivated all their senses , in Arabic fa-lammd
hhcdaba hulla hhilbin , the literal rendering of which would be, “ when-
he had beguiled every pericardium.”

Make known to us the shell of thy egg and its yolk , for “ thy outward
and inward state.” For the preceding phrase, thou hast shown u$
the mark of thy arrow , comp. Chenery’s note on the proverb : “Each
man knows best the mark of his arrow,” vol. i., p. 323.

Now when I perceived the traces of the good and bad blended in
Abu Zayd. —This is an approximate paraphrase of an idiom which
defies all attempts at a more accurate translation. SJucubu abt
zaidin wa raubu-hu is explained by the commentators as meaning
the honey of Abu Zayd and his curdled milk, that is to say, his
sweet and bitter, or his truth and falsehood. The proverb (Ar.
Prov., ii. 647 and 878), md ' inda-hu shaubun wa Id raubun i applies
to a man of indifferent character, somewhat like the English, “ he is
neither fish nor fowl.”

When, lo ! it ivas he himself , in Arabic fa-lzd huwa iyyd-hu , with
the objective case of the repeated pronoun instead of the nominative,
according to the grammarians of Basra a popular solecism for
fa izd huwa huuxt, as would be the English, “ behold ! he was him.”
Since Hariri was a native of Basra, it is more than probable that he
shared this view; nevertheless, he adopts the faulty phrase, partly
because he aims at a vivid portraiture of life, partly ■ for reasons
discussed by Chenery in his “ Introduction,” vol. i., p. 72, where
similar instances of such disputed grammatical points are mentioned.

Has wooers for her comeliness and pleasingness .—The literal ren¬
dering would be : “ Is wooed as with the wooing of one who by her


NOTES .


219


beauty can dispense with adornments ( ghdniyah ), and by her pleasant
ways so captivates her husband that he feels not tempted to look at
others (mughniyah), .

Then let him wash my grief with its proper soap .—This may be
taken by Abu Zayd’s audience to mean a gift that would allay his
anxiety for the future of his pretended daughter, but for the initiated
it contains an allusion to a saying attributed to Chosroes, that wine
is the soap for grief, and implies that the reprobate intends to spend
the prospective dirhems on the forbidden beverage, which is the real
theme of his improvisation.

Making me send after him more than one glance of loving affection .

—Here again a lengthy paraphrase is needed, in order to render the
Arabic idiom intelligible. Zawicada-ni nazratan min z% * alaqin means
literally: £c provisioned me with the glance of one possessed of
affection ” (comp. Ar. Prov. 5 ii. 747).


THE THIRTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.

The explanation of the twenty conundrums contained in -this
Assembly has been given at the foot of the translation from Hariri’s
own commentary, and it remains for me here only to add a few more
remarks of general interest, partly from the same short commentary
appended to it by the author, partly from other sources, which I
was able to consult.

I made my camel of peregrination kneel down at Malatiyah. —De Sacy
spells the name Maltiyah, and I followed him in my own edition of
the text, misled by his statement that the ancient name of the town
was Maldani, and had by the Arabs been transformed into Maltiyah,
with or without tashdid on the ya. Since then, however, I have
ascertained that the town, situated in Mesopotamia on the western
side of the Euphrates, was formerly called Maladni. Moreover
Firfizabfidi, the author of the Kamfts, rejects the form with tashdid
as faulty, hence it appears that the form Malatyah given in De Sacy’s
quotation from Mutenebbi is the only correct one, and that Hariri
has altered it into Malatiyah by poetical licence, to make it rhyme
with mathjah , travelling-beast. The old city had been destroyed by
the Greeks, and Kaliph Manshr rebuilt it a.h. 139, surrounded it
with a wall, and settled in it a number of Arab tribes.


220


NOTES.


When I had thrown down there my staff, a proverbial expression for
I had given over travelling or made a halt. In a similar manner, it
is said, “ I lifted up my staff ,'” for “ I set out on or resumed my
journey ” (Ar. Prov., ii. 644 ; ii. 493).

I saw a group of nine people who had purchased some iviue .—The
Arabic term for people is here raht, which means a company of
men below ten in number, and who according to an observation of
Hariri in his Durrah ,, are sons of the same father from different
mothers. If, however, the word is preceded by a numeral, as here
by Us ah, nine, it is synonymous with nafs or shale hs, a person, and
in using it in this signification, Hariri alludes to Koran xxvii. 49 :
“ And there were* in the city nine persons, who committed excesses
in the land, and did not that which is right.” A few lines lower
down the sons of one father and various mothers are called nhw'u
'Mat, 'Utah being a fellow-wife, from the root 'all “ drinking re¬
peatedly, 5 ' according to the idea that a man on marrying first took a
single draught (nahila), which he repeats on wedding a second
woman or more in addition. These half-brothers are farther qualified
as thrown together from deserts, from which it would appear that
their case was similar to that of the fictitious son of Abu Zayd and
Barrah in Assembly Y., vol. i., p. 130, that is that all of them, or at
least some, had a common father, who in his wanderings had
married their respective mothers, and left them pregnant, without
returning to them. On their chance meeting they may have dis¬
covered this tie of relationship between them, which in itself was
loose enough, but strengthened by their common love for Arab lore,
here called the woof of scholarship, and meaning an intimate know¬
ledge of the Arabic language, oratory and poetry. The laxness of
manners indicated by this supposed state of affairs would account
for their buying wine, for the purpose of a drinking-bout in the
open air, a proceeding which is evidently not approved of by A1
Harith, but which he is ready to condone for the sake of their
accomplishments. I may mention that the term employed for wine
is gahwah, the modern word for coffee, but in the older language
used for any intoxicating liquor, and in particular as a synonym of
hhamr. It is said to be thus called because it blunts the sexual
appetite (tuqhi shahwata’ 1-jimiV).

And appeared as a complex compatible in its parts.— The simile is


NOTES.


221


either taken from grammatical terminology, in which it means a
compound sentence whose constituent parts are well proportioned
to each other, or it is, according to Sherishi, a comparison borrowed
from arithmetic, meaning a number whose parts are congruous, i.e.,
one which can be divided into its fractions and fractions of fractions
(half, third of this, fourth of the result, and so on) without leaving a
rest, the smallest of which is 2,520, thus divisible by the first
numbers from 2 to 10. The idea seems to be, that however deeply
these people entered into the discussion of any question, it never
led to a discrepancy of opinion between them.

We began to display both Soha and the Moon , i.e ., things insignificant
and brilliant (or obscure and evident; see the notfe on “ Sohayl and
Solid meet” vol. i., p. 489, and comp. Ar. Prov., i. 527, 528).

An old man intruded upon us. —The Arabic for “ intruded ” is here
waghala, as in Assembly XXIY., vol. i., p. 244, since those intruded
upon are engaged in drinking, in contradistinction from warasha ,
which would mean he joined uninvited a company taking their
meal or celebrating a banquet; see also the note on Tofayl , vol. i.,
p. 411.

Whose comeliness and shapeliness had gone, 1 while knowledge and experi¬
ence remained with him. —The first clause of this proposition, in
Arabic, zahaba Ijibmdm wa sibra-hu , is borrowed from a tradition, and
hibr is explained as the impression or trace of beauty, from habara ,,
he embellished, whence 1 translate comeliness, ie pleasantness of
aspect. Silo\ on the other hand, is that by which a thing is recog¬
nized, its form, or shape, and if I render it by shapeliness, I have in
my mind the relation which exists in Italian between forma and
formositl, or the more emphatic sense of the word in the English
idiom “ he is in good form.” The Arabic equivalents for know¬
ledge and experience, khvbr and mbr, are synonyms for information
obtained by testing and probing.

And that both he who drew water from the top of the well s and he who
drew it from the bottom , were at a loss.—Al mdtih is a man standing
with his logs astride on the brink of a well, and receiving the bucket
filled with water from another standing at the bottom, who is called
ahmd'ih, a practice which has given rise to the proverb: lt Thou
knowest this better than the md’ih knowoth the fundament of the
mdtih ” (see Ar. Prov.,, i. 111).


222


NOTES .


Not every thing Mach is a dqte, nor every thing ruddy is wine. —The
proverb, for which comp. Ar. Prov., ii. 627, runs originally : “Not
every thing white is fat, nor every thing black a date/' and is used
to indicate an error in opinion or judgment, and difference of nature
and disposition. Abu Zayd substitutes for the simile <c fat ” that of
“wine,” in allusion to the pastime, in which the party were indulging
and, I suppose, insinuating that he for one would not have any
scruple to take a share in it.

Then we held on to him , as the chameleon holds to the trees ,—One of
their proverbs says: “ More cautious than the chameleon,” because
it never leaves one branch of a tree before it has firmly seized
another with its fore-feet (Ar. Prov., i. 399).

The cure of a rent is that it be stitched , a proverbial expression for
the reparation of an injury, here referring to the stranger’s sarcastic
remark by which he had wounded the susceptibilities of the audience.
The word herns, stitching, means the sowing together of a torn
garment, without using a patch (Ar. Prov., i. 7).

I shall give the judgment of Solomon in the matter of the sown Jlr/d ,
meaning a sound judgment, such as was that of Solomon, alluded to
in Koran, xxi. 78: “And David and Solomon, when they gave
judgment concerning a field, when some people’s sheop had grazed
therein ; and We were witnesses of their judgment.” The story
underlying this passage is thus told by Ibn 'Abbas : “ Two men came
before David and Solomon, one of whom was owner of a field, the
other of some sheep. The former said, 0 Prophet of the Lord, the
sheep of this man have broken loose at night and pastured in my field,
leaving nothing of its produce. Said David to him : Go, the sheep
shall be thine. But Solomon, who was then eleven years old, quoth :
Methinks another decision would be more equitable towards both
parties. So David authorized him to deliver judgment between the
twain, whereupon he said: I see fit that thou give over his sheop to
the owner of the field, to whom their young, and their milk and
wool and every profit derived therefrom shall belong, and that thou
give over the field to the owner of the sheep, to sow therein seed,
such as his sheep have pastured of, and keep it until in the coming
year it have the same appearance as on the day on which it has been
grazed upon, when he shall return it to its owner, and claim the
return of his own sheep from him. Then David said to him : The


NOTES.


223


decision be as thou hast decided, and he issued judgment accord¬
ingly.”

Golden-coloured cooled (companionable) wine, in Arabic ash-shamulw
5 z-zahabiyah, shamill being a name for wine, either because it gathers
the drinkers sociably together ( shamala ), or more probably because
it has been cooled by exposure to the north wind (shimdl, comp, the-
note on Cooled of the north wind , vol. i., p. 501), and here accom¬
panied by the feminine of the adjective, because it is a synonym of
the feminine noun khamr. It will be noticed how persistently the
obtruder harps on a subject so congenial to him.

That those who failed may not doubt .— Al-mubtiluna , a term applied
in Koran, xxix. 47, to those who treat the sacr&d book as a vain
thing, or accuse it of falsehood, has here the more general meaning
of disparaging critics, who raise capricious and frivolous objections.

I am not like Mm who stints his boom companion, nor of those whose
fat remains in their own dish.—Who stints is in Arabic man yasta'siru ,
lit., “who prefers himself to others.” The second part of the
sentence is an allusion to the proverb, samnu-kum huriqa fi adimi-
kum , your fat (butter) has been poured out into your own dish, i.e. y
serves only to render your own food savoury ( adim , a by-dish).
Adim is also synonymous with nihy , an earthen pail or leather bag,
used for buttering, when the meaning would be, your butter remains
in your vessel, and is never taken out from it, to prepare food for
guests of yours. In either case the proverb is applied to a person
who keeps his good things to himself, without letting others benefit
thereby. The quotation seems to reprove them for not having
offered him a cup (see Ar. Prov., i. 614).

Then he blinked [made sign with his glance ] to the third and said .
—Allusion to Koran, xix. 12: “And he (Zacharias) came forth
from the sanctuary to his people and made sign to them (as though
he would say), c Praise God at morn and eve.’ ” (The note to this
passage in the second edition of De Sacy misprints ix. for xix.)

We are not of the steeds of this race-course , and have no hands for the
untying of these knots— Two proverbial expressions for : “We are not
equal to this task” (see Ar. Prov., ii. 644, and ii. 493). Another
form of the second of these sayings is, “No two hands belonging
to one man are ten,” meaning “ The power of one man is not like
that of tenin Arabic : Id yadai li-wdhiclin bi-asharah , where the


224


NOTES.


dual with its suppressed ndn before the dative particle li stands for
the iz&fah construction, Id yadaini wdhidin , as the popular phrase
Id abd laka , thou hast no father, stands for la abdJca , there is no father
of thine.

I shall make known to [teach] you that which ye had not known .—
Allusion to Koran, ii. 146 : “ Thus have We sent to you an apostle
from among yourselves, to rehearse our signs to you, and to purify
you, and to instruct you in the book, and in wisdom, and to teach
you that which ye had not known.”

And the pockets (lit., sleeves) became as if yesterday they had not been
rich, for “ they became emptied of their money.” This again alludes
to the Koran, x. *25 : “Until the earth hath received its golden
raiment, and is decked out: and they who dwell on it deem that
they have power over it! Our behest cometh to it by night or by
day, and We make it as if it had been mown down—as if it had not
been rich only yesterday.”


THE THIRTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.

I had travelled up to Sa'dah. — Sa'duh, without the article and im¬
perfectly declined, is the name of a large town in Upper Yemen,
about sixty parasangs distant from San a, and was renowned for the
manufacture of a superior kind of leather, and for the beauty of its
women, of which Ibn Batfttah gives a glowing account. The latter
particular has furnished the name daughters of Sa'dah, which in the
following line of the original is given to the Zebra or South African
wild ass, as resembling the women of that place in beauty and
graceful agility. If sa'dah takes the article, it signifies the shaft of
a lance, which needs no tasqtf or straightening, wherefore A1 Haris
m allusion to a verse of the Ldniiyet al 'Arab, calls himself possessed
of a straightness that resembles a lance ( yahki \?-sadata).

, Wh0mj %t contamed of noble lords , in Arabic man tahwt-hi mlna
s-sardh. Sardt stands here for sara’at, pi. 0 f sariyun, a lord or
princely person, which, according to Jauhari, is the only singular in
fwalah of a word of the measure fail De Sacy reads mrdt, which is
the plural of sdrt, one who travels by night, and would here evidently
be meaningless. This may be a slip of the pen, occasioned by the


NOTES.


225


preceding ruwdt, pi. of rdioi, or simply a misprint, for in his com¬
mentary he quotes the above-mentioned remark of Janharl, and in
vol. i., p. 56, of his second edition he reads correctly sardt. In
Assembly XIII. Abu Zayd says: • “ I am of the Princes of the
tribes ” (vol. i., p. 177), annt min sarawdti H-qabd'il, where sarawdt is
a further plural of the plural sardt.

Wide of range, namely, in the exercise of his liberality. Bd\ like
the English fathom in its original meaning, is the width between the
extremities of the arms when extended, and rahibic %bd' or tawilu
' 1-bCt , wide or long of range, is said of a generous man, as on the
contrary a miser is called qasiru %bd\ short of range.

A Tenvtmi in descent and disposition, i.e., descended from Temim
bin Ad, whose progeny, the Benu Temim, were celebrated for their
generous disposition, inherited from him. Temim was the maternal
uncle of Nazr bin Kananah, father of Koraysh, through Barrah, the
daughter of his sister Morr, whence the poet Jerir says :

“ The mother who bore Koraysh disgraced not men nor was she barren,

Tor no son is nobler than Koraysh, and no uncle nobler than Temim.”

And in a similar strain Farazdak sings in praise of the tribe
Koraysh :

“They are the sons of Barrah, daughter of Morr : how noble their kin
on father and mother’s side :

For no chief purer of descent than Koraysh, no uncle nobler than
Temim.”

Another poet, however, taxes the Bend Temim with avarice and
meanness, saying :

“Temim is a surer guide on the road of vileness than the Kata bird
(comp. vol. i., p. 480),

But when they enter on the path of noble deeds, they go astray.”

At the same time endearing myself to him by being chary of visiting ,
in accordance with Mohammed’s saying, “ Visit intermittingly that
thou make thyself the more beloved.”

Until I became the echo of his voice and the Salmdn of his house. —The
former simile is taken from the proverb, “ quicker than the return
of the echo" (Ar. Prov., i. 674), in the sense in which it is said of
one who obeys readily : “he is quick as if ho were the son of the
mountain (ibnu 7 Udd)” meaning the echo (Ar. Prov., i. 163 and 184,
where the expression “ daughter of the mountain," ibnatu ’ l-jabal, is

15


VOL. II.


226


NOTES.


used). Salmon, the Persian, was an early convert to Islam, and an
intimate associate of Mohammed, who considered him as a member
of his household. It was he who after the battle of Ohud, when
Medina was threatened with an invasion of the hostile tribes,
advised Mohammed to entrench the town (see Muir’s “ Life of
Mohamet,” new edition, p. 318). Ibn 'Abb&s relates that the
Prophet said of him : “ The longing of Paradise for Salman is not
greater than Salmon’s longing for Paradise.” He died A.H. 36.

And inhaling the fragrance of his bay-tree, in Arabic rand , name of
an odorous tree, the inhaling or sniffing of whose scent, like the
preceding simile, stands for enjoying the Kadi’s liberality.

And when I foast meat he casts it into the cinders, taken from the
proverb : “ Thy brother has been roasting meat, until when it was
done he dropped it into the ashes,” applied to one who spoils that
which had been done well (Ar. Prov., i. 657). It is said to originate
with the Khalif 'Omar, who uttered the words when, on passing the
house of a man renowned for his piety, he heard the sounds of
musical instruments and the noises of revelry.

And those around him, were amazed at it—wa atrafa bi-hi man
hawdlai-hi, the translation of which turns on the meaning given to
the word atrafa . It may be paraphrased with the Beyrout edition,
atd-hum hi ’ l-utrufati , having the Kadi for subject, and rendered by
Preston : “ (He) represented it to those around as an extraordinary
case.” Or it may have for its subject “those around him,” when it
would signify xt they became possessed of wonder ( sdrd zawi turfatin)
and said, c How strange this is ’ ( ?nd atrafa-hu)” This is De Sacy’s
interpretation, and I follow it, as more in keeping with the Arabic
idiom. Preston’s remark: “ The words which follow, viz., summa
gala (thereupon he said), without a repetition of the word gdz% seem
to show that the first explanation is the true one,” fails to be con¬
clusive for two reasons. In the first instance he overlooks and
ignores in his rendering the suffixed pronoun in man hawdlai-hi ,
which precedes the verb gala, and may well supply the subject for
it. Secondly, this verb being in the singular, could not by any
possibility of Arabic construction refer to the plurality of persons
surrounding the Kadi, unless it opened the sentence: we can say
gtda man hawdlai-hi, but if the verb follows, it must be mm hawdlai-
hi gdlu ? The singular of the verb, therefore, necessitates for its


NOTES.


227


subject a noun in the singular, which in this place can only be
al-qdzt

Disobedience is one bereavement of the twain , lit., one of the two be¬
reavements, meaning that children, by their disobedience, are as
much lost to their parents as by death, or in the words of a current
proverb, al-uqdq suklu man lam yaskal, disobedience experienced
from children is the bereavement of him who is not bereft (Ar.
Prov., ii, 92).

Oftentimes barrenness is more cooling to the eye, viz., than children,
which endearingly are called gurratu 9 Vain, coolness of the eye, but
frequently become an eyesore by their disobedience and ingratitude.
Preston translates : “ And perhaps it would be preferable to be
entirely childless,” which he explains in the note: “And perhaps
utter bereavement is cooler to the eye,” Le., less painful [than that
they should be disobedient]. This, however, seems somehow to
miss the meaning of 'uqm, which is sterility, not “ utter bereavement/’

Like one who craves for the eggs of the cock hawk —in Arabic, lea-man
yabglit haiza 'l-andqi, a proverbial expression for that which is diffi¬
cult or impossible to obtain. In the explanation of the- simile the
commentators differ. Some say that anuq is a male hawk, other¬
wise called rakham, from whom it would be absurd to look for eggs.
According to others, it is the female bird, and her eggs are said to be
unobtainable, because she builds her nest ou inaccessible mountain-
peaks. The latter interpretation is evidently the correct one in the
following line of the poet Akhtal:

“ To seek from the dark-eyed gazelles their intimacy
Ts like seeking the eggs of the hawk ensconced in her nest,”

for the feminine adjective mastakinnah shows that the female bird is
meant. (Gazelles, metaphorically for damsels, is the signification
ascribed here to jdzi'dt, which originally means camels, or similar
animals, that are satisfied with the moisture contained in green food
instead of water, therefore leading to the idea of abstemious, chaste,
coy. The word rendered by intimacy is sirr, literally secret, but
hero standing for sexual intercourse, connexion, marriage, as in
ch. xi., v. 235, of the Koran : “And no blame shall attach to you
in proposing to such women [within the first four months and ten
days of their widowhood], or in keeping the intention of doing so
to yourselves. God knoweth that ye will not forget them. But

15—2


228


NOTES.


pledge not each other to marriage unless ye speak honourable
words/' Rodwell translates: “ But plight not faith to them in
secret/ 7 apparently mistaking the special meaning of the word in
this case, for there is no need for the injunction of avoiding secrecy,
provided the wooing is done in decent language). To return to the
idiom in question, the female hawk seems also to be alluded to in a
passage taken from an anonymous poet:

“ When I had a secret entrusted to me, I concealed it like the eggs of
the hawk whose nest is not to be reached

In Arabic, Id yundlu la-hu wakru , where the pronoun in la-Jm
(whose) refers t5 the collective noun baiz, not to the name of the
bird, since the secret concealed in the breast is compared to the
eggs deposited in the nest. Both these instances tally with the
proverb (Ar. Prov., ii. 148), dazzu min baizi ’l-aw&qi, rarer than the
eggs of the hawk, for * aziz , of which aazz is the comparative, does
not imply absolute impossibility, but difficulty of attainment and
rareness of occurrence, being, for instance, applied to exceptional or
unique grammatical forms, as the plural sardt mentioned p. 224
above. On the other hand, it is stated that Mu&wiyeh was asked
by a man: “Wilt thou grant me a loan T He answered “Yes.”
Said the man: “And to my son?” “bTo,” answered the Khalif.
“Or to‘my kindred? 77 insisted the supplicant. Whereupon Mu'ar
wiyeh said :

“He wanted the piebald, big with young ( talaba 7 l-ablaqa 7 l-'aquq -),
When he could not find him, he wished for the eggs of the hawk,”

where ablaq means a male piebald horse or spotted camel, for whom
it is as impossible to conceive as it is for the male hawk to lay eggs,
and consequently the latter phrase here coincides with the popular
expression, “the egg of the cock. 77 Some, however, will have it
that the cock lays an egg once without repeating the performance,
in support whereof they quote the following verse of the poet Abu
'Atahiyah :

“ Thou hast visited us once in a lifetime, do so again and let it not be
the cock’s egg, 75

i.e.j let not thy visit remain solitary like it.


NOTES .


229


As with a frown the lion would fend Ms mane. —This alludes to the
proverb : “ More unapproachable than the mane of the lion ” (see
Ar. Prov., ii. 714). In the text the dual libdatai-hi is used, the
reason for which seems to be that the word libdah (mane) is defined
in the dictionaries as the matted hair between the shoulders and on
the croup of the lion.

As those endoioed with firmness bore 'patiently , in Arabic sabra uli
H-azmi, a Koranic expression taken from ch. xlvi., v. 34: “Bear
thou up, then, with patience, as did the Apostles, endued with
firmness.”

Spill not the water of thy face, in Arabic Id turiq mcVa 'l-muhaiyd ,
for the more usual mcVa ’ l-wajhi , in which the word “ water ” is
used in a similar sense as when we speak of the water of a gem or
a blade, meaning the smooth surface and serene aspect of the human
countenance, characterising a man who is respected and respects
himself. Thus “ the water of the face,” like the Persian equivalent,
dbi ruy , stands for honour, and to spill it is a metaphorical expres¬
sion for “ demeaning one’s self.”

And if his broiderecl satin ( dibdj) has gone to rags , sees not his way by
begging to fret his cheeks. — Dibdj, derived through Persian probably
from the Greek, is brocade or embroidered silk-stuff, and the femi¬
nine form dibdjah becomes a simile for the forehead and the cheeks,
where again the idea of glossiness and smoothness constitutes the
link of comparison. The fraying or fretting of the tissue of the
face, by rubbing it on the ground in supplication, is an idiom of the
same meaning as that explained in the preceding note, with both of
which compare Chenery in the passage, Fray the tissue of my counte¬
nance, vol. i., p. 280. In addition to the extracts in prose and verse
on the shame and humiliation of beggary given there, the following
may be quoted. Al-Hasan, son of 'Ali, said on this subject: ££ Let
it suffice thee, as to begging, that it enfeebles the tongue of the
speaker, and breaks the heart of the brave, the valiant, that it
makes stand the freeborn, the noble, in the place of the abject slave,
that it takes away the freshness of colour and wipes away a man’s
honour, that it makes him love death and renders life hateful.”
Al-Asma'i relates : “ I heard an Arab saying : 1 Begging is the high¬
road to abasement; it robs the noble of his greatness and the
estimable of the esteem in which he is held.” Muiiwiyeh is said to


230


NOTES.


have presented 'Abd Allah, ibn az Zobayr with 3,000 dirhems for
having recited to him a triplet of Afwah al-Awadi running thus :

“ I have tested mankind generation after generation, and seen naught
but deceit and strife,

Nor have I witnessed of calamities one more disastrous and hurtful than
enmity between man and man,

And I have tasted the bitterness of all things, but there is naught that
excels begging in bitterness.”

Wilt thou teach thy mother how to copulate , and thy nurse how to give
such? —Alluding to and enlarging upon the proverb “like one who
instructs her mother in copulation ” (Ar. Prov., ii. 325), said of
a person who affects to teach another more knowing than himself.
In similar manner the popular sayings: “ The scorpion has rubbed
himself against the snake , and the weanlings have coursed along with the
stallions,” apply to one who attempts a task to which he is not equal
(comp. Ar. Prov., i. 609).

And lowered to him the wing of the kindly , an expression borrowed
from Koran, xvii. 25 : “And lower to them (your parents) the wing
of humility out of compassionate tenderness and saj, fi Lord have
mercy on them both, even as they reared me when I was little. > ”

As fair those in need, an exception is made for them in matters pro¬
hibited. —This refers to the popular saying az-zarurdiu tabilm 7-
mahzurdta, “ necessities permit things forbidden,” which is akin to
our proverb “ necessity knows no law,” and, according to Sherlslii,
is justified by Koran, v. 5 : “ Whoso then without wilful leanings
to wrong shall be forced by hunger to transgress, to him, verily,
will Allah be Indulgent, Merciful.

Was it not thou who contradicted his father irreverently in saying ?—
This translation presupposes the reading wa gala, which is that of
the native editions and of most MSS., my own included, assigning
the following verses to the youth, whom his father quotes, as the
son had done with the preceding verses belonging to the old man.
De Sacy reads is gala, “ when he said,” making the father to be their
author also, and thereby to contradict himself by blaming content¬
ment and resignation which he had praised and commended before.
The editors of De Sacy’s second edition, in remarking that the
former reading supports Riickert’s opinion on the point to the same
effect, add with good reason, that only in this manner the Kadi’s


NOTES ..


231


indignation at the lad’s inconsistency becomes intelligible, who first
refused to beg at his father’s injunction and now deems an appeal to
the generous preferable to bearing distress patiently.

j For Moses met it heretofore and al-Khazir did the same. —Al-Khazir,
more commonly called al-Khizr, is the servant of God and com¬
panion of Moses, mentioned in the Sfira of the Cave, xviii., verse 76
of which relates the incident here alluded to : “ Then went they on
until they came to the people of a city. Of its people they asked
food, but they refused them for guests. 7 ’ The Mohammedans con¬
sider him to be one of the Prophets, who has survived from the
time of Moses to the present age, and a legend says that he is
present whenever his name has been pronounced, whence the follow¬
ing line of the poet Abft t-Taiyib :

“ As soon as we recall his liberality, he appeal’s, far or near he hastens
to the spot with the foot of al-Khizr.”

Temimi at one time and Kaisi at another ? —In the original Temimi
and Kaisi stand in the accusative or objective case, which is either
that of condition (Ml), or depending on an elided verb ; “ Showest
thou thyself at one time as a Temimi, at another as a Kaisi, i.e.,
displayest thou alternately the lofty disposition of the tribe Temim
and the baseness of the tribe Kais i The form of interrogation has
here the force of an assertion, implying reproof. To Temimi com¬
pare the note, p. 225, above.

“By Him who has made thee a hey for the truth , and an opener
(fattah) amongst mankind, meaning a dispenser of justice amongst
them, as in Koran, vii. 87: “0 our Lord 1 decide (lit., open)
between us and between our people with truth, for Thou art the
best of those who decide,” where the participle fdtih, lit., one who
opens, coincides with the more intensive form fattdh of the present
passage.

For among the missing arrows is one that hits, meaning that even a
miser may have a fit of generosity (see Ar. Prov., ii. 625).

So he was not slow (lit., he belied him not) to set his net and to bake his
fish before the fire .—Those are two proverbial expressions, according
to a marginal note in “Myths of Modern Origin,” for using strata¬
gem or planning deceit, the former self-evident,' the latter arising
from the practice of a thief, who on seeing a fire, walked up to it


232


NOTES.


with the purpose of stealing, but when surprised, pretended he had
come to bake his fish by it.

Are rooted more firmly than mount Bazivd. —This is the name of a
mountain near Medina with far-spreading ramifications, which ex¬
plains the comparison here made between its extent and that of the
Kadi’s wisdom and clemency.

Whose gifts are like yon quails and yon manna , allusion to Koran, ii.
54 : “ And We caused the clouds to overshadow you, and We sent
down manna and quails upon you” (comp, also vii. 160 and xx. 82).

Then the youth rejpented Utterly. —The Arabic for this: fa-suqita
Tfatd fi yadi-hi , contains a peculiarity of idiom, which has greatly
exercised the ingenuity of the philologists. Suqut, to fall, is a neuter
verb of which the passive can only be used in the third person
singular suqita , with the impersonal meaning “it was fallen,” and
the proverbial expression suqita ft yadi-hi (Ar. Prov., i. 604), which
is applied to one deeply repentant, signifies, a falling into his hand
was caused, namely, of his head or mouth, brought about by his
remorse, since people in a paroxysm of contrition were wont to bite
their fingers. A note in De Sacy’s second edition points out, that
grammatically speaking the phrase is very similar to the Latin “ Sic
itur ad astra, ” literally, “ thus a going or soaring to the stars is
done,” for : this is the road to fame. The Arabic mode of speech
seems to have been, unknown to the-poets of the pre-Islamite period,
but appears for the first time in the^Koran, vii. 148, where it is said
of the worshippers of the golden calf wa-lammd suqita fi aidi-him , trans¬
lated by Kodwell: “ But when they bitterly repented.” Mohammed,
no doubt, had heard the locution on his journeys amongst the desert
Arabs, but when the later poets adopted it from the sacred book,
they inadvertently or intentionally overlooked the impersonality of
the passive form, and AhCi Kuwas, for instance, was not afraid to
say : iva nisimtin suqittu minhd fi yadi. This is about the same as if
a facetious Latinist of the middle ages had, in the sentence quoted
above, added the termination of the first person to the verbal form
itur, and written : sic ituro ad astra. Intelligent readers would
have understood him to mean: “Thus I do what is done to reach
the stars or the pinnacle of glory,” just as the fellow-countrymen of
Abb Nuw&s perceived, his meaning to be: “ And there is many a
woman by whom I was made sorely to repent.” In the present case the


NOTES,


233


construction could have been rendered perfectly correct in two ways
by saying either: fa fcd H-fatd suqifa ft yatli-hi or fa smfita ft yculi
l-fatd , the former signifying “ Then, as for the youth, it was fallen
into his hand,” the latter meaning, “ Then it was fallen into the
hand of the youth,” where the expression “ it was fallen ” is to be
explained as has been done in the beginning of this note. Now it
may be asked, why did Hariri, who possessed such a thorough
mastery over his language, choose the more objectionable form
when he knew better ? My answer is, that it is not he who speaks
in his work, but the B;Vwi, who relates Abft Zayd’s adventures, and
Hariri shows his skill in making him speak in the most natural and
life-like manner. A1 Harith, who may be supposed to be an Arab of
liberal education, above all well versed in his Koran and the poetry
of his age, had begun with the proverbial and sacred formula fa
snqita, but remembering that the pronoun in yadi-hi would be
without a subject to refer to, as the person mentioned last, was the
Kadi, he throws in at once, by way of parenthesis, the word al-
fatd, “as for the youth,” without waiting for the end of the sen¬
tence. We have seen on various occasions that Hariri likes to intro¬
duce such disputed points of grammar and etymology, partly to
show that he is well acquainted with the controversy, partly perhaps
to provoke further discussion on the subject. Finally I may add,
for the sake of completeness, that one solitary reading of the Koran
substitutes the active saqata for the passive suqifa, supplying the noun
al-nadamn , “repentance,” as subject to the former, which interpreta¬
tion, however, Hariri himself in his grammatical treatise “ Durrat
al-Ghawwas ” declares to be faulty ; a sufficient reply to those who
would make the same substitution in the text of the Assembly.

And (might) leant from what tree his fire sprang , lit., might know
the tree of his fire, for “his origin and character,” alluding to the
proverb (Ar. Prov., ii. 207, 256) : “ In every tree is fire, but the
Markh and the 'Uffir excel,” viz., in yielding tire when rubbed, or
feeding it, when kindled; so much so that in the hot season fre¬
quently trees of these kinds are set aflame by the friction, brought
about by the wind, and spread conflagration over a whole valley.
A poet of the Hamasch says :

cl Thy fire-shafts are the best of fire-shafts of kings in which theMarkh-
.wood mixes with the ' Ufiir.


234


NOTES.


But even wert thou in the darkness of night to rub a pebble with the
wood of the Naba'tree, thou wouldst elicit fire.”

The Naba' is a tree whose wood, on account of its hardness, is
preferred for making bows, so that the production of a spark by
rubbing it against a pebble is a striking simile for any marvellous
and extraordinary feat.

To inquire after his good ancl evil hap, in Arabic li-astarifa sdniha-
hu wa bdriha-hu. This is taken from the flight of a bird, or from
game, which are called sdniJi , if coming from the left and turning
their right to you, which is considered by most Arabs to portend
good, while bdrih means the reverse, and is said to augur evil.
According to Sherlshi, however, the people of Nejd regard, on the
contrary, the former as an ominous, the latter as an auspicious sign.


THE THIRTY-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.

Ever since . ... my 'pen sputtered. —The most obvious explanation
of this phrase is that it means : Since I knew how to write, but the
word qalam , pen, is also used metaphorically for zalcar, membrum
virile, when the idiom allows of the interpretation, “ since I had
reached puberty.”

I clutched his stirrup with both my hands , in allusion to the proverb,
ushdud yadaikct ft gharzi-hi , tighten thy hands on his stirrilp, mean¬
ing, cling to one who has the power to benefit thee, or stick to an
undertaking unflaggingly (see Ar. Prov., i. 660).

■ In applying the pitch to the places where the scab begins to show , again
proverbial (Ar. Prov., iii., P. 1, p. 541), for being well grounded in
a matter, and knowing how to treat or mend it.

Swifter than the moon in her changes , the last word being in Arabic
nuqal , plural of nuqlah , her movement from one sign of the Zodiac
to the next, which is performed in about two days and eight hours.
Another reading is ft 'l-nufal, during her second three nights (the
first three being called ahurarf when her swiftness means her earli¬
ness of setting during those nights. The preceding expression, to-
wander abroad faster than the proverb , refers to the phrase al-masalu
'l-s&ir, the current proverb.

Which is part of man's chastisement (or torment), allusion to a tradi-


NOTES .


235


tion which is recorded, in the following words, in the Muwatta, one
of the oldest collections of the Hadis, compiled by the Imam Malik
(fA.H., 179): “ Travel is a portion of man’s punishment, it de¬
prives you of sleep and drink and food; so when one of you has
obtained his object in undertaking it, let him return to his people
in all haste.”

So at a time when I had strayed to Merv , and no wonder. —Merv, in
Arabic Mane, an imperfectly declined noun, whence the oblique
case Manra, is a large and celebrated town of Khorasan, called the
mother of that country. As the people of Khorasan were renowned
for their stinginess, it is not surprising that the inhabitants of the
mother-town were said to excel in it all the rest of the world.
Witness the story, related in Sadi’s Gulistan, if I remember well, of
the merchant of Merv, who would not allow his son to eat cheese,
but made him rub his bread against the glass cover under which it
was kept. In the title of this Assembly, Hariri uses the regular
form of the noun of relation marwt, in preference to the more usual
mancazt, probably for marghard, derived from mar a h ft r:, an older
name of Merv (compare my Persian Dictionary, p. 1217). The
words in the text, no wonder , in Arabic la gharwa , are, of course,
thrown in to rhyme with manva, but they are not entirely irrele¬
vant, as the fame and importance of the city may naturally enough
induce a traveller to visit it.

Nor raw I any trace or dust of him , in the original W ard la-hu
asar-an wa Id 'isyar-an, which final word means dust raised by his
foot in walking, and seems more appropriate than the reading
'akar-an of some MSS., the meaning of which, “ a slight and feeble
trace,” would appear pleonastic after amr-uu.

And dings to the yeoyle commanding respect, as one clings to Ms wife
and Ms dose relation ,s.—The text of this passage, wa ’ Itar.ama li-ahli
H-hvrami Jca-md ytdia::amn li 'l-tthli wal-hurami , contains a play on the
double meaning of the words ahl and hnram. The latter is the
plural of hurmah, which may he synonymous with i/ttirfm, honour-
ing, paying respect, revering, and if in connection with it, ahl is
taken in the sense of people, the expression ahlu’l-7j-unm signifies
“ people of respects,” Le. y to whom respects are due. But the plural
of It amah has also the special meaning of close relatives, comprising
the relations of a man by consanguinity, affinity, or fosterage,


236


NOTES.


with whom marriage is unlawful, while al-alil , with the article,
stands for his household or more in particular for his wife. The
reading which I have adopted is that of my own MS. and of the
native editions. De Sacy has al-haram for the second al-huram, but
the former, in the sense of “ harem,” would be almost identical with
al-ahl, as his own definition in his commentary shows.

For Allah’s grace upon thee has been great —quotation from Koran,
iv. 113 : “And God hath caused the Book and the Wisdom to
descend upon thee, and what thou knewest not He hath caused
thee to know; and the grace of God towards thee hath been great.”

Who grovels in the d-ust after he had rolled in riches , in Arabic
tariba ba'da ’ l-itr&bf . The verb tariba means he has become poor, as
though he were bent to the dust (; iurdb ) by dint of his poverty, and
itrdb, infinitive of the fourth form of the same verb, signifies being
wealthy, as though a man’s riches were plentiful, like dust.

And hopefulness is the best means of propitiation of him who begs , and
the best gift of him who gives. —The commentators say in explanation
of this : “ The trusting hopefulness with which you represent your
need to the generous on approaching him, gains his favour for you
more effectually than the intercession of a third person, and it is a
source of even greater pleasure and gratification to him than the
gift itself, which he may be prevailed upon to bestow on you.”

And deal me fair as Allah has dealt fair with thee.^ Taken from
Koran, xxviii. 77 : “ But seek, by means of what. God hath given
thee, to attain the future Mansion; and neglect not thy part in this
world, but be bounteous to others; as God has been bounteous to
thee.”

Then he stopped short , to wait for the fruit of Ms planting (ukla gh arsi -
hi). — Uicl, lit., that which is eaten, occurs in the sense of fruit,
Koran, xviii. 31: “Now set forth to them as a parable two men •
on one of whom We had bestowed two gardens of grape-vines, and
surrounded both with palm-trees, and placed corn-fields between
them; Each of the gardens did yield its fruit (uJcl), and failed not
thereof at all.”

Mayst thou forfend a curse , i.e ., mayst thou guard thyself or refrain
from doing anything that would bring a curse upon thee, a formula
of greeting, implying a prayer, addressed to kings in the times of
the Ignorance. t Jauhari quotes the following verse, which he attri-


NOTES.


237


butcs to Zohayr bin Janab al-Kalbi, a warrior poet, on whom see
Caussin de Percival’s “ Essai,” i. 116 ; ii. 174:

“ For sooth, I have obtained all ’ that man may obtain, except the
salute,”

where the word “salute,” in Arabic at-tahaiyah , is explained by al-
mulk , i.e., royal power and dignity.

And token he began with a, bounty, folloios it up with another ; in the
text, ira in bada 1 bi-d’idat-in Ada. The verb c aud means to come
back, to return, to repeat. Hence the feminine participle Widah ,
that which returns, stands like the English word “ return ” for
profit, advantage, gain, which, when conferred upon somebody else*
becomes a benefit. Ada has then its usual sense : he comes back to
it, repeats it again and again.

And never meet stinginess and praise, so that one woidd think a limrd
this , tlait a fish , etc.—An Arab proverb says, “ I shall never do this
until the lizard goes to the water” (Ar. Prov., i. 574), and of two
things or persons utterly incompatible with each other it is said
“ they are as far asunder as the lizard and the fish,” because the-
former avoids that which is the element of the latter (comp. vol. i.,
p. 431).

Made him alight on the seat of the drew miser ( maqadu ’l-khdtini), a
popular expression for closest proximity, as mafiaru H-kalh, the place
to which a frightened dog is driven, stands for a great distance.
Synonymous with the former idiom are mafadu ’ l-qdhilati and
magadu ’ l-irjlri , seat of the midwife, place of the waistband,
respectively, and a more emphatic form of expressing remoteness is
muntVn 'l-yyilg (s-suraiyd), the suspension place of Capella (of the
Pleiades).

Thai which announced to him length of skirt and shortness of night .—
Length of skirt is a metaphor for wealth and luxury, for which
compare the following passage in tho twenty-sixth Assembly, vol. i.,
p. 26-1 : “ Until when his gifts had overwhelmed me, and his gold
had lengthened wy skirt , I contrived to depart in the fair condition
thou seost.” In similar manner, shortness of night means a life of
pleasure, since the night is short only for him who passes it in
delight and enjoyment, while, as tho poet says, the shortest night
becomes long in sorrow and grief. Many conceits of the poets turn


238


NOTES.


on this subject, amongst others the following play of Abu 3 1-Kasim
as-SMimi on the consonance of sound between hilt, my night, and
laila, name of a mistress :

“ My night and Laila are alike in contrariness, making of me a proverb
in love-matters,

My night is lavish of its length {PfiT) whenever Laila stints me her
favour (, taul ), and when she is lavish thereof it is my night that stints
me.”

That my earnings are clue to worth, not to meddling, ancl my station to
power of speech, not to Icings' grace. —To this the commentators quote
Mutenebbi’s line :

“ Not through my people have I attained to greatness, they are great
through me, *

By my own self have I risen, not by my ancestors. 37


THE THIRTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.

On hacks of Mahri camels. —Mahri is the noun of relation formed
from Mahrat ibn Hayd&n, chief of a tribe of Yemen, and its
feminine Mahriyah means a camel descended from those bred by him,
which were celebrated for their swiftness, said to surpass that of
horses.

Some promising business had cropped up for me at Suhdr. —This is
one of the chief towns of the district 'Omk, on the south-eastern
coast of Arabia, and an emporium for the trade of the country by
means of the Persian Gulf, with a harbour one parasang square.
The above passage runs in Arabic, wa gad sanaha H arahun bi-Suhdra ,
where I translate arahun, an affair or matter, by “ promising
business, 33 on account of the verb sanaha, which, as was mentioned
in a previous note, means: presented itself under favourable
auspices.

Who blames himself and finds excuses, i.e., who reproaches himself
for venturing on a sea-voyage and exposing himself to its dangers,
but at the same time finds excuses, on account of the quantity of his
merchandise, which would render the land journey too tedious and
expensive.

0 ye people of this strong-built ship, etc. —Allusion to the following
passages of the Koran, xvii. 68 : “ It is your Lord, who speedeth


NOTES.


239


onwards the ships for you in the sea”; vi. 96 : “This is the
Ordinance of the Mighty, the Wise lxi. 10 : “ 0 ye who believe !
shall I direct you unto a merchandise which shall deliver you from
the sore torment V*

Whose shadow is not heavy, for: who is no encumbrance, or will
not prove a bore, taken from the saying : thy shadow weighs heavy
upon me (comp. Assembly XXII., vol. i., p. 230, 1. 13; and the
note on Deemed his shadow to he heavy, ibul., p. 473).

And not to he stingy in'providing for his needs. —The word ma tin, here
translated “in providing for his needs,” has occurred in Assembly
XXXVI., p. 80, 1. 4 from the bottom, where I have rendered it by
“ bounty.” It is, according to most lexicographers, a derivative of
the measure faul, from the verb ma'u, to flow, whence it signifies
rain, and in accordance with the connection existing in the Arabic
mind between the idea of water and moisture and that of bounty, of
which Ohenery speaks in his interesting note on A bucket from his
stream (vol. i., p. 282), it becomes synonymous with manlf in the
sense of kindness, beneficence, etc. A more far-fetched explanation
is, that it stands for maHnah, aid, assistance, from the verb 'ami, to
help, and that the letter of prolongation in the first syllable is
inserted to compensate for the dropped termination of the feminine.
Be that as it may, the term mrtartn is further applied to anything
useful, or borrowed for use, as a kettle, an axe, or household utensils
in general. Abfi 'Obaydeh says, m<Wn has in the time of Ignorance
the meaning of advantage, gift, and in Islam that of obedience, piety,
legal alms. In modern Arabic, mfitlnu ’ bwardq is a ream of paper.

I take refuge with Allah from the paths of destruction.—An ejaculatory
prayer of this kind, on embarking in a vessel, is approved of by
Mohammed in the following words of a tradition : “ It is a safe¬
guard from drowning for my people when they mount their ships.”

Allah . . . has not made it binding on the ignorant to learn, any more
than He has made it incumbent on the learned to teach, i.e., He has
enjoined the one at the same time, or as well as the other. This
alludes to the saying attributed to ’Alt: “ Allah has imposed upon
the ignorant the duty of learning, as he has imposed upon those
possessed of knowledge the duty of teaching.” Similarly Mohammed
bin Kab says : “It is not allowed to one of the learned to be silent
concerning his learning, nor is the ignorant allowed to keep silence


240


NOTES.


concerning his ignorance, but he should ask.” The equivalent for
“ He has made binding upon ” is in Arabic akhaza, “ he has taken
from,” where the word 'ahd or misdq, “ covenant,” is understood,
which idiom occurs in full, Koran, iii. 184 : “ Moreover, when God
entered into a covenant with (lit., took a covenant) from those to
whom the Book had been given, . . . they cast it behind their
backs and sold it for a sorry price ! But vile is that for which they
have sold it.”

He quoted from the Koran , saying , lit., he read, qara’a , the verb
from which the name Qu'r&n or Koran itself is derived. The passage
quoted is xi. 43.

By Him who holds in bondage the fathomless sea (al-bahra ’l-lnjjtya).
— Lujji, derived from lujjah , an abyss, is that of which the bottom
cannot be reached, and applies likewise to the sea in Koran, xxiv. 40:
“ Or like the darkness on the unfathomable sea, when covered by
billows riding upon billows, above which are clouds : darkness upon
darkness. When a man reacheth forth his hand, he can scarcely
see it! He to whom God shall not give light, no light at all
hath he!”

How could the son of brightness {ibnu jald) remain hidden 2 —a desig¬
nation given to a man of fame or mark, either because it is used as
a metaphor for the morning, the moon, or the dawn of day, or after
a notorious depredator, thus called, for whom see Ar. Prov., i. 46.

While the sea was calm (wa ’l-bahru rahwun), again taken from
Koran, xliv. 23: “And leave the sea behind thee resting in calm¬
ness,” i.e ., restored to its natural condition, after it had swallowed
the Egyptians in pursuit of Moses and his people. Rodwell translates
here “ the disparted sea,” following the interpretation of those com¬
mentators who explain the word by opened or split asunder, from
rahti, he opened his legs wide. It is, however, evident, from our
text, that Hariri leans to the former notion.

And the travellers forgot all that had been , i.e., the state of things
which had prevailed in the early part of their voyage.

But we proceeded to search within its inmost part , etc .—Allusion to
the following passages of the Koran, xvii. 5 : “So when the menace
for the first crime (the slaughter of Isaiah and the imprisonment of
Jeremiah, punished by the invasion of the Assyrians) came to be
inflicted, We sent against you our servants, endued with terrible


NOTES .


241


prowess; and they searched the inmost part of your abodes, and the
menace was accomplished ”; ibid., xvi. 50: a Have they not seen
how everything which God hath created turneth its shadow right and
left, 55 where the verb tafaiyu 5 is used in the sense of turning one’s
shadow, which in the text of the Assembly has the meaning of
seeking shade; ibid., xxii. 44 : “ And how many cities which had
acted wickedly have We destroyed, and they are laid low in ruin on
their own foundations, and wells abandoned and lofty castlesT

We found every one of them in the predicament (lit., skin) of one
broken down, and the grief of one taken captive .—This is the reading
of De Sacy and my MS., which I follow in my own edition. The
Beyrout and Boulak prints have instead : But we found every one of
them sorrowful, deep in grief, so that we fancied him utterly broken
down or taken captive.

When we saw that their fire teas the fire of al-Tlubdhib. — This
refers to the proverb, akhlafu min ndri Thubdhib, more deceitful
than the fire of al-ITubdhib or of Alnl JTubdhib (Ai\ Prov., i. 454 ;
ii. 343 ; iii., P. 1, 28), said to have been a miser, who used to kindle
his fire from thin wood, so that it was extinguished before any
guest, speculating on his hospitality, could approach it. According
to others, the appellative applies to the glow-worm, commonly
called sirdju ’l-lail, lamp of the night, or to the sparks struck by the
hoofs of a horse on stony ground, or produced by the collision of
stones in the air. Al-Kat/imi says in the Hamaseh :

“ For sooth, the fires of Kays in winter-time are to the night farer but
like the fire of al-Hub&hib,”

which Tabriz! explains: “ Like’ the sparks springing from a stone
under the horse’s hoof. 55

And be the churl cursed (qabuha), the Arabic verb being taken in
the sense in which it is used in.Koran, xxviii. 42 : “ We^pursued
them with a curse in this world, and they shall be of the execrated
(miua H-maqhVdna) on the day of Resurrection.”

The Shtih of this territory .—The Persian word shah, king, lends
local colour to a scene enacted on an island of the Persian Gulf, and
at the same time it contains an allusion to the king of chess, in
connection with nupah, territory, which also means a square of the
chess-board.

VOL. II.


242


NOTES .


When it took no longer than to say: Nay , nay I —For this proverbial
phrase to express shortness of time and quickness of action see
Ar. Prov., ii. 295. It occurs in the following line of A1 Komayt ibn
Zayd, of whom an account is given by Chenery, vol. i., p. 320 :

“The alighting of the people therein is like (saying) nay, nay, for a
little while, without putting saddle near saddle,”

ie., without unsaddling. Jerir uses in the same sense the expression
like nay ancl like this , in speaking of a short snatch of sleep.

Or an enemy frankly hostile , in Arabic wa 'aduwin mubinin , allusion
to Koran, xvii. 55 : “Enjoin My servants to speak in kindly sort:
Verily Satan would stir up strifes among them; aye, Satan is man’s
avowed foe ”

Sound advisers how often are they suspected, lit., how many a sound
adviser is set down as one to be suspected (zannin), a word borrowed
from Koran, lxxxi. 24, where, however, the reading zannin, niggard.,
seems preferable. The Koranic passage refers to Mohammed, of
whom it is said that he does not stint or keep back heaven’s secrets.
With the reading zannin the meaning would be, he is not subject
to the suspicion of falsehood, when he speaks of the invisible world
and its mysteries.

That the hand of none menstruous must touch it, indicating that the
spell is something sacred, in allusion to a woman in this state being
forbidden to touch the sacred book.

Or the interval which the milker observes in drawing milk. —To one
who hurries another on, it is said amhilni fuwaqa naqatin , allow me
the collecting time (fuwdq) of a she-camel, i.e., the time in which
she collects a fresh flow of milk, after being milked (Ar. Prov.,
ii. 602).

So that I was made to fancy him 'Uwais al Karani or Delays al-Asadt.
—The former, a native of Karan in Nejd, was the most eminent
ascetic and devotee of Kufa, who was killed in the battle of Siffin ;
Dobays, known as Amir Dobays, or Amir Saif ad-daulat al-Asadi,
a grandee of Bagdad and contemporary of Hariri, noted for his
generosity, of which he gave signal proofs to the author of the
Makamat on hearing that he had mentioned him in this work.


NOTES .


243


THE FORTIETH ASSEMBLY.

But I met from her with the sweat of the water-bag, ie., with the
sweat which the carrying of the water-bag produces in the slave-
girl who is burdened with it, a proverbial expression for misery and
hardship, for which see Ar. Prov., ii. 347 ; iii., P. 2, 480. Another
explanation is that the sweat of the water-bag means the water
which flows from it or the flow itself, so that the meaning of the
proverb, “I have imposed upon thee the sweat of the water-bag/'
would be either, I have forced thee to travel, when thou needest
the sweat of the water-bag, i.e., its water, or, I hav^ imposed upon
thee a task which makes thy sweat flow as profusely as the water
flows from the water-bag. This would come near the form of the
saying, transmitted by Maydani (Ar. Prov., ii. 436): “I have met
therefrom with the sweat of my brow.’ 5 Lastly, some interpreters
read instead of 'drag (sweat), the word \dag, synonymous with
mihlq, the handle by which the water-bag is carried, and say the
proverb signifies : “ I have imposed upon thee the carrying of the
water-bag,” namely, the necessity of travelling.

JFhat the upshot would he, lit., how the turning-out would be (kaifo
’l-munqalubii). —The word munqalab may be noun of place (turning-
point), or verbal noun (the turning-out of a matter). In the Koran,
xviii. 34, it occurs in the sense of that which takes the turn of
something else: “ I shall surely find a better (garden) than it in
exchange (mungalaban) ” ; and ib., xxvi. 228, it lias the meaning of
return: “But they who treat them (the believers) unjustly shall
find out what a return awaiteth them, lit., with what return they
shall return (to God, aiya mungalabm ya.nqalilnlnu).

Hence I threw my business behind my back, in the Arabic idiom
“behind my ear,” to which Hariri, in the short commentary attached
by him to this Assombly, quotes Koran, iii. 184: “They cast it
behind their backs” (comp. p. 216, above).

Though I should not be of any help .—The fourth form of the verb
fjjttnid, which generally means to enrich, is here used in that of
helping, as in Koran, xliv. 41: “A day when a servant shall not
help a master in aught (hi yugdrnt), neither shall aid be given to
them (la i/m-ymlnu)” ..... [ ,,

16—2


244


NOTES.


And stint even the fragment of a worn toothpicl s, lit., the spittings of
the siwdlc , meaning the splinters of the miswdk, or piece of wood,
used for rubbing and thereby cleaning the teeth before prayer,
which remain in the mouth, and are spit out, when this preliminary
act of ceremonial ablution has been performed (see Hughes' “ Dic¬
tionary of Isl&m,” p. 353)*.

Knoioest thou not that contumacy provokes the wrath of the Lord 2 —
The Lord may mean £t thy husband,” as the Beyrout edition ex¬
plains, or more probably God Almighty, in allusion to Koran,
xxiv. 8, 9 : “But it shall avert the chastisement from her ( i.e ., the
woman accused of adultery), if she testify a testimony four times
repeated, by God, that he (the accusing husband) is indeed of them
that lie; and a fifth time that the wrath of the Lord he on her , if he
have spoken the truth.”

And punishes the neighbour for the default of the neighbour .—This
and the preceding metaphor are sufficiently transparent to allow
of dispensing with the exceedingly plain-spoken definition of the
neighbour and the neighbour's neighbour, given by Sherishi, who
at the same time relates that the saying was addressed by an Arab
to his wife, when she excused herself from meeting his advances in
due fashion on the plea that she was visited by her menses. The
light, thus thrown on the subject, extends also to the following
rebuke of the Kadi, in which the salt-marshes stand for a place
where no plants grow, and where sowing seed is as futile as looking
out for chickens in a place where no chickens are hatched. In the
imprecation, with which he concludes: “May no concern of thine
prosper” {Id nairna * avfu-ka ), the same double meaning underlies
the word 'auf t condition, state of affairs, as the word qalam in the
first note to Assembly XXXVIII., p. 234, the affirmative form of
the idiom naima ' aufu-ka , being addressed to a man *on the point of
consummating marriage (Ar. Prov., ii. 747), and in the sentence,
“ Mayst thou not be safe in that which thou fearest,” the object of
fear is offspring, either female, which, as we have seen, p. 209 above,
is considered as a misfortune by all 'Arabs, or offspring in general,
which the poorer classes amongst them dread in reversed propor¬
tion, as it seems, with those amongst ourselves.

By Him who sends down the winds , quotation from Koran, vii. 55,
and. passim.


NOTES.


245


She is more of a liar Hum Sujahi (la-akzctbu min Sajahi ), according
to Hariri’s commentary, a proper name indeclinable in the letter i,
like that of the celebrated grammarian Sibawayhi (see vol. i., p. 497,
and comp, bardhi in Assembly XLVIII.). The woman thus called
was the daughter of al-Munzir, and made claim to the prophetic
office in opposition to the pseudo-prophet Musaylamah (see “ Diet,
of Islam,” p. 422), whom she went to convert or fight, but whose
cause she subsequently embraced, giving herself to him in marriage.
The proverb concerning her (Ar. Prov., i. 595) is not as quoted in
the text, but ughlamni (aznd) min Sajdhi, hotter (more lecherous) than
Sajahi, probably an intentional slip of Abit Zayd’s memory, who
trusted in that of his audience to give the retort Courteous to the
accusation of his spouse by a counter-charge.

He is a greater liar than Ah (l Sum amah, the surname of the aforesaid
impostor Musaylamah, also called al-Kazzab, the liar, who in the
latter days of Mohammed’s life rose in rivalry with him, and after
the Prophet’s death acquired considerable power, until Abfi Bekr’s
general, Khalid ibn al-Welid, crushed his followers in a sanguinary
battle, in which the false prophet was slain by the negro slave
Wahsh? with the same lance wherewith he had killed Mohammed’s
uncle Hamzah in the battle of Ohud.

More barefaced than bark, etc.— Ahraat- is, lit., more showing forth,
/.c., displaying her face without a veil, a sign of immodesty in a
woman.

liljlah , which, for the sake of assonance, I translate by “ purs¬
lane,” is some kind of bitter herb, which grows on the brink of
rivers, and is therefore proverbially (Ar. Prov., i. 40G), called
Ijanajd, foolish, silly, because exposing itself to be undermined and
carried away by the current. The river Tigris, whose Arabic name
dijla.h rhymes with it, is considered one of the widest rivers, so
much so that a flooded country is called dijlah , as resembling it in
width and extent.

If Shiran, had bestowed on thee her beauty , etc.— Shirin , wife of the
Persian king Khosru Perwez, celebrated for her beauty and the
sculptor Farhad’s fatal love for her.— Bilkis, Queen of Saba (the
Scriptural Sheba, for whom see Koran, xxvii. 22, 23).— Zobanjdeh ,
wife of I la,run ar Keshid and grand-daughter of Mansur, possessed
of great wealth, which she spent lavishly in pilgrimage, pious dona-


246


NOTES.


tions, and the building of mosques.— Bdrdn, either the daughter of
Khosru Perwez, who reigned after his death for forty years, or more
probably the wife of the Khalif Ma’mun, who spread for her on the
wedding night a golden carpet, on which he poured from a large
vessel a heap of pearls for the waiting women, each of whom took
a bead, the remainder being left sparkling on the carpet.— Az-Zebbd
(see notes to Assembly XXVII., p. 190 above), proverbial for magnifi¬
cence and power (Ar. Prov., ii. 147), and thus called from the length
of her hair ( zcibab ), which she trailed behind her when walking.—
BaMah, daughter of Ishmael, of the tribe Kays, a woman of Basra,
celebrated for piety (Ibn Khallikan, i. 263).— Khindaf\ surname of
Laila, daughter of Hulw&n bin 'Imran, and wife of Alyas bin Modar,
surpassing all Arab women in glory, as ancestress of the tribe
Koraysh.— Al-Khansd , the Pug-nosed, nickname of TumMir bint
Amr ibn Harith ibn ash-Sherid. She lived up to the rise of Islam,
and was the greatest Arabic poetess, famous especially for her
elegies on her brother Sakhr (comp. Ar. Prov., ii. 617, and see
Chenery’s note, vol. i., p. 387, to Being at one time SaJchr , at another
time the sister of SaJchr).

0 thou viler than Mdclir. —Madir, nickname of Mokharik, a man
of the tribe Benu Hilal ibn Amir, who had taken possession of a
cistern to water his camels, and when it had served his purpose,
coated it with his excrements, in order to render it useless to those
coming after him, and thereby gave rise to the proverb, “ more
stingy than Madir” (Ar. Prov., i. 190).— Kdshir, either a camel
stallion belonging to one of the tribes of S'ad ibn Zayd MamU ibn
Temim, who covered no she-camel without her dying, or a year of
drought, thus called from its stripping ( qashr ) the ground of vege¬
tation (Ar. Prov. i. 690).— Sdfir (whistler), a word of disputed mean¬
ing (Ar. Prov., i. 326). Some say it signifies any bird that whistles,
and that cowardice is attributed to it, because it is in continual fear
of birds and beasts of prey. By others it is said to mean a special
kind of bird, which, at the approach of night, clings to some
branches and whistles all night through from fear of falling asleep
and being captured. According to a third explanation, it designates
a man who whistles to a woman, so as to give warning of danger,
and all the while is cowed with fear lest he be caught at his errand.
Lastly, it is stated that the agent “ whistling 7 ' stands for the patient


NOTES .


247


“whistled to ” (as a signal for flight), as in Koran, lxxxvi. 6, “ pour¬
ing (ddfiq) water” (i.e., sperm) stands for “water poured forth
(.utadfdq )” and in popular parlance “a riding-beast (rdhilah) ” for a
beast ridden upon (marMlah), a peculiarity of idiom as frequent in
Arabic as, vice versa , the use of the patient instead of the agent, for
instance, Koran, xvii. 47, “a hidden (■ mast dr) veil” for a “hiding
or enshrouding (sdtir) veil.”— Tdmir, the Jumper, with his full title,
Tdmir ibn Tdmir , Jumper Jumperson, the flea, on account of his
extraordinary power of leaping here, there, and everywhere, pro¬
verbial for giddiness (Ar. Prov., ii. 52).

More contemptible than nail-parings in a heap of rubbish. —This trans¬
lation renders the reading of several manuscripts, pay own included,
which adds after quldmah, nail-parings, the words ft qurndmth, in
sweepings. Although not admitted into the printed editions, it
doubtlessly improves the equibalance of the qarinah, and makes the
phrase more forcible.

More vicious than the mule of Abd Duldrnch (Ar. Prov., i. 416), a
compendium of all possible depravities, and an impossible one into
the bargain, impossible, I mean, to translate decently, but to be
guessed at by fox-hunters, who remember what reynard is said to
do when hard pressed by the hounds, excusable in his case as a
means of self-defence, but in the mule sheer wanton mischief at the
cost of harmless passers-by. Her master, son of an emancipated
black slave, was a poet who flourished in the days of the last
Omayyides and first Abbasides, and he has immortalised the brute
by a Kusideh of considerable length and beauty.

More out of place than a bug (or dung-jly) in a perfume-box , in Arabic
nJuju.ru ndnhaqqatin ft Jiuqqat-m, lit., more bewildered, like one who
has gone astray or lost his way, and here meaning that Abft Zayd
contaminates his surroundings, as the malodorous insect spoils the
scents amongst which it is rushing or fluttering about.

And supposing thou wert (d-Jiasan with Ms preaching and utterance,
etc.— Al-Hasan Abu Ha id (d-Basri, proverbial for pulpit eloquence,
and a great devotee (t A.H., 110; see Ibn Khallikan, i. 188).—
Ash Sha'bi, fin dr ibn 'Abdallah of the tribe Sha'b in Yemen, like
the preceding a tdM, or one who had conversed with Mohammed’s
companions, a great scholar, deeply versed in law, and knowing the
Koran by heart. He was a favourite with Hajjaj ibn Yusuf (and


248


NOTES .


died at Kufa between A.H. 103 and 107 (Ibn Khallikan, i. 344,
and Ar. Prov., i. 413). —Al Khalil , or Abu 'Abel ar-Rahman ibn
Ahmad al-FardMdi, the founder of Arabic grammar and prosody, to
the discovery of which latter art he was led by listening to the fall
of the hammers of blacksmiths, sounding to him alternately like
daq, daq-daq, daqaq-daqaq, etc.; and striking on his ear like the
rhythmical measures of the constituent elements of' his native
poetry, whereupon he built a most elaborate system of metrology
(born A.H. 100, 1160 or 170; see Ibn Khallikan, i. 252).— Jerir, or
Abu Eazrah ibn *Aiiyah , considered the greatest poet of early Islam,
rivalled only by Farazdak and Akhtal, and equally distinguished
in erotic and satiric poetry. He died ninety and odd years old,
AH. 110, in the same year as Farazdak, with whom he had carried
on a lively warfare of “ give and take 19 in lampoons (see Ibn Khalli¬
kan, i. 150).— Koss } the eloquent Christian Bishop of Najr&n, for
whom see Chenery’s note on the formula And now , vol. i. 269, and
who is mentioned passim in other Assemblies of our author.—
'Abd al-Eamid ibn Yahyd ibn Sa'td, was secretary to Mar wan ibn
Mohammed, the last Khalif of the House of Omayyeh, and excelled
by the beauty of his caligraphy and style, the use of which, how¬
ever, made in the service of an antagonist, incensed the founder of
the Abbaside dynasty against him, who put him cruelly to death.—
Abie Amr JRubbdn (according to others, ZubbCm) ibn al-'Ald, noted for
his profound knowledge of the Koran in its seven readings, made a
vow to recite the whole of the sacred text every three nights. He
was also a great grammarian and lexicographer (born in Mecca
A.H. 70, t in Kufa about A.H. 154; see Ibn Khallikan, i. 403).—
Ibn Korayb al-Asma% spoken of vol. i., p. 319, and frequently
alluded to in the Makamat. His life will be found in Ibn Khalli¬
kan, i. 403.

Ye twain remind me of Shann and Tabagah , and haioh and pellet, lit.,
I see that ye twain are, etc.—The explanation of the two proverbs
here alluded to is disputed, but their meaning in this place is,
“ I see that you are a match for each other/’ The first is, wdfaqa
shannun tabaqata , Shann has matched Tabaqah (Ar. Prov., ii. 800,
835), where, according to most interpreters, the names are those of
two Arab tribes. Others, however, say that Shann was a sharp-
witted Arab, who vowed that he would not wed, unless a woman


NOTES .


249


liis equal in sagacity. While he was roaming about in search of her,
he met with a travelling companion, whom he asked on setting out
together: “Wilt thou carry me, or shall I carry thee V 7 Said the
man : “0 thou fool! carries ever one mounted another who is
mounted also ?” Shann kept silent until they came to a sown field,
when he said: “ Thinkest thou that this field has already been eaten
up or not V 5 “Thou idiot!” replied the man, “seest thou not that
it stands in ears V 9 Another pause of silence, till they were met by
a funeral, and Shann asked: “ Reckest thou that the man on the
bier is alive or dead ¥’ Then the man exclaimed : “In all my life
I have never come across a dafter dolt than thou art; fanciest thou
that people escort a living man to the grave V* Presently they
reached the village of the man, who made his fellow-traveller
welcome at his home. ISTow he had a daughter called Tabaqah, and
taking her aside, he related to her their colloquy as a piece of rare
fun. But she said to him : “ The man was quite right in his
speech, and his questions were all that might be expected from one
like him. When he asked thee, 4 Wilt thou carry me, or shall I
carry thee? 5 his meaning was, ‘Wilt thou talk to me, or shall I talk
to thee, in order to make us bear up with the tediousness of the
journey V As for his question about the field, whether it had been
eaten up or not, he meant, whether its owners had taken and con¬
sumed the price of its produce in advance or not. Lastly, when he
asked whether the man on the bier was alive, he wanted to know
whether he left a son behind, by whom he would continue to live in
man’s memory, or not. ,> When the host joined his guest again, and
told him of his daughter’s interpretation of their converse, the latter
sued for her hand and married her, and when he brought her to his
own people, relating the proofs of sense and sagacity which she
had given him, they said : “ Shann is well matched with Tabaqah/ 5
Asma'i is credited with a third, somewhat lame explanation, to the
effect that shann means a worn-out skin-bag, which, when furnished
with an adequate covering, was fitted for further use, and gave rise
to the saying in question. The actual form of the second proverb
(Ar. Prov., i. 365), applied to one who is frightened by an enemy
or put to the test by his equal, is : khiddu, khicla'a ward 9 a-lti bundujah,
the verbal meaning of which turns on that of ffliida’a, which may
either be the name of a tribe, warned to be pursued by a rival tribe


250


NOTES.


of the name of Bunduqah, or it may signify the bird thus called
(vulture, hawk), in which case bunduqah is the pellet of the archer,
the tenor of the proverb being: “ Hawk, hawk, the pellet is after
(or behind) thee 1” Applied to the couple engaged in altercation,
it means in both cases that either party finds a match in the other.

Enter in thy conduct the level road , allusion to the proverb, “ He
who enters the level road is safe from tripping ” (Ar. Prov., ii. 675),
and here intended as a caution to the husband to approach his wife
in lawful fashion.

I shall not hoist my sail to him, another metaphor which sufficiently
explains itself, considering that it is the sail which makes the ship
to go. #

With the three binding forms of oath .—These are either the three
forms of divorce allowed by ash-SMfi'l (see “Diet, of Islam,” p. 87,
iii., and p. 90, v.); or the oath by the name of God in its three
forms : wa'lldhi, billdhi , talldhi ; or divorce, manumission of a slave,
and pilgrimage to Mecca.

The fundament of either of you has missed the pit, a proverbial ex¬
pression (Ar. Prov., i. 444) applied to one who misplaces anything
or misses the object of his wish, and arising from a man’s having
dug two holes, the one for keeping provisions in, the other to serve
as a privy. His two sons mistook the former for the latter, when
he addressed them with the words above.

And make an example of you for those who have eyes to see, alluding
to Koran, iii. 11 : “ In this truly was a lesson for men endued with
discernment.”

And naught I water but my field for planting. —Compare to this the
note on p. 244 above.

That it is I who taught the Shaykh to versify with such glibness, in
Arabic ami ’llati lagqanati ’ sh-shaiTcha ’l-ardjizd. In translating thus
I follow the reading of my own MS. in preference to De Sacy, who,
probably misguided by the French idiom, “ C’est moi qui ai,” adopts
the reading : laqgantu (1st person) zcl ’sh-shaikha. Nasif al-Yazaji,
in his critical letter, censures him on this point, proposing the very
reading which my MS. contains, and Mehren, who has translated
and annotated this letter, defends the French against the Arabic
scholar, but the redactors of the second edition of De Sacy refute
Mehren’s arguments in a lengthy note, which, I think, settles the


NOTES .


251


question definitely. Ardjiz is plural of urjiizah , a poem in rejez
metre, and as this is a very popular and easy-flowing kind of metrical
composition, I feel myself justified in rendering the word in this
place by “ to versify with such glibness,” and a little lower down by
“ doggerel-rhyme.”

He would be like one who pays a debt with borrowed money , and prays
the sunset prayer with two inclinations (instead of the prescribed four,
which it is unlawful to cut short, even when travelling), meaning
that what he had done was as if he had done nothing, since a debt
thus paid is still a debt, and a prayer thus curtailed is valueless.

I testify that ye twain are the most crafty ammcjst men and jinn ,
allusion to Koran, lv. 31 : “We will settle accounts with you, O ye
men and jinn,” lit., ye two heavy, i.e., troublesome, ones.


THE FORTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.

Listening to the tunes of song , in Arabic uzunan li ’l-aghdrid, lit.,
being an ear to songs, a remarkable idiom, closely akin to the
English, “ I am all ear.”

And repented of my falling short in my duty towards Allah , allusion
to Koran, xxxix. 57 : “So that a soul say, £ 0 misery 1 for my
failures in duty towards God ! for verily, I was of those who scoffed/ ”

And returned from dissipation to collectedness , lit., whose spreading
out has returned to being folded up (wa fd’ a mansharu-hu ild ’t-taiyi).
A note in my MS. says : “ Manshar is an infinitive, in the sense of
the patient or passive participle manshdr , that which is spread out,
ie.j the pages of the book in which his transgressions are recorded,
meaning that by his repentance this book has been folded up or
closed, and De Sacy adopts this explanation in his commentary.
But it seems simpler and more natural to take with Sherishi man-
sharu-hu in the sense of intishdru-hu, his launching out into the
dissolute pleasures of youth and passion, from which he has returned
by repentance to a proper and self-possessed frame of mind, like a
garment which has been spread out and is folded up again. Preston
translates : “ Whose conduct was reformed from laxity to strictness,”
and aptly quotes the Latin rendering of the passage: “ Cujus animus


252


NOTES.


solutus rediisset in plicam, 55 probably from Peiper’s Latin translation
of the Assemblies, mentioned vol. i., p. 101.

When foreign travel had cast me to Tanis. —Tinnis, or Tanis, from
which latter form the name of the Tanitic mouth of the Nile is
derived, was formerly an important town in the Delta, renowned
for the fabrication of costly stuffs of various kinds. It is surrounded
by an inlet of the Mediterranean, into which the Nile rises at the
season of inundation, so that its water is salt during one half of the
year and sweet during the other half.

Through his love for it he is slaughtered without a knife .—This may
mean either simply without the use of a knife, or, as Sherishi ex¬
plains, otherwise than by a knife, for instance, by a stone or a club,
in which case death would not follow instantaneously, but under
prolonged suffering. Preston translates accordingly : “ He perishes
by a lingering death,” referring to the torment and misery to which
the worldling is doomed by his wretched devotion to the world.
It seems, however, to me that the preacher* intends to say : He is
not bodily killed by violence, but his moral life is destroyed by the
very pleasures and sensual gratifications which the world offers to
him.

I swear by Him who sent forth both the waters, sweet and salt , and lit
up the twain , sun and moon, in Arabic man maraja 5 l-bahraini wa
nauwara ’ l-qamaraini , lit., “who set free the two seas and gave light
to the two moons.” Preston renders the former by : 44 who mingled
the water of the two seas,” and accompanies the word “mingled 55 by
the note : 44 If we suppose 4 the two seas 5 here spoken of to be the
Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, this rendering of maraja is
best. But if 4 the two seas ’ intended be the Mediterranean and the
Black Sea, it is best to translate maraja 4 mix 5 ; and that these are
the two intended is rendered probable by the fact that one of the
titles of the Turkish Sultan is 4 Lord of the two seas, s ie., the
Black Sea and the Mediterranean. 55 This is ingenious enough, as
far as it goes, but it seems strange that he, as well as De Sacy and
the redactors of his second edition, has overlooked the allusion to
Koran, xxv. 55 : 44 And He it is who hath let loose the two seas,
the one sweet, fresh; and the other salt, bitter ”; and ibid., lv. 19 :
44 He hath let loose the two seas which meet each other, 55 to which
latter quotation comp, ibid., xxxv. 13 : 44 Nor are the two seas alike :


NOTES.


253


the one is fresh, sweet, pleasant for drink, and the other salt, bitter/'
etc. When, moreover, the dictionaries tell us, that hahr is a term
both for the sea and for a large river like the Nile, the passage, as
translated by me, appears particularly appropriate to the place
where the scene of the Assembly is laid (see the note on Tan is
above). As for the expression al-ganmrdniy the two moons, for sun
and moon, ash-shamsu wall-gamuru, as the two seemingly greatest
luminaries, Sherishi remarks, that they are designated by the dual
of qainar , moon, on account of its easier pronunciation and mascu¬
line gender, not by that of shams , sun (in Arabic feminine, reversedly
with the English idiom), although the former is less brilliant and
borrows its light from the latter. In similar mahner, the two im¬
mediate successors of Mohammed . in the Khalifate, Abft Bekr and
'Omar, are called al-'Umarfm, in spite of the pre-emiuence accorded
to Abft Bekr over 'Omar, because this name adapts itself more
readily to the dual form.

Ami exalted the dignity of the two (holy) stones. —The two stones are
meant, either for the two precious metals, gold and silver, or for
the black stone of the Ka'beh, and the holy rock in the Temple of
Jerusalem, to which Mohammed tied his mount Borfik after his
night-journey to heaven; or, the same black stone at Mecca, and
the so-called station of Abraham, the sacred stone upon which
Abraham stood when he built the Ka’beh, and which is said to bear
the impression of his footmarks. The character of the address
renders it more than probable that either of the two last mentioned
explanations applies here to the exclusion of the first, for which
reason I insert in parenthesis the word “ holy ” in my translation.

Who -plunges into the abode of fire, while he treasures gold and hoards
■up riches. —Allusion to Koran, ix. 34: “0 Believers! of a truth,
many of the teachers and monks dovour man’s substance in vanity,
and turn them from the Way of God. But to those who treasure up
gold and silver , and expend it not for the cause of God, announce
tidings of grievous punishment,” i.e., the torment of the blazing fire of
hell. On the worthlessness and perishableness of worldly goods,
the poets are eloquent. Abu ’l-'Atfihlyah, for instance, says :

“ O thou who exaltest thyself by the world and its pomp, such exalting
is but that of clay by clay ;


254


NOTES.


If thou desirest for the noblest of all men, then gaze at a king in the
garb of a mendicant;

I see man content with the most trifling share of religion, but in life
they are by no means satisfied with a trifle ;

Let then Allah suffice thee instead of the world of kings, as the world
suffices kings instead of religion.”

Or, to quote the words of another poet:

“ Anybody addicted to this life is nobody in our eyes, and this abode of
perishableness we reck not an abode :

For our riches are but loans, which he who lends will presently take
back from him that borrows.”

Feather the free, etc.—Compare to this Assembly XI., vol. i., p. 167,
1. 4, and the note*bo it, ibid., p. 368.

By the Faithful , the Guardian. —See Koran, lix. 23 ; “He is God,
beside whom there is no god. He is the King, the Holy, the Peace¬
ful, the Faithful , the Guardian , the Mighty, the Strong, the Most
High! Far be the Glory of God from that which they associate
with Him/'

Will ye enjoin on men what is right , and forget your own souls ?—

Quotation from Koran, ii. 41 : “Will ye enjoin what is right upon
others, and though ye read the Book, forget your own souls V’
Mohammed is related to have said : “In my night-journey I passed
by some men, whose lips and tongues were being cut off with scissors
of fire. Then I asked, Who are these, 0 Gabriel ? He said, These
are the preachers from amongst thy people who enjoin on mankind
that which is right, and forget their own souls.” Abu ’l-Atahiyah
addresses Mansur ibn Ammar (for whom see Ibn Khallikan, ii. 545)
in the following words :

“ O preacher of men, thou hast become suspected, since thou blamest
actions of theirs which thou thyself committest,

Like one who clothes in garments the naked, while his nakedness is
apparent to men, without his trying to conceal it;

Yet the most grievous case known in any soul, after idolatry, is its
blindness for its own sins,

Its knowledge of the faults of others which it clearly perceives, while it
perceives not the fault within itself.”

That will do , a popular English idiom for the equally popular
Arabic gad-ha , which is synonymous with hasbu-ka , “ let this suffice
thee.” The following “shame on thee ” is in the original itta ’ ib ,
imperative of the 8th form of writb, which is generally explained by


NOTES .


255


istahi, be ashamed, in which sense the verb has occurred in Assembly
XVIII., p. 212, 1. 10. According to other authorities, it is equiva¬
lent to irja\ return ! be gone ! leave off!

lie turned his back and went without returning .—This is taken from
Koran, xxvii. 10 : ££ And when he (Moses) saw that it moved itself
as though it were a serpent, he retreated backward and returned not.”
Also xxviii. 31: ££ And £ Throw down now thy rod.’ Then when
he saw it stir itself as though it were a serpent, he retreated and jled
and retraced not his steps.”


THE FORTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.

Clinging closer to me Hum love to the Bcnil ' Vzrah , and bravery to the
race of Aha Sufrah. —The tribe of the Benu TTzrah were famous for
their fatal love-passion, of which an instance is related in the three
hundred and eighty-fourth of the Arabian Nights. One of their
poets sings :

££ If an 'Uzri escapes from death through love, that one, by the Lord of
lovers, is an interloper,”

and the tale goes that an Arab was asked, “ From what tribe art
thou T He answered, ££ From a people, who when they love, they
die.” Whereupon a damsel, who had heard him, exclaimed: ££ An
'Uzri, by the Lord of the Kabeh.” As for the race of Abft Sufrah,
they are his son al-Muhallab, commander of Basra iinder al-Hajjaj,
and the sons of al-Muhallab, who were all distinguished for valour
and every knightly virtue, so that a poet in the Tlamaseh says of
them :

“The race of al-Muhallab are a stock endowed with glory, such as no
Arab has attained, nay, nor comes near attaining.”

Abu Sufrah is the Idnyeh of Zalina (oppressor) ibn Sarraq or ftariq
(robber), the ominous significance of which names induced Khalif
'Omar to refuse him a post of Governor for which he had applied.
His sons and grandsons played a conspicuous part in the troubles
caused by Muawiyelfs usurpation of the Khalifate (see Weil,
“ Geschichte dor Chalifen,” i. 365 and following).

Now when I had alighted at Najrftn, in Arabic fa lammd aljaitn
H-jirdua , lit., when I had laid down my neck, for which idiom


256


NOTES.


compare Assembly XIX., vol. i., p. 215, 1. 30, and the note at the
bottom of p. 446, ibid. Najran is a town of Yemen, called after its
founder, Najran ibn Zayd, and halfway between Sana and Hadra-
mowt, in ancient times mostly inhabited by Christians, whose
eloquent Bishop Koss has been mentioned repeatedly.

Forsooth the morning-brightness shows dear to those possessed of eyes ,
a proverb (Ar. Prov., ii. 255) which admits of two interpretations.
De Sacy, in his commentary, says it is applied to anything perfectly
self-evident, and the verb baiyana (shows) is here used intransitively
for tabaiyana. Sherishi, who mentions this explanation without
repudiating it, remarks, however, that the night in its darkness is
the same for the blind and the seeing; but that the morning, when
it appears, reveals all objects to those endowed with eyesight. I
have tried in my translation to preserve the ambiguity.

And beholding holds the stead of hoo witnesses , ie., is equally con¬
vincing. The passage alludes to Koran, ii. 282 : “ And call to
witness two witnesses from among your men; but if there not be
two men, # let there be a man and two women of those whom ye
shall judge fit for witnesses,” namely, such as are upright, 'adl,
which term Hariri uses here as synonym of shahid , witness.

And responded to his challenge to the combat , in Arabic wa mulabbiina
dd'iya mundbazati-hi, lit., they were saying labbai-ka to the caller for
combat with him (comp. Hariri’s Preface, vol. i., p. 105, line 10
from the bottom, where a similar expression occurs).

Their wrath was allayed , lit., their knots were loosened, a pro¬
verbial expression for the abatement of anger, for which see Ar.
Prov., i. 251.

A driver she has } kinsman of hers , meaning the rope by which the
canvas fan is led, and which is, like itself, made of hemp.

Through whom the Writ [imdm] is known , as holy recording angels
take their pride in him. —This translation is based on the supposition :
1. That the word imdm is here used in the same sense as Koran,
xvii. 74 : “ One day We will summon all men with their writ (bi-
* imdmi-kim) ; then they whose book shall be given into their right
hand shall read their book, and not be wronged a thread.” It is
true that Eodwell renders “ with their leaders,” but most commen¬
tators interpret the term as above, and this view of the case is
eminently supported by xxxvi. (the celebrated Sura Ya Sin) 11 :


NOTES.


257


“ Yerily it is We who will quicken the dead, and We write down
the works which they send on before, and the traces which they
leave behind; and everything do We set down in a clear Writ
(ft imdm-in mvhtn-in ).” Rodwell translates, or rather paraphrases,
“in the clear Book of our decrees,” and says in a note, “ lit., m the
clear prototype^ that is, in the Preserved Table, on which all the
actions of mankind are written down.” 2. The preceding inference
seems to justify me in assuming that al-kirdm has in our passage the
same meaning as in Koran, lxxx. 11-15 : “ Yerily it (the Koran) is
a warning (and whoso is willing beareth it in mind); Written on
honoured pages, Exalted, purified, By the hands of Scribes, honoured
{kirdm-in ), righteous.” Also lxxxii. 10-12: “ Yet* truly there are
guardians over you— Illustrious recorders—(Idrdman Mtiblna) cogni¬
sant of your actions.” A more commonplace explanation is that
under imdm the Khalif is meant, said to be made known by the pen,
because it writes down his commands and decrees, and that kirdm
signifies distinguished official scribes or secretaries, who take pride
in their pen, because it frequently assures to them access to the
highest dignities under Government. Still, the former interpreta¬
tion seems preferable, the more so as the word riddled upon, in
Arabic galam, is in itself an allusion to the Koran, whose Sura
Ixviii. has it for its title.

Whan given to drink he flies about like one athirst , and settles to rest ,
ialien thirstiness gats hold of him , meaning that the pen, when supplied
with ink, hurries along the paper like one in search of drink, and
when it is thirsty, Le ., dry for want of ink, it rests, contrary to
man, who anxiously moves about in seeking for water, when he is
thirsty, but rests when his thirst is quenched.

And no offence at his wedlock is ever founds lit., “In his marriage
there is no way against him,” where the word way or road (subil)
is to be taken as in Koran, ix. 92 : “It is no crime in the weak, and
in the sick, and in those who find not the means, to stay at home
.(in times of war), provided they are sincere with God and His
Apostle. In those who act righteously, there is no cause of blame
{md min sabil-in ): and God is Gracious, Merciful.” In this passage
of the sacred text said is explained with tarty hi * t-ia'Ab , way for
punishment.

As the spouses are growing grey , lit., with the grey hair (finda ’al-
VOL. II. 17


258


NOTES.


mashibi ), where the article stands for the personal pronoun “ their,
and allows, therefore, the substitution of the nouns to which this
pronoun refers. This use of the article is frequent enough in Arabic,
but the commentators find it worth their while to mention that it is
sanctioned by the Koran, xli. 31: “We are your guardians in this
life and in the next; yours therein shall be what your souls desire
{met tashtaM ’ l-anfusu [the souls] for anfusaJcum [your souls]), and
yours therein whatever ye shall ask for/*

One swerving although firmly joined , bestowing gifts not worldng mis¬
chief —This seems to me the most simple and natural way of render¬
ing the play on the word jdfi , which I take first in the sense of
deviating, inasmuch as one of the sides of the water-wheel con¬
tinually seems to turn away from the other, although they are in¬
separably united (mausiH) ; secondly, in that of exercising tyranny,
doing injury, meaning that the water-wheel, far from causing a
disastrous inundation, fertilizes the fields by irrigating them, and is
therefore called wasul, which the commentators paraphrase by hasim
’ l : atd\ abounding in benefits.

Yet is his fierceness to be feared. —His fierceness signifies here ex¬
cessive swiftness of rotation, which may put the machinery of the
wheel out of order and damage the receptacles for the water. The
purity of heart refers of course to the limpidity of the water con¬
tained in those receptacles.

And dose your five upon them , ie., close your fingers upon them, for
“preserve them well in your memory/' The expression “five” for
“fingers ” has occurred in the seventh Assembly, vol. i., 140.

Now the desire for more beguiled ( istafazzat) the people into allowing
themselves to be taxed with dulness. —The verb, here used, is another
idiom borrowed from the Koran, xvii. 66, where, after the refusal of
Iblis to prostrate himself before Adam, it is said to him : “ And
entice (istafziz ) such of them (Adam’s offspring) as thou canst by thy
voice.”

One veiled as if sorrowful , yet gladsome apparently .—Here it is
difficult for the translator to do justice to the original. To render
the text at all intelligible, it must be stated that the cooling-flask,
or refrigerator, is a green jar, covered with canvas, whence its name,
al-muzallamah , the enveloped one, and lined between this cover and
its own outer surface with a layer of straw, to keep the water in it


NOTES,


259


cool in summer time. The middle of it is perforated, and holds a
tube of silver or some other metal, by which people drink out of it.
It is therefore in the riddle called masnlrah , provided with a navel
(surrah), referring to the hole into which the tube is fixed, but also
passive participle of the verb surdr, to rejoice, and therefore translated
gladsome. It is further described as maahmumah T which may either
mean covered, as the sky is covered by clouds (ghumalm), or grieved,
sorrowful, part. pass, of the verb ghamm, to grieve.

Approached for her offspring's sake at times , i,e,, in summer on
account of the water which is contained in it, like the offspring,
lit., the foetus, in the mother’s womb. The second “ at times ”
means, of course, in winter, when the cooling-flask # is shelved away,
which is playfully stigmatised as an act of cruelty or ingratitude for
services rendered afore.

Her outward attire is showy , disdained is her under doth, —The showy
outward attire is a gaily coloured wrapper over the coarse canvas-
cover, and the disdained undercloth (lit., lining) is meant for the
coating of straw, which, however, ought not to be despised, since
it serves the wise purpose of keeping the water cool.

Seen during Ilajj he ceases to be seen on 'Id, how strange to tell, —The
word translated by Hajj, pilgrimage, is in Arabic al-'ushr, for 'ashru
zi ’ I'hijjah , ie., the first ten days of the month ztl Uijjah, in which
the pilgrimage takes place, and during which period the nails are
allowed to grow ; and the word translated by Td is an-nahr, the day
of sacrifice, called 'id, or feast, which terminates the pilgrimage,
when the nails are pared again. At the same time, the former word
may signify the ten fingers, the natural^place of the nails, and the
latter the throat or chest, where none are to be found, a double
meaning which it is, of course, impossible to render in English.

If both wear painted cheeks , she is put to torture , ie., if either end of
the match is coated with naphtha, it is made to burn.

lllrnt is the thing that when it corrupts , its error turns to righteousness ?
—Meaning that wine, which is forbidden to the believer, turns into
vinegar, when it gets sour, and thereby becomes lawful.

Onejidde and leaning with one half to one side, etc.—To render this
plain, it will suffice to transcribe Sherishi’s commentary on the
passage : u In spite of his fickleness and leaning to one side (■ i.e
partiality), he is always seen in an elevated place, like a king who

17—2


260


NOTES.


distributes justice (meaning either that the balance is lifted up by
the hand, or raised on a stand). Common stone and gold are the
same to him, and if thou look at him with the eye of the sagacious,
thou wilt wonder to find that people are satisfied with his decision,
although he is by nature partial to one of the litigants, showing a
bias towards him/’

And reck this to be our dowry of divorce. —The dowry or provision
of divorce (miitatu ’t-tildqi) is a gift made by the husband to a wife,
divorced before consummation has taken place, in obedience to
Koran, ii. 237: “It shall be no crime in you, if ye divorce your
wives, so long as ye have not consummated the marriage nor settled
any dowry on £hem. And provide for them—he who is in easy
circumstances according to his means, and he who is straitened,
according to his means : this is a duty for those who do what is
right.’ 7 Here the meaning is: Let the revelation of thy pedigree
be thy parting gift before we separate.

THE FORTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.

As one who shakes two divining arrows , i.e., divided between de¬
spondency and hope, like one who shakes the two arrows of success
and failure (comp. p. 80 above). According to others, it alludes to
the popular saying: “ Either booty or loss, either dominion or
destruction.”

And the onslaught of the host of Ham , equivalent to the preceding
words, “the downfall of darkness, 77 H&m, son of Noah, being the
father of blackamoors, and therefore his army a simile for the black¬
ness of night.

Whether to gather my skirt , and tether or face the night and grope my
meaning whether I should tuck my garments round me for
taking my night’s rest, after having tied up my travelling beast, or
continue my journey at all hazards and in spite of all difficulties
and obstacles. In the above translation I use the infinitives of the
verbs, for the sake of conciseness, but in the original the aorist is
employed, “or face the night,” for instance, is expressed by am
a'famidw ’l-laila, “ or should face the night.” This is the reading of
the native prints, which I adopt in my own edition. De Sacy has
qghtamadu, which is explained by: “should make the night my


. NOTES.


261


scabbard ” ( ghimd ), in a similar sense as it is said in Assembly
XXIX.: “I made night my shirt.*’ But while the latter compari¬
son graphically pictures a state of utter denudation and penury,
the simile of the scabbard seems somewhat far-fetched and in¬
appropriate.

Now while I was revolving in my mind for ivhat I should decide myself
lit., while I was turning about my deliberation and churning my
resolve, the Arabic for which latter verb is. imtikhdz, . explained as
istikhrdju ’ z-zubdaii mina ’l-labani , the bringing out of the butter from
the milk.

Drowned in sleep , in Arabic aktahala bi-ruqddi-hi (he had applied
kohl by his sleep), where the sleep which had t^ken possession of
him is likened to kohl , or antimony applied to the eyes. In the next
line these eyes are called “his two lamps,” lit up again on his
recovery from unconsciousness, which, as it were, had extinguished
them.

Thy brother or the wolf, a proverb which also takes the form “ the
brother or the night,” and applies to one who is in doubt and per¬
plexity. The meaning is that Abu Zayd was frightened by the
other’s sudden appearance, and asked himself, Is he whom I see a
friend or foe, but as the words are spoken in the hearing of A1
Harith, they are addressed at the same time to him, implying the
question : Dost thou approach me with friendly or hostile intention 1
Wherefore he replies: No, I am but a casual comer, who has lost
his way in the darkness of night (comp. Ar. Prov., i. 75).

So give me light , that I also may strike it for thee , another proverb,
in the explanation of which the commentators exercise their in¬
genuity, as is so frequently the case, to little purpose. Some take
objection to it on the ground that he who has the means of striking
a light for himself applies not for a light to another. Mayd&ni
(Ar. Prov., ii. 8) says it means: “ be for me, then I shall be for
thee,” i.e ., I shall prove towards thee, as thou pro vest towards me,
and a further explanation is : “be more for me than I can be for
thee,” since giving light is more than merely striking it. It seems
to me that Abft Zayd’s reply, in connection with what had gone
before, makes the matter sufficiently clear. In apostrophizing him¬
self audibly to A1 H&rith with the words, <c Thy brother or the wolf,”
he admitted implicitly that the latter had an equal right to suspect


262


NOTES.


the intentions of a stranger whom he had met accidentally. Al-
Harith therefore says, Enlighten me as to thy own disposition
towards me, and I will model mine accordingly towards thyself.
To this Abu Zayd answers, in allusion to the first-quoted proverb :
“ Let thy anxiety be at rest , for thou hast many a brother whom thy mother
bore not” thereby clearly indicating that he was animated only by
feelings of a most friendly kind. The appropriateness of this second
proverb (Ar. Prov., i. 529, 549) lies more in the sense which it
derives from the context than in its original purport, which, far
from removing suspicion, expresses such. It is attributed to Lok-
m&n ibn 'Ad, who, it is told, found in a house to which he had come
to quench his thirst a woman engaged in dalliance with a man, and
on asking her, “ Who is this youth at thy side, for I know that he
is not thy husband/’ was answered, “ He is my brother,” whereupon
he uttered the above rejoinder.

With the approach of morning people praise night-faring , proverbial
for bearing hardships in the hope of ensuing rest (Ar. Prov., ii. 70).
The saying originates with Khalid ibn al-Welid, when Abu Bekr
bade him go from Yemameh, where he happened to be, to Irak.
He proposed to travel by the waterless desert, when Baff at-Ta’i
said to him: “I have traversed it in the time of ignorance. It
allows of watering the camels only on the fifth day, and I think
thou wilt not be able to cross it unless providing thyself with
water.” So he bought a hundred generous camels, which he let
grow thirsty, and after having watered them, he sewed up their
pudenda and muzzled them. After two days’ travel in the desert
he feared the effects of thirst on his men and horses, and that the
water in the bellies of the camels might be absorbed. He therefore
drew it off, and made the men and horses to drink, whereupon he
continued his march. In the fourth night B&fi e said : “ Look out
whether you can see some lofty Lotus-trees; if so, all is well • if
not, we are doomed to perish.” The men did so, and having got
sight of the trees, brought him the tidings, when he exclaimed,
“God is great!” and the people shouted with him, “ God is great!”
and rushed towards the water. But KMlid, recited the following
lines:

“ How doughty a wight is Bafi', when rightly guided he has crossed the
waterless desert from Quraqir to Suw&,


NOTES .


263


A five days 5 journey ; when the craven travels it, he weeps ; no man is
to be found that performed it before him ;

With the approach of morning, people praise night-faring, and all that
drowsiness had concealed from them reveals itself in brightness.”

The Arabic for “ a five days’ journey ” of my translation is khims-cin ,
objective case of the noun Ifihims, a desert in which water is so
scarce that the camels can only be watered at an interval of five
days, and its nominative has occurred above in RafT’s address to
Khalid. Quraqir and Suw& are the names of two watering-
stations.

While his sadclle-beasi flitted along (stepped hurriedly, taziffv) with the
speed of the young ostrich , allusion to Koran, xxxvii. 92 : “ Then his
tribesmen rushed on him with hurried steps (yaziffuna).”

I had her exhibited to me for sale at Hadramowt .—Hadramowt is
as mentioned in the Epitome, an important town on the south
coast of Arabia Eelix, noted for its camel breed and its cord-
wainery, from which the Arabic titles of this Assembly are derived,
Bakriyah being the noun of relation of baler, a young camel, and
hadramiyah being that of Hadramowt, applied both to a camel
bred in that locality and to a peculiar kind of shoes or sandals
manufactured there.

And I endured death-pangs to acquire her , an idiom which, as far
as energy of expression goes, is an improvement on the English, I
was dying to obtain possession of her.

Until I found her proof for travels and a provision for the time of stay,
meaning that her strength and power of endurance were equal to the
most fatiguing journeys, and that her milk and foals provided means
of support when I was staying at home. My translation follows the
reading of the Bey rout edition : wciuddata qardr-in , although in my
text revision I had adopted that of De Sacy, and of my own MS.,
c uddata fir dr-in, which would signify “ an equipment for flight.”

Who knew not what pitch is, Le ., who never suffered from scab,
which would require the application of pitch to the affected places
(comp, the note to Assembly XXXVIII., p. 234, above).

Noiv it happened that she had strayed some little while since , in Arabic
muz muddatun , where the student should notice the nominative of
the depending noun, in accordance with the rule, stated by Hariri
himself in his grammatical treatise “ Mulhatu T-irab,” on the govern-


264


NOTES .


merit of the two synonymous particles munz and muz. Both are
equivalents of/% in, with regard to the present, and of min, from, for,
meaning since, with regard to the past; but while the former
governs the oblique case in either sense, the latter governs the
oblique case with the present, and requires the nominative of the
noun with the past. “ I have not seen him to-day 57 would therefore
he md m’aitu-hu munz al-yaumi , or muz al-yaumi , hut “ I have not
seen him for two days (two days since) ”, would be munz yaumaini
(oblique case), or muz yaumdni (nominative). This, at least, is, in
Hariri's opinion, the more elegant construction, although the lexico¬
graphical authorities have a great deal more to say on the subject.

Not the quiet of despair, meaning, nor could I persuade myself to
give over further search as hopeless, which would, in a certain
measure, have set my mind at rest, in the sense of the proverb :
“ Despair is one of the two kinds of rest.”

Her blemish has been cut short , in Arabic c arru-hd gad husima, which
to him, who understands the mount of Hadramowt to be a camel,
would mean that she had been cured of the scab, but applied to the
shoe, that the scars of scab in the hide, from which it was made,
had been removed by the knife of the shoemaker. In like manner,
other similarities between the two are more or less forcibly ex¬
plained, as, for instance, “ her back is as though it had been broken
and re-set,” refers to the elevated part on the upper side of the
shoe-sole, which resembles the swelling that remains in a broken
limb after its re-setting. This part of the shoe is called sandm , the
usual term for the hump of a camel. To trace the comparisons
further would only weary the English reader, but for the Arabs it
was a favourite theme, even with poets such as Mutenebbi, who in
his poems frequently plays on these double-meanings.

She adorns her who travels thereon , and furthers the journey at the
oncoming of night , a somewhat lengthy rendering of the Arabic
tazinu ’l-mashiyata wa tuinu ’l-ndshiyata, in which I follow Sherishi’s
explanation as the simplest and most plausible. As referring to the
shoe, he takes mdshiyah , fern, of mtishi, walker, to mean the walker’s
foot, rijl, which, like, other double members of the human body, is
in Arabic feminine, while with regard to the camel, mdshiyah would be
any female walking along with it. Ndshiyah stands, according to him,
for ndshi’ah, with change of the Hamzeh into y, to make it conform


- NOTES.


265


with the preceding mdshiyah , and its literal sense is the growing one,
figuratively applied to the early part of night, when, after the heat
of day, travelling on foot or beast is helped on, i.e., becomes less
toilsome in the hot climate. For this meaning of the word nashi'ah
comp. Koran, lxxiii. 6 : “ Yerily the oncoming of night is most fitted
for earnest devotion, and speech is more collected.” The substance
of this passage is disputed amongst the commentators, but about the
word in question most of them agree.

When I alighted at Tabrin, a town three days’ journey distant
from Yemameh on one side, and from Hasa on the other, and
forming with them a triangle, Yemameh lying to the west, Hasa to
the east, and Yabrin to the south. *

On whom one could perceive that the birds might perch quietly , i.e., the
gravity of his demeanour and his dignified restfulness were such
that they might have emboldened the birds to alight on him.
Similarly a poet of the Hamaseh says :

“ As though the birds had settled on their heads, no fear of violence,
but the awe inspired by majesty ; ”

and tradition relates that it was said of Mohammed’s companions
“ as though the birds rested upon their heads.” To a grave and
placid person, the proverb is applied : inna-hu la-wdqiu * t-tairi , “ he is
one on whom the birds alight.”

If it is she by idiom he expected twenty .—The Arabic utiya bi-hd .
'ishrtna may mean: he was given for her twenty, viz., denars, or
given with her twenty, viz., blows, an ambiguity turning on the
force of the preposition hi, and which I have tried to preserve in the
above translation, which may signify either he hoped to realize by
her the price mentioned, or he was afraid to receive the same
amount of slaps by means of her. It is quite in the character of a
popular jester, like the one introduced here, to speak the next
moment of a thing expected as if it had really taken place, when it
serves his purpose to have the laughter of the audience on his side.
So ho presently says the evidence of his own eyes must show him
that nobody would offer twenty for this shoe, or if he wants to prove
that he has got his twenty with it, let him bare the back of his
neck, and everybody would see the traces of the blows.

ylnd do good according to thy power. —De Sacy reads here, iva-j all


266


NOTES.


’l-Ehaira bUiasabi tdqati-Jca , which he explains in his commentary :
“ Give me for her keep as much as thou canst afford.” The redactors
of the second edition of his text remark to this : u On the margin of
a MS. the words wa-’jali l-khaira are said to mean iva-’shkuru ’ lldha ,
render thanks to Allah, which seems to us preferable to the interpre¬
tation given in the note. The Kadi is far too generous to demand
payment for the care bestowed by him on the camel which he had
found.” De Sacy himself, however, mentions that some MSS. have
fa-fall ’ l-khaira , and do good, and this, with the substitution of wa
for the initial /ft, is indeed the reading of my own MS. and of the
native editions. While, therefore, concurring in the opinion that
the Kadi enjoin* gratitude towards Allah to Abu Zayd, I think that
by doing so in the words of the last quoted versions he alluded to
Koran xxii. 76 : “ Believers! bow down and prostrate yourself, and
worship your Lord, and work righteousness (waf'alti H~khaira)fi im¬
plying that the most meritorious way of paying thanks to God is by
demonstrations of piety and the performance of good actions.

So live as long as camels speed the pilgrims on. —The original says :
“ Mayst thou last as long as the ostrich and the camels last ” (dim
dauma ’n-nadmi wa-n-na ami), to which the commentators remark,
that the ostrich is said to live a thousand years, and the race of camels
dies never out, so that the phrase means, live for ever. The word naam
is, of course, used for the rhyme’s sake, and not Cm for that of allitera¬
tion, but although the mention of camels may be justified by the
subject-matter of the Assembly, the ostrich may be easily dispensed
with, and I hope I shall not be blamed for my attempt to bring the
last line into closer connection with the first one and its allusions to
the Ka'beh and the sanctuary of Mecca. For naam some MSS. read
ni'am, kind deeds, pi. of ni'mah , which in itself would be appropriate
enough, but make the ostrich appear still more out of place.

Without dinning his benefit into my ears. —The Arabic imtindn is
mentioning to another boastfully the benefits conferred on him, and
making him feel painfully the obligation he has incurred. Hence
the name manndnah , given to a rich woman who has married a poor
man, and keeps harping on the advantages she has bestowed on him
(comp, the note on hanndnah , p. 270, below).

By Allah , yea } in Arabic allahumma naam , lit., “ 0 Allah ! yes, 55
an idiomatical use of the vocative, which in De Sacy’s commentary


NOTES.


267


is explained in a lengthy note, translated in full by the redactors of
the second edition, vol. ii., p. 80. It emphasises the negative or
affirmative answer to a question, by apostrophising the Divine
Power, to call it as it were to witness of the truth of the reply, and
will be easily understood by the English reader, if he remembers
such familiar expressions as “ Good gracious ! no.” “ Good heavens 1
yes.”

Whose face pleaded in Ms favour , lit., in whose face there was an
intercessor, taken from a poem of Ibn Kanbar, in which he says :
“ How ever great an offence he may have committed, he is excused
for what he has done, for in his face there is an intercessor, that
effaces the offence from the hearts of men.” A tradition attributes
to Mohammed the saying : “ Three things gladden the eye : to look
at the verdure of the fields, at running water, and at a beautiful
face/ 3

And a hidden egg , viz., of the ostrich, which hides its eggs in the
grass, to protect them from dust or injury (comp. Ass. XLVI., below),
an allusion to Koran, xxxvii. 47: cc And with them (the inhabitants of
Paradise) the large-eyed ones with modest refraining glances, fair
like the sheltered egg” Beautiful women are compared to the egg of
the ostrich on account of the whiteness of their complexion, and the
yellowish tint which mingles with it. Thus Imr al-Kays, in the
32nd verse of his “ Mo'allakah ” (Arnold’s edition, p. 14), likens his
mistress to the egg of the ostrich, or, according to others, to a virgin
pearl, whose whiteness is suffused with a shade of yellowness.

No intimate has known her , in Arabic Id ’ siaghshd-kd Idbis-un , lit., a
coverer has not enveloped her. This alludes to Koran, ii. 183 :
“ You are allowed on the night of the fast to approach your wives:
they are your garment and ye are their garment,” a simile for the
intimacy and close connection between husband and wife, the former
of whom is accordingly called Idbis, as though he covered the latter
with a garment. Compare the English term to cover, for to
embrace or know carnally.

The experienced %oho repeats her favour , in Arabic al-mu\dlilah, the
active form of the participle, of which the passive occurs in verse 15
of the “ Moallakah,” just quoted :

i% Then I said to her, Travel on, loosening the camel’s rein, and repel me
not from the repeated culling of thy fruit.”


268


NOTES.


An easy knot for the wooer , i.e., a knot easily untied, in allusion to
the proverb rad 'iq&lu-ki bi-unshutat-in , the tether of thy love is not
lightly loosened (Ar. Prov., ii. 621).

And have displayed the two hinds — al-mahdtaini , dual of mahdt , a
wild cow, with whose eyes the eyes of a woman are compared, in
analogy with the Homeric epithet fioums, bestowed on the queen of
the gods.

And which rouses thy appetite ?—a translation which I beg the
indulgent reader to consider rather as a modest rendering of the
asterisks, which the Beyrout edition substitutes to the unsophisti¬
cated words of the text than of the words themselves.

A stone to be*feared by the adversary , in Arabic al-murdjim } which
Sherislii explains, he at whom thou throwest stones and who throws
stones at thee.

From which the cupping-places are made to bleeds meaning the shoulder
and lower part of the neck.

Her intercourse is unprofitable , lit., is a thunder-cloud without rain
(salifaiun) from salafi little rain, accompanied with much thunder,
whence the proverb, many a scanty rainfall is under the thunder¬
cloud, applied to a man who praises himself much and has little
merit, or who assumes a threatening air without standing his
ground when it comes to the point (Ar. Prov., i. 535). Sherlshi,
however, explains salifah by fastidious, disdainful, deriving it from
zalif, side of the neck, the showing of which to a person corresponds
to the English idiom “ showing him the cold shoulder.’* Lastly, it
is said to mean untractable, difficult to manage, from arzun salifatun ,
a hard ground which resists cultivation.

Her hand is clumsy (kharqtt). —This word is variously interpreted as
“foolish,” “unskilful in handiwork,” ^‘ too proud to work with her
fingers,” “ wanting in gentleness,” “ lavish in household expendi¬
ture.” A proverb says : al-kharqd’u let tadama ' illat-an , the foolish
woman is not at a loss for pretexts (Ar. Prov., iii., P. 1, p. 364).

Her night is a night indeed. —One of the many grammatical re¬
sources of Arabic is to create comparatives of any noun, by forming
the measure af\d from the respective root. I remember to have
read somewhere an amusing story of a judge who, being carried
across a swollen stream astride on the back of a client, uttered the
prayer: “ 0 Allah, strengthen this ass, to bring me safely over.”


NOTES .


269


Said the client within himself: “ Thou callest me an ass, and
makest use of me as such, but thou art a greater ass than I” ( ahmar ,
more of an ass, comparative of himdr , ass), presently dropping him
into the water, where the poor man would have been drowned if his
judicial embonpoint had not served him as a life-buoy, that floated
him comfortably to the shore. In similar manner the noun lail,
night, forms the comparative alyal, more of a night than night itself,
which occurs in the phrase Jchdbitu lailin alyali (by metrical license
for tdyala, the comparative form being imperfectly declined), which
Chenery translates : one stumbling in the night-dark night (see
vol. i., p. 129, six lines from the bottom). The fern, of alyal is laild 9 ,
as in the passage now under consideration, the Arabic of which is:
wa-lailatahd IttihVu , the objective case of the noun depending on
the preceding inna. The same expression has been met with in
Assembly XV.,'where A1 Harith is made to say : “Until I formed
a wish that I might be granted a talk-fellow, who (as Chenery
again renders it) should shorten the tedium of my night-dnrJc night
(U-yaqsura Uila lailntt ’1-laihVi, see vol. i., p. 18G, and the corre¬
sponding note, ibid., p. 398). The native Dictionaries describe both
lailun alyalu and Uvilntun laihVu as synonyms of lailun hVilun , where
hVil has the force of an active participle, as we would say “ nighten-
ing ” for “ darkening,” and which they explain as a long and dark
night, or as one of the three nights preceding the new moon. In
the present instance I think my translation, “her night is anight
indeed,” expresses sufficiently the idea which the precocious youth
wishes to convey.

And to fowic her needs the lifting of a veil .—This may mean, her
real character is a mystery to the husband, which only reveals itself
to him after long acquaintance and intercourse, or, according to
others, it refers to her virginity and its physical sign.

And subdues the experienced stallion , in Arabic wa'zmati H-faniga
’ IMrdla , literally, she subjugates the stallion, who has grown the
tooth Mdl, and is then called by the same name, an event which
takes place with the camel of either sex, when it has reached the
ninth year. The term stands here metaphorically for a man of
whom we would say, “ he has cut his wisdom-teeth.” For the verb
azraat comp, the proverb : “ The fever has humbled me before
thee,” or in another version, “The fever has made me succumb to


270


NOTES.


sleep,” which professes submission to a calamity, and is said to
originate with an Arab of the tribe Kalb, named Murir, or Murin,
who uttered the words when, in an attempt to liberate his brothers
from the captivity of the Jinn, he was, in consequence of a fever,
overpowered by sleep, and fell captive himself to one of them
(Ar. Prov., i. 364).

So I looh out for one who holds and spends , i.e., one who has hoarded
up money and expends it freely, so that I may indulge in fine
raiment and pleasant companionship.

One dainty (. zawwdqah , of fastidious and changeable taste, especially
in matters matrimonial), alluding to a saying attributed by tradition
to Mohammed, ifi answer to a man who had told him that he had
divorced his wife : “ Allah loves not the dainty, either man or
woman.”

I was and have become , meaning “ under my former husband I
was honoured and well-to-do, but now I am despised and poverty-
stricken.”

And if she thus be a habitual lamenter , blest with family and ivithal a
bold-faced wanton .—A lamenter, hanndnah, is a woman who always
bewails the late lamented, and blest with family, bardk , is explained
as one who has up-grown sons. For the following “and withal”
De Sacy reads “ or,” which in itself would be preferable, but is not
warranted by the native editions and the MSS. consulted by me.

Then he chid me as the tutor chideth at the slip of his pupil. —The
word translated with chiding (intihdr) is taken from Koran, xciii. 10 :
“And as to him that asketh of thee, chide him not away (Id
tanhar ).”

East thou bethink thee of what thou hast heard ? in Arabic aturd-ka
md samfta, lit., wilt thou be made to see or ponder ? where the
pronominal suffix of the first verb is not considered as a mafdl or
objective case, but as corroborative of the inflectional pronoun, just
as we might say : “ Wilt thou be made to see for thyself,” or “ with
thy own eyes V 9 Compare Koran, vi. 40, and Baydawi’s commen¬
tary ; also De Sacy, Gramm., i. 1189, and ii. 866, note.

That there is no monkery in Isldm , alluding to a tradition which
makes Mohammed say : “In Islam there is no monkery (ruhbdniyah)
and no celibacy ( tabattul ),” the former Arabic term being derived
from ruhbdn , a Christian monk, the latter from the verb bail, cutting


NOTES .


271


off, which in its fifth form means cutting one’s self off from all
worldly concerns, and in particular abstaining from sexual inter¬
course. To the same root the word batvd y virgin, is to be traced,
which is applied to the Virgin Mary and to Mohammed’s daughter
Fatimeh. Another tradition relates that the Prophet asked of
'Akaf ibn Wadtfah: “0 *Akaf, hast thou a wife?” and when he
answered in the negative, Mohammed said : “ Then thou art of the
brothers of Satan ; if thou belong to the Christian monks, stick to
them; but if thou belong to us, one of our ordinances is the
married state.”

S«bers thy sight , i.e. y prevents thy eyes from looking at other
women. •

Through her thou beholdest the coolness of thy eye, and the flower sweet
to thy nostrils. —These two similes, and the metaphorical expressions
which follow them, stand for offspring.

How , then, art thou averse to the ordinance of the sent ones , refers to
the traditional saying of Mohammed : “ Four are the ordinances of
the apostles, the use of scents (for hygienic purposes), the cleansing
of the teeth by the miswdlc, matrimony, and a bashful behaviour ”
lastly, “ the advantages enjoyed by the owners of a household ” alludes to
another tradition by which Mohammed is recorded to have said:
“ Two inclinations (in prayer) of those who possess a family are
better than eighty-two of a celibate.”

And darted aside as the locust darts , an allusion to the proverb
ansa min a TjarMi, more given to darting off than locusts (Ar. Prov.,
ii. 791).

So that thou mayst indulge thyself a bit , and dispense with a damsel
thou woaldst have to endower. —Here again I am obliged to tone
down the terse literalness of the original, while trying to preserve
the idiomatical force of its two diminutives, at least in form,
'urmirah, a. name given here to the hand, as instrumental in a
vice severely denounced by Mohammed, and muhairah, diminutive
of mahtrah , a woman of noble birth, and therefore exacting a large
dowry,

And not let thy generation grow to marts estate , Le., mayst thou die
young, for if Allah shortens the lives of those who belong to the
same generation with him, his own life will be but short.

By Him who has planted the forests, in Arabic bi-man aubata ’l-aikn,


272


NOTES .


the final word being a plural, the singular of which occurs in Koran,
xxvi. 176, and passim.

Lick up the honey and ask no questions , viz., ask not where it comes
from, or as a modern proverb has it: kuli ’l-baqla wa Id tasal *ani
l-maqbalah , eat the cabbage, and ask not for the cabbage-field (comp.
Ar. Prov., ii. 393).

That the goal of his talk was distant , and that the Shaykh was a
mighty sharp one .—The former idiom, in Arabic ash-shautu batimm
(for which comp. Ar. Prov., iii., P. 1, p.262) is taken from a race¬
horse, whose course up to the goal is called shauu The second, in
the original ash-shaiZhu shuwaitinnn, means literally the Shaykh is a
devilkin, the epithet being the diminutive of shaitdn , Satan, which,
as a note in my MS. remarks, 4 ‘is fai'dl of shut&n, being distant, on
account of his remoteness from the Mercy of Allah.” But shaitdn,
applied to men and Jinn, has also the meaning of haughty, mis¬
chievous, cunning, and the diminutive is explained as *dhibu adabin
wa dahd’-in, possessed of learning and sagacity.

And see dearly thy quiddity , in Arabic istabantu inna-ka, which
maybe interpreted: “ I fully perceive what inna-ka means, when
thou art concerned.” It will be remembered that the inchoative
particle inna, behold, is placed before a nominal sentence, governing
the accusative of the subject, which of course may be an affixed
pronoun, and the nominative of the predicate, for instance, inna
Zayd-ctn (inna-Jm) la-'dlimun, behold Zayd (behold he) is learned
indeed, which is more emphatical than the simple sentence, Zay dun
dlimun (huiva Ydimun) Zayd is learned (he is learned). The youth,
therefore, intends to say, I know perfectly what kind of a man
thou art, and am not at a loss how to complete my speech when I
begin it with inna-ka, “ behold thou art.” The word quiddity, as
an abstract noun derived from another part of speech, seems a fair
equivalent.

In this place poetry fetches not a barley-corn , etc.—The satire, con¬
tained in this and the preceding passage, is a favourite theme with
the poets. One, for instance, says:

“ If the eloquence of Sahb/in, and the caligraphy of Ibn Muklah, and the
intellect of the Benft Kand, and the piety of Ibn Adham

Were collected in one man, and that man poor, though free-born withal,
he would not be worth a dirhem,”


NOTES.


273


where the attribute “free-born,” besides implying that he has en
joyed a liberal education and is highly cultivated, at the same time
suggests that he is of no value, even if he is sold as a slave, because
such a sale would be invalid, as amusingly illustrated in Assembly
XXXIV.


THE FORTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.

I came in a night of deepest darkness , in Arabic t ashautu fi lailatin
ddjiyati } z-zulmati. The verb c ashautu means origfnally I came at
nightfall, but subsequently it took the signification of “ I came ” in
general, in which it governs the preposition ild, to. Followed by
the preposition an, from, it occurs in the sense of departing in
Koran, xliii. 35 : “ And whoso shall withdraw from (man %yashu 'an)
the Warning of God of Mercy, We will prepare a Satan for him,
and he shall be his fast companion.”

Her bosom closely buttoned .—This simile is explained by the follow¬
ing qarlnah, the purport of which is that the heaped-up clouds
covered the sky so completely that no interstice was left for the
stars to shine through.

I was colder therein than the eye of the chameleon and a mangy goat ,
two proverbs to the same effect, for which see Maydani’s Collection,
i. 743. The eye of the chameleon is said to be cold, because,
according to the popular belief, it always seeks the sun and the
warmth emanating from it, while the denudated state of the mangy
goat sufficiently accounts for her suffering from the severity of the
seasons. The word used for cold (sard, in the comparative asrad) is
in this signification borrowed from the Persian sard , the Arabic root
sard having different meanings, as being scanty, missing the aim, etc.
In the short commentary, attached by Hariri to this Assembly, he
mentions that some lexicographers declare the second of the above
proverbs to be a misreading of the first, caused by displacing the
diacritical points of H-hirbd’i, which thereby becomes 'ansi

H-jarhVi. Prosaic matter-of-fact people deemed probably the former
too fanciful, and thinking the shivering goat a more appropriate
comparison, tried to improve on the eye of the chameleon, although

VOL. II. 18


274


NOTES ..


they had to introduce a spurious al before the word 'auz, which
article has nothing whatever to do with the word mn of the original
proverb, as this noun governs another noun in construction.

Well is he ivont to ward against the ills of time with gathered ashes ,
sharpened knives , literally: “he is against the evil of time, accus¬
tomed to evil, one gathered of ashes, sharpened of knives,” a
thoroughly idiomatic expression for.: his heaped-up ashes and
sharpened knives proclaim that he is always ready to kindle his fires
and slaughter his animals for the benefit of those who suffer from
the hardships of time and take refuge with his hospitality.

Whose camels ['ish&r] bellowed , whose cauldrons [a'shdr] boiled .—The
connecting link between the two words 'ishdr and cCshdr is the
numeral \ishar , ten, the former being pi. or collective noun of
c ushara , a she-camel who has been pregnant for ten months or
thereabouts, when she drops her young, during the whole of which
time she goes by the above name; the latter, originally the pi. of
c ushr , a tenth part, is applied to a kettle so large that it equals ten of
ordinary size in capacity.

Who were gathering the fruit of winter , i.e., enjoying the warmth of
the fire. Hariri, in the above-mentioned commentary, quotes the
following lines of a later poet:

44 Fire is the fruit of winter ; who then desires in winter to taste fruit,
let him warm himself,

Ay, fruit in winter is worth wishing for, but fire is for the frozen the
best that he can taste . 55

And udien embarrassment had passed away , in Arabic wa lammd an
sard H-Jiasaru. The word hasar, which has occurred in Hariri’s
Preface, vol. i., p. 103, 1. 12, and was translated there by
44 hesitation, 55 has here the meaning of embarrassed silence, which
would be natural at the first meeting of many persons hitherto
unacquainted with each other.

Proof (lit., protected) against the blamer and caviller , i.e., the most
fastidious and dainty eater would not have been able to find fault
with them.

Then we heeded not what is said about gluttony. —This alludes to the
proverb : al-bitnaiu tafanu ’ l-fitnata , gluttony does away with sense,
with regard to which the meaning of the next clause is, 44 on the
contrary, we v found sense in indulging it.” It is reported of the


NOTES.


275


Khalif 'Omar that he used to say: “Be on your guard, 0 men,
against gluttony, for it corrupts the body, and makes you neglectful
of prayer, and heirs to sickness.” (Comp. Ar. Prov., i. 180.)

For he crouched apart. —This alludes to the proverb : “he grazes in
company ( wasatan , literally, in the middle, i.e., amongst the rest),
and lies down by himself, 57 applied to one who is ready to par¬
take in another’s affluence, but turns aside from him at the approach
of misfortune (Ar. Prov., ii. 910).

And were afraid of being worsted when we questioned him , in Arabic
wa khashind ft ’l-mas’ilati 'l-aula, literally, “ we feared in questioning
the disproportionality,” an idiom taken from the Mohammedan law
of inheritance, for which see Chenery’s note on the*passage the day's
duties pressed upon us of Assembly XXI., vol. i., p. 462.

Verily this is naught but stories of those gone before (lit., of the first or
former ones)—quotation from Koran, vi. 25 : “and though they see
all kinds of signs, they refuse faith in them until, when they come to
thee to dispute with thee, the infidels say, ‘ Verily, this is nothing
but fables (asdtir) of the ancients.’ 55 I translate the Arabic term
asdtir with stories, because its singular isttlr, or ustur , has etymolo¬
gically been identified with the Greek Icrropta. Its derivation from
satr, writing, as that which has been written down, appears, how¬
ever, quite as legitimate, if not more so.

Then he begged a hearing from the night-talkers. —In the original the
singular “night-talker” {sdmir) is used, to which Hariri comments:
sdmir is a collective noun, standing for the plural summdr, as kdzir,
lit., one present, is a name for a tribal division alighting at a
watering-place, and as bdqir means a herd of cattle, or, according
to others, cattle together with their herdsmen. The word sdmir
itself is derived from samar , the shade produced by the moon, in
which the night-talkers mostly assemble, whence the proverb, “ Id
ukallimu-hu 'l-qamara-wa- s-samctra ”—“ I shall not talk to him in the
moon-light, or in the shade of the moon” (Ar. Prov., ii. 418;
compare also vol. i., p. 303, the note on “His talk-fellow”).

The second signification of “ nasi" is “ running fast.” —In this sense
the word occurs Koran, xxi. 96 : “And they shall hasten ( yansildna)
from every high land. 55 .

In a camel-litter between cords ( sabab ).—For the meaning of cord,
as applied to the word sabab, comp. Koran, xxii. 15 : “ Let him who

18—2


276


NOTES.


thinketh that God will by no means aid his Apostle in this world,
and in the next, stretch a cord to heaven,” etc.

It is ivhat the world knows as wine. —This seems to be the meaning
of khamru ’ l-dlami , the wine of the world, to which De Sacy
remarks, “ i.e the Ghubaira’ is like wine, such as its qualities are
known to mankind, in which regard there is no difference between
them.”

In which latter sense some commentators explain the Koranic imshu .—

This occurs Koran, lxvii. 15, where, however, Kodwell translates:
“Traverse then its (the earth’s) broad sides” (fa’mshu fi mand-
kibirhd). According to the interpretation mentioned here by Hariri,
the meaning is : “may ye have abundance of cattle,” by way of
prayer for their prosperity, which is in keeping with the concluding
part of the passage : “ and eat of what He has provided—unto Him
shall be the resurrection.”

Dumb withal. —Dumbness, says De Sacy’s commentary, is ascribed
to him in order that the hearers should not think htdikan to be a
metathesis of hakiycm , one who relates a story, as shakt, one clad in
full armour, is transposed into shCdih. Without having recourse to
the supposition of such a metathesis, I may mention that hail
denotes also one who composes poetry, which to the Arab mind
appears as the spontaneous outpour of the emotions of the soul, and
therefore naturally as improvisation. For this reason I translate
somewhat freely “deaf and dumb,” since from a person afflicted
with this infirmity, poetical effusions would scarcely be expected.

Wonders will never cease , lit., then, how many wonders are there in
creation !

And also “ the telling of a lie” —In the passage of the Koran
quoted to this (xxvi. 137), the expression Jchalqu ’ l-auivalina is used
in the same sense as asdtfru ’l-auwalina in that quoted, p. 275,
above.

And also the lachrymal gland .—Sherishi mentions a third significa¬
tion of gdiarb, a large bucket, and explains in this connection halab
with saiyalcm , running, streaming, which, however, scarcely yields a
satisfactory meaning, and seems not to have been in Hariri’s mind
when he composed this line.

Of Arabs and wives beloved. —This translation follows De Sacy’s
reading min *urbin wa min'urubi , which is also that of my MS. The


NOTES.


277


native editions have min 'ujmin wa min 'urubi , where 'ujm is pi. of
'ajarn, one who speaks Arabic badly or not at all, a foreigner.

And also used metaphorically for “ woman.” —Compare the expres¬
sion libds, garment, in the same sense which occurs in the Koranic
passage quoted, p. 267, above.

It is no nest of thine , so get thee out , in Arabic laisa bi-ushshi-ki fa-
’druji , a proverb applied to one who claims or usurps that to which
he is not entitled. Hariri, in his commentary to the Assembly,
remarks that 'ushsh is the term for a nest built on a tree, while wakr
is a nest made on a wall or in a mountain-cave.

He taunted us with the taunt of the unconcerned towards the troubled .—
Comp. Ar. Prov., ii. 612, 815; also i. 720. ♦

The coaxing before provoking the milk-flow , in Arabic al-indsu qcibla
H-ibsdsi, another proverb (Ar. Prov., i. 94), taken from the habit of
the milker to coax the camel before he draws the milk, saying to
her during the act, bus , bus, in order to keep her quiet and elicit a
copious flow. The camel which gives milk freely when this is said
to her is called basus (compare Chenery’s note on The war of Al
Basus } vol. i., p. 526 and foil.). The meaning of the passage in the
context is, of course, that Abu Zayd expects to be gratified by a
gift before vouchsafing the explanation of his verbal puzzles.

One of those who want a return for their gift. —The four concluding
words of this sentence are in Arabic represented by the single word
shukm , the opposite of which is shukd , a free gift. In some manu¬
script copies of Hariri's commentary the following line of a poet is
quoted :

“ My gift to be returned (shuhni) is ready, and likewise my free gift
(shukdi), for good and evil there is a place with me,”

where, however, the meaning seems to be, I am equally prepared to
return evil for evil, as good for good.

It grieved our host , in the original siVa abd maswd-nd, lit., the father
of our place of shelter, or, as Hariri explains, the entertainer, to
whom they had repaired, and whose hospitality they were enjoying.

An Adi camel and a robe like Sa'id’s. —An Tdi camel means, accord¬
ing to the author’s commentary, either one descended of a generous
stallion of the name Id, or the noun of relation refers to ’Id ibn
Mahrah, a tribal division, which, like the tribe Mahrah itself,
was renowned for its camel breed (comp, the note on Mahriyah,


‘278


NOTES ,.


p. 238, above). A robe like Said’s alludes to a garment in which
Mohammed clad Said ibn al-As when he was a youth.

A disposition like A khzam’s, a proverb the origin of which is
ascribed to Sad ibn al-Hashraj, grandfather of Hatim Tay, the pro¬
totype of generosity with the Arabs and the people of the East in
general, when he found that the youth Hatim, in growing up,
had developed more and more the liberal and magnanimous qualities
for which his own grandfather Akhzam was renowned, saying : “a
disposition which I know from Akhzam ” (Ar. Prov., i. 658).
Maydani (ii. 688) adduces the authority of Ibn al-Kalbi for the
statement that the proverb originated with the father of Akhzam,
which latter is sa^d to have been a disobedient and undutiful son to
him. When Akhzam died he left sons behind him, who one day
assaulted their grandfather and wounded him severely, whereupon
he indited the following verses :

“ Children of my own blood have stained me with my blood, whoever
meets with lions amongst men, will be wounded, a disposition known to
me from Akhzam.”

The verses occur in the Ham&seh, p. 646 of Freytag’s edition, where
the Commentary attributes their authorship, implying that of the
proverb, to various other persons. Haiiri, in his own notes to this
Assembly, asserts that they were composed by ‘Akil ibn 'Ullafah,
and that the final words are only a quotation of the current proverb.
This is probable enough, and in this case e Akil evidently means
simply to say, that the disposition of his sons was inherited from
their father, as that of Hatim was from his grandfather Akhzam.

He sprang to the camel and straightway saddled her, etc.—This
passage has been translated as interpreted in Hariri’s commentary,
which takes occasion from the term “ saddled ” (rahala) to supple¬
ment the explanation of rdhilah , saddle-beast, mentioned p. 247
above, by the remark that it applies as well to the male as the
female camel, and that its feminine termination has no reference to
the sex, but is that of intensity (mubdlaahah). To the word
“mounted” ( irtahala ), the author quotes a characteristic anecdote
recorded of Mohammed, to the effect that once, when he was pros¬
trated in prayer, and his grandson Hasan riding on his back, he
prolonged his devotion and afterwards said : “ The little one had


NOTES.


279


mounted me ( irtahcda-ni), and I was loath to curtail his pleasure.”
Lastly to “ hastened on ” he refers to the tradition: “ At the
approach of the hour (of resurrection) a fire will come forth from
the bottom of 'Aden, which will hasten on mankind.”

Contented idth a chance draught, nashh, lit., a draught insufficient
to quench the thirst, and, according to the dictionary Muhit, by
opposition, drinking one’s fill.

And went away under every star of heaven, a proverbial expression
applied to those who separate and travel on different roads (comp.
Ar. Prov., i. 508).


THE FORTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.

And checked his hark, in Arabic khasa’at-hu 'ani 'n-nubdhi, lit., scared
him away from his hark. The verb, which is here transitive in the
sense of driving away a dog, etc., is also used intransitively for
taking one’s self off, as in Koran, xxiii. 110 : “ He will say (to those
whose balances at the day of judgment shall be light), ‘Be ye
driven away into it (ikhsa'u ft-hd, the pronoun referring to hell-fire),
and address Me not. 1 ”

And eased his hack after his pebhle-throw.—Jamrah, here translated
with “ pebble-throw,” is the ceremony of stoning the devil at Mina,
which concludes the rites of the pilgrimage, and thereby removes
the weight, which, as it were, is imposed on the back of the pilgrim
by his religious duties. A marginal note in my MS. says, and hirhd
’l-nutfata, the author means by it the semen virile, and however
distasteful the repeated allusions to the pilgrimage and its ceremonies
may appear to the European mind, in connection with these matri¬
monial squabbles, we must not forget that Orientals look on such
matters simply as natural facts, and, far from intending blasphemy,
honestly believe they mitigate in this way their language in speaking
on subjects of that kind.

He foliuwed Aba Yusufs view.— This eminent lawyer, a disciple of
Abu Hanifeh, was born at Bagdad A.H. 113, and died A.H. 182,
after having filled the office of Chief Justice (qAA ’l-quzat) under
Harun ar-Iieshld and his two immediate predecessors. The lesser
pilgrimage, or 'umrah, consists in the performance of the ceremonies


280


NOTES.


of circumambulating the Kabeh, and running between al-Marwah
and as-Safa, but omitting the sacrifices and other observances of the
Hajj. The practice of combining the c umrah and the hajj , wearing
the same ihrdm, or pilgrim's cloak, is called gdrin “ joining,” that
of performing the c umrah before the hajj in the same year, but in a
different ihrdm, is termed tamattu , “reaping advantage," because it
procures the advantages of both ceremonies. Lastly, the name
ifrdd (isolation) is given to either act, if performed separately in
different years.

Obedient to old Abu H-Murratis hest. —Abu ’1-Murrah is a nickname
given to Iblis, because it was that of the old man of Nejd, in whose
likeness he appeared to the Koraysh, instigating them to destroy
Mohammed by the sword.

Who clears himself from doubts cast on him , lit., who explains his
excuse in that which causes her to doubt.

Professed so staunchly by * Uzrah’s tribe. — Compare the note on
the Benu "CJzrah, p. 255, above.

Like one who rows chastity for caution's sake , in Arabic hijrdna c affin
akhizin hizra-h% with the renouncing of the chaste, who takes liis
precautions, in allusion to Koran, iv. 73 : “0 ye who believe, make
use of precautions” {hhuzd hizra-kum; the passage refers to the
mode of warfare to be adopted against the infidels).

And not from grudge held I aloof from my field. —The final word, in
the sense in which it is used here, is again taken from the Koran,
ii. 223 : “Your wives are your field; go in therefore to your field
in what way soever ye will; but do first some act for your souPs
good; and fear ye God, and know that ye must meet Him; and
bear these tidings to the faithful."

Thou lack-food and lack-a-lance, lit., “ 0 thou who art no food and
no tilting," ie., neither possessed of the one nor fit for the other.
De Sacy and the Beyrout edition read here : yd man huwa Id ta'dmun
wa Id tidnun , with the full nominative termination of the two nouns;
while my own MS. has Id tadma wa Id tidna , in the accusative
without tanwin. These are the most approved of the legitimate
five modes of construing the repeated absolute negative Id with two
nouns, which are illustrated in Palmer’s “ Arabic Grammar,” p. 255,
by the different manners of expressing the celebrated ejaculatory
prayer : “ There is no strength and no power but with God,” in


NOTES.


281


Arabic. In the above passage of our text the negative and noun
together form logically a compound, as rendered in my translation.
The word ti'dn, infinitive of the third conjugation, stands here
metaphorically for jimd\ copulation, which has the same grammatical
measure jial.

When for every grazing creature there is a pasture ground , in Arabic
wa li-kulli aMlatin mardn. —The woman affects in this speech the
language of the proverbs, intending to say that everybody has his
appointed share in the bounty of the Creator, and therefore ought
to be contented with his lot, and trust in Providence. But although
the saying does not appear in this form amongst the proverbs of the
Arabs, its leading words are contained in the prrverb : mar an wa
Id-aMlata , “ a pasture, but none to graze on it,” which is applied to
a rich man, who allows no other person to take part in the enjoy¬
ment of his wealth (Ar. Prov., ii. 619). Akdlah means originally a
sheep, which is fattened in order to be slaughtered for food, but is
here used in a general sense for any grazing animal, and the above
sentiment is taken from Koran, xi. 8 : “ And there is no moving
thing on earth whose nourishment dependeth not on God, and
He knoweth its haunts and final resting-place; all is in the clear
Book/’ -

If thou wert to 'wrangle with al-Khansd she would go away from thee
silenced. —For al-Khansa comp, the note, p. 246, above.

There is enough in his concern for his growling entrails (qctbqab) to
make him forget his pendulum (zabzab). —This alludes to the proverb :
man icuqiya sharra laqlaqi-hi wa qabqabi-hi wa zabzdbi-hi faqad wuqiya
’sh-sharra kulla-hu , which may be translated freely: “ He who is safe
from the mischief of his rattler (tongue), and his growler (belly),
and his swinger (penis) is safe from all mischief ” (Ar. Prov., ii. 663).

After appeal to the judge , in Arabic bdda H-mundfarah. This is
originally a technical term for the contention before an umpire on
the titles of a man or tribe to nobility or honour over others, for
which see Clienery’s note on Pride to Assembly XII., where the
word occurs in the form nifdr (vol. i., p. 375). Here, however, it
is merely a synonym of mulidkamah , judicial contest, litigation in a
court of justice, or of tahdkum, which a little lower down will be
translated “ resort to the judgment-seat.”

Content therewith the two hollows. — Al-ajwafcm, the two hollows, is


282


NOTES.


equivalent to al-ghdrdn , the two caves (os et pudenda), for which
compare the note, voL i., p. 460).

Resist the stirrer of mischief (ndzigh) between two friends , allusion to
Koran, vii. 199, where the same verb is applied to Satan: “ And if
stirrings to evil from Satan stir thee, then fly thou for refuge to God;
He verily hearetb, knoweth !”

For the handsome way in which he had dismissed them, in the text
e aid husni 5 s-sardhi . The word sardh , which originally means allow¬
ing the cattle to pasture freely, if applied to a woman, signifies
divorce, and has here the sense of dismissal, as in the proverb
as-sardhu mina ’n-najdhi, dismissal is part of success (Ar. Prov., i. 602).
In explanation of this the commentators say : “ If thou art not able
to supply a man’s want, thou shouldst make him despair, i.e., re¬
nounce all hope of obtaining it.” It is therefore tantamount to the
proverb, “ Despair is one of the two kinds of rest,” which we have
met with in a former Assembly (see p. 264 above).

So he rose to go defiantly, but came back defeated .—This translation
is more in accordance with the spirit than the letter of the two
proverbs quoted in the text. He rose to go defiantly is in Arabic
■nahaza yanfuzzu mizraicai-hi , lit., he rose shaking the extremities of
his buttocks, a proverbial expression for the threatening and arro¬
gant deportment of an adversary, which 'Antarah did not hesitate
to use in one of his kasidehs (Ar. Prov., i. 301). He came back
defeated, 'dda yazribu asdarah-hi , alludes to the saying, “He came
beating his shoulders” (Ar. Prov., i. 288), which means, “ He came
empty-handed, without having accomplished his object.”

Flight with Qurdb is the wiser thing. — Here again I follow the
reading of my MS. in preference to De Sacy, who writes Jcirdb with
kasrah instead of qurCib with zammah. The latter is the name of a
generous steed which belonged to 'Abdallah, the brother of Durayd
ibn as-Simmah. They were engaged in war, and Durayd, consider,
ing himself and his people inferior in force to the enemy, advised
his brother to flee, with the words quoted above, implying that
speedy flight was more prudent than fighting on unequal terms.
Abdallah, however, would not listen to him, but resolved on combat,
in which he was killed and the horse taken captive. Abu Zayd in
this version, therefore, means to say that to flee in the utmost haste
was the safer course for them. On the other hand, qirdb signifies


NOTES.


283


the scabbard of a sword, or any case in which a mounted traveller
keeps his utensils; or it may be synonymous with garth, that which
is near at hand and easily carried off. In this form the proverb is
said to originate with Jabir (according to others, Khalid) ibn 'Amr
al-Mfizani, who, while journeying with some companions, saw the
tracks of two men on the road, and, through his skill in reading
footprints, discovered them to be men of great violence and rapacity.
He therefore urged his companions to take to flight with the most
portable of their goods, before losing the rest of them together with
their lives. Thus the purport of the proverb, and its application in
the present instance, would be to enjoin contentment with small
advantages, such as the couple had already reaped,^without running
into danger in the hope of getting more (see Ar. Prov., ii. 210).

Nay, the return to the charge is pruiseuorthier , in Arabic bali ’ l-audu
ahmaclu. The comparative ahmacl is formed from the passive
participle m ah? wild, praised, when the sense would be, if a beginning
is to be praised, the return to the same line of conduct is still more
so (Ar. Prov., ii. 130). Some interpreters take the adjective in
a personal sense, “one praiseworthier, 33 and contend that al-uucl
stands for pi 'l-aud, “ he who returns, 33 as, according to this view,
jirtir in the preceding note stands for zUt, 3 l-firdr , he who takes to flight.
But as Abu Zayd in the verses following repeats the word al-aud
in the sense of return, in evident allusion to the words of his wife,
the former explanation seems to me more appropriate.

Even though its keeper made it free to all corners. —The Arabic
mhkduM , here rendered with “made it free to all comers, 33 *means
the same as jaalorhd ft salnli 3 Rdhi , gave it over in the way, i.e.,
service of Allah to the use of the public (others read ft sabili
’l-kftairi, by way of a good action, or explain the phrase by ahalla-hd
li 3 bni ’ s-sabili , made it lawful to the son of the road, ie. 9 the
traveller).

Alnl Mtlsd , before thee , has been deceived.— The text says: Before
thee the Shaykh of the Asharis has been deceived, alluding to Abu
Musa Abdallah ibn Kais al-Ashari (+A.H. 44), who was appointed
together with 'Amr ibn al-As, to be arbiter between Ali and
Mu awiyeh after the battle of tiffin, and was outwitted by Amr to
Ali’s detriment (see Weil, “Geschichte der Chalifen, 33 i. 230 and
following).


284


NOTES.


THE FOETY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.

A most ardent desire , in Arabic talabun yd la-Im min talabin; a
thoroughly idiomatic expression, the literal rendering of which
would be “a desire, 0 what of a desire it was,” the vocative
particle yd referring to the pronoun of the third person, and this
itself being affixed to the so-called Idmu ’t-ta'ajjub, or particle of
admiration. Similar constructions occur in the beginning of the
lines of the “Ham&seh,” quoted vol. i., p. 449, in the Note on The
guarded domain of Kolaijb : u Oh lark! {yd la-hi min qubburatin ), the
valley is open *o thee in this pasture land,” and in the poet Zu
’1-Bummah’s verse: “ Oh, oval cheek {yd laM min Ehaddin asilin),
and tender speech and form, that only a caviller would presume to
blame.” In both these examples the vocative particle and that of
admiration have the same reference to the suffix of the second person
feminine, which they have in our text to the third of the masculine.

To sound the stupidity of the people of her soil. —The character of
dulness and stupidity was, according to Motarrezi, so well established
in public opinion, as to the natives of Emessa, that if the people of
Bagdad wished to denote a man as a consummate fool, they called
him Himsi, one born at Hims.

With the swiftness of the shooting-star when it swoops down to stone,
viz., the Shaitans stealing a hearing from the angels, allusion to
Koran, lxvii. 5: “And of a surety We have decked the lower
heaven with lights, and have placed them there to be hurled at the
Satans, for whom We have prepared the torment of the flaming fire.”
Also xv. 17, 18 : “And We guard them from every stoned Satan,
save such as steal a hearing : and him do visible flames pursue.”

Whose old age was coming on and whose youth had turned its bach
on him , a reversal of the proverb adbara ahariru-hu wa aqbcda
hariru-hu (Ar. Prov., i. 484), generally explained by “ whose pleasant
disposition had departed and whose peevishness had come,” taking
harir in the sense of yelping or snarling, like an ill-natured dog.
But Sherishi rightly remarks, that this description is not borne 1 out
by the schoolmaster’s demeanour towards his pupils, whom he treats
in the sequel of the Assembly with playful kindliness. He, there¬
fore, derives the word from the idiom harm ’ sh-shauk , the thorn has


NOTES .


285


dried up and grown hard, like the teeth of a cat (/my), and con¬
sidering it as a synonym of yah, dryness, brought on by old age,
renders it by haram, senility. With regard to gharir, he observes
that one of its meanings is “ one who stands security or bail,” and
refers it to youth, as a guarantee for length of life. This seems
sufficiently to justify my translation, which at the same time is not
inconsistent with the first mentioned interpretation.

So that I might test in him the learned folks of Hims, meant, of course,
ironically, as presently indicated by the avowed intention of the
narrator to fathom the essence of the man’s foolishness.

And greeted me with even a handsomer greeting than I had given him,
in accordance with the injunction of the Koran, h* 88 : “ If ye are
greeted with a greeting, then greet ye with a better greeting, or at
least return it; verily God taketh count of all things.”

Indite the unadorned couplets, in Arabic al-abydta ’ l-aicdtila , i.e.,
those which contain only words consisting of letters without
diacritical dots.

Nor gain'st thou glory courting girls full of hip, lit., and the place for
seeking glory is not a damsel with heavy hips. This translation is
based on the reading niarddu H-hamdi, which is that of the native
editions and of my MS., the governing noun mardd, with fathah,
being explained by Sherishi as a synonym of mar*a, pasture ground.
De Sacy prefers murdd, wish, which, however, seems here less
appropriate, and gives scarcely a satisfactory sense.

And praise he icins, etc., lit., his knowledge that the one-eyed are
not endowed with the dowries of the sound, has obtained praise for
him, meaning that he is deservedly commended for his discernment
in discriminating between the relative value of things and actions.

Display the bridal couplets .—The couplets following in the original
are called bridal, i.e., adorned like brides, because all the letters
contained therein are dotted, in direct contradistinction from the
preceding ones. According to Sherishi, it was a custom with the
ancient Arabs to apply to the cheeks of brides beauty-spots, painted
with saffron, and called nugat, pi. of nugtah, which is also the
grammatical term for the diacritical points of letters.

A blessing has been bestoioed on thee amongst fawns, as a blessing has
been bestowed on yonder olive-tree. —The Arabic text contains here two
expressions, which require explanation. The word translated by


286


NOTES:


fawns is tala, the young of any cloven-hoofed animal, as a cow, a
sheep, a gazelle. The olive-tree is designated By Id wa Id (lit., “neither
nor ”), suggestive of the passage of the Koran, xxiv. 35 : “ God is the
Light of the Heavens and of the Earth. His Light is like a niche
in which is a lamp—the lamp encased in glass—the glass, as it were,
a glistening star. From a blessed tree it is lighted, the olive , neither of
the East nor of the West (Id sharaqiyatun wa-ld gharabiyatun), whose
oil would well-nigh shine out, even though fire touched it not. It
is light upon light 1” etc. In illustration of this, it is told that an
Arab addressed to Abu Hanifeh the question <£ With one ivdw (letter
w for the conjunction wa), or with two wdws ?’ He replied
“With two,” whereupon the Arab said to him, “A blessing has
been bestowed in thee, as a blessing has been bestowed in Id wa-ld. ”
After he had gone, Abb. Hanifeh’s disciples asked him what the
man's question had meant. Abu Hanifeh answered, “ He demanded
me whether the profession of faith should be said with two wdws,
like that of Ibn Mas'ud, namely, £ I testify that there is no (Id) god
but God and (first wdw) that Mohammed is His servant and (second
wdw) Apostle,' or with one wdw, like that of Abu Musd al-A'shaii,*
to wit, £ I testify that there is no god but God, and that Mohammed
is his Apostle.’ In approval of my decision, he called me blessed,
and alluded to the passage of the sacred book on the blessed olive-
tree. ” With regard to the latter a tradition goes, that a man saw
the Prophet in a dream, and complained to him of an ailment from
which he suffered, whereupon the Prophet said to him: i( have
Id wa Id? Ibn Sirin, a celebrated interpreter of dreams (for whom
see Ibn Khallikau, i. 635) was consulted on the meaning of these
words, and declared it to be £t Eat olives ” (or olive oil).

0 Qutriib, —which may be translated “0 fidget,” beingthename of
i little animal, which is continually on the move, proverbially applied
bo one who travels much about, and used as a nickname ever since
die grammarian Sibawayh called by it Mohammed ibn al-Mustanir
see Ibn Khallik&n, i. 693, and comp. Ar. Prov., i. 643).

Or the likeness of an ivm'y-doll, allusion to the proverb ahsanu mina
d-dumyati (mina : z-zdni), more beautiful than a figure or image, both
if which, according to Mayd&ni, mean idols (Ar. Prov., i. 408).

Write down the mongrel couplets , in the original urqum al-abydta ’ l-al -


NOTES .;


287


akhydf i-C-, verses, the alternate words of which consist of dotted
and undotted letters in turn. The term akhydf is applied to sons
of the same mother by different fathers, or to men of heterogeneous
character and condition, and is derived from khaif\ the quality of
having one eye blue and the other black in a horse.

0 dijf-neck, 0 [essence of the\ perfume of Mausham , two epithets for
bold and mischievous, the first of which, in Arabic ghashamsham , is
applied to a man of unbending nature, who bows his head to no one,
and whom nothing can avert from his purpose. The second alludes
to the proverb ash’amy, min 'itri maushamin , more ill-omened than the
perfume of Mausham, the most plausible explanation of which is
that Mausham is the name of a woman trading irr perfumes, who
was surprised and despoiled of her goods by a gang of robbers.
When she complained of this to the people of her tribe, they pursued
•the pillagers, and killed every one on whom they smelled the scent
of the perfume. See Ar. Prov., i. 155, 692, where other readings
and interpretations will, be found.

Kills beholders , in the sense in which the Irish speak of a killing
beauty, and in which presently her rounded bosom, or, according to
others, her swelling hip, is called a deadly bane for the enamoured
admirer.

The two bordered couplets , in the text al-baitaini H-mutmfaini , mean¬
ing that the beginning and ending of either couplet form a rhyme,
and thereby resemble a cloak which is bordered with embroidered
designs. Some MSS. read mutrifaini , participle of atrafa , lie pro¬
duced something novel and wonderful, when the sense would be the
two couplets, which fill the hearers with marvel or challenge com¬
parison. A third rendering is mntarrafaini , in allusion to. a horse,
which is called mutarmf when its head and tail are white.

Ami are sure not to be matched (lit., abetted or strengthened,
ydazmzih) by a third is taken from Koran, xxxvi. 13: “When We
sent two unto them and they charged them with imposture, there¬
fore with a third JFe strengthened them (’azzaz-nti), and they said,

* Verily we are the Sent unto you of God.’ 5 ’

Make thee a mark whose traces show fair to sight .—The initial words
are in Arabic sioisimitan, impress a sign (viz., on thy conduct, which
in pause would read dm small, in conformity with the final simsimah ,
a grain of sesame or coriander-seed. In similar manner the second


288


NOTES.


couplet opens with lodl-malcru mahmtt “ and fraud or craftiness as
far as” (supply “thou art able—do not practise it”), the first, four
syllables of which are identical in sound with the terminating
wa’l-mah'umah, cc and honour, reverence, fair fame amongst men.”

0 father of despoilment, in Arabic yd aid H'-ghuMl. — Ghul-ul is
originally the purloining of part of a booty to the detriment of one’s
companions, and the meaning is here that the beauty of the boy is
such, that it pre-eminently captivates the minds of the beholders so
as to curtail the legitimate share of his fellow-pupils in the admira¬
tion due to them. f

0 cymbal-beater of the troop {yd sanndjata ’l-jaishi). —The Persian
sanj, cymbal, has*furnished Arabic with the word sanndj, a cymbal-
beater, which in the form mnndjah with the feminine termination
of intensity occurs in the nickname by which one of the bards of
the Ham&seh, A'shd, Kays, is known as sanndjatu ’ l-arab , on account
of his facundity as an orator and poet.

Well done , 0 thou mite , thou eye of a fly. —In default of a better
equivalent, I translate with £: mite ” the Arabic hibiggah (according
to Sherishi, a fart), which is used in taunting a man with his
diminutive size. Other authorities say it means long or lanky, but
this would scarcely tally with the following “ eye of a fly,” another
playful and endearing term, indicating excessive smallness of person,
which Tradition puts into the mouth of Mohammed, when dandling
his grandsons, al Hasan and al-Hosayn.

Saying to him : I commend thee to the protection of Allah from the eye
of the envier , and fain would be made thy ransom. —This is, of necessity,
the ponderous paraphrase of 'auwaza-hu wcv faddd-hu , second form of
the verbs 'auz and fadd respectively, which means to pronounce the
formulas translated above in full.

0 Kdkd\ a male proper name, for an instance of which see vol. i.,
p. 471, and the etymological explanation of which is disputed. Of
the various meanings assigned to it, here that of “ loud-voiced ”
seems the most appropriate, since it is said of the boy that he
recited his verses in a high-pitched key. The following “ 0 thou
bird cautious as to where thou sippest water f in Arabic yd bdqflata
d-bagd'i, lit., “0 crafty bird of the water-pools,” alludes to the
proverb (Ar. Prov., i. 162), mentioned and explained vol. i.,
p. 318.


NOTES.


289


Brighter than the fire of hospitality to the eyes of the son of night-
faring. Another proverbial saying, for which see Ar. Prov., i. 408.

Thou who askest me about the two letters Zdd and Zd .—For the reason
stated in the epitome to this Assembly, I restrict myself to giving
here the remainder of this long string of words without regard to
versification, together with their English equivalents. They are
muwdziby one who persists in; intizdr , expectation; ilzaz, impor¬
tunity ; wazif thinnest part of the leg of a horse or camel; zdli',
crooked; 'azim, great; zdhir y helper; fazz y water in a camel’s
stomach (also harsh, cruel); ighldz s rough treatment; nazifi clean,
tidy, neat; zarf a vessel; zdlaf continence ; zdhir, evident; fazi\
Sweetwater (also ugly, difficult); wu"dz y preachers^ 'uk&z, place of
the annual fair between Mecca and T&'if, the name being derived
from the verb *aJcz, in the sense of thronging together; za\ travel¬
ling ; mazz y wild pomegranate ; hanzal , colocynth; gdrizdn , the two
tan-gatherers (see p. 6 above); aushdz , pi. of washiz , mixed crowd,
rabble ; zirdb , hillocks ; zirrdn, sharp stones ; shazaf distress ; bdhiz,
heavy to bear, oppressive ; jazavi y boaster, vainglorious ; jawwdz ,
profligate (also gluttonous); zardbin , pole-cats; handzib , male
beetles ; \mzub y male locust; zayydn , wild jessamine; ruz y hole in a
spear or arrow to fix the head in; shanazi , surroundings of a
mountain; dalz, pushing back; zdb ( zdm ), clamour, noise (also
brother-in-law); zabzdb , ailment; 'unzuwdn, a saline plant; jin dz,
fool; shinz%r y ill-tempered; ta'dzul, hanging together of locusts or
dogs in copulation ; izlim , indigo ; bazr , clitoris ; in dz } erection.
With the exception of a few more words of exceedingly rare occur¬
rence, this list is said to be complete, and cognate forms are, of
course, as far as the letter zd is concerned, spelt alike, for instance,
gaiz y excessive heat, and gdzil, they were hot, etc.

May thy mouth never be harmed. —Thus Ohenery translates (vol. i.,
p. 183, last line but one) the idiom Id fuzza fid-la, which also occurs
in the fourteenth Assembly^ The literal rendering would be, ‘ may
thy mouth not be broken,” where mouth is said to stand for
“ teeth.” The expression was, according to Tradition, used by
Mohammed, when the poet N&bighah recited to him his kasideh in
the letter Ra, terminating in the lines :

“ We have reached the summit in praise, and glory and lordship, yet we
hope to attain to a station even above this.

VOL. II.


19


290


NOTES.


“ Whither to, 0 father of Lail& ?” asked the Prophet, and on the
poet’s answer, “ to Paradise,” he said to him approvingly : “ Id
afzaza ’ll&hu fd-ka,” “may Allah not harm thy mouth.” The sub¬
stitution of “teeth” for “ mouth,” in the interpretation of the com¬
mentators, is in congruity with the original meaning of the verb
fazz , “ breaking a seal.”

A safer keeper than the earth , alluding to the proverb: ahfazu
mina ’l-arzi wa dktamu wa dmanu , “ more keeping and more concealing
and more trusty than the earth,” because it keeps safely what is
buried in it of wealth, etc., like a custodian, and pays back what is
confided to it like a trustee, and bn account of the saying “ speak
not ill of the de^d, so that the earth may not shield him better than
thou.”

Therefore remember me: I will remember you ; and render thanks to
me, and be not ungrateful to me —quotation from Koran, ii. 147.

But I was like one who tries to see in the dark, etc .—My translation
follows here the reading of my own MS.: wa ana , “ but I,” or of
the native editions: wa kuntu, “but I was,” instead of that of
De Sacy : “ wa huwa, “but he,” which seems to me an evident mis¬
print or slip of the pen, overlooked by the editors of the 2nd edition.

Than one who speaks from experience, in Arabic mislu khaMrin.
Compare Koran, xxxv. 15: “If ye cry to them (the false gods),
they hear not your cry, and if they heard they would not answer
you; and in the day of Resurrection they will disown your joining
them with G-od. And none can instruct thee like Him who is informed
(khabtr) of all.”

Thou art the son of the days, ie., well acquainted with their con¬
ditions and proof against their vicissitudes, as we would say “ a
thorough man of the world.”


THE FORTY-SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.

While I was staying at Hajr of Yemdmeh .—Yemameh is one of
the most fertile districts of Hij£z, and at the same time the name of
its chief town, situated in the east of Mecca. It has been men¬
tioned in Assembly XL., p. 103, above, as the scene of the Musay-
limeh’s insurrection under the Khalifate of Abft Bekr, which was


NOTES.


291


crushed by a sanguinary battle, in which the impostor himself was
slain. The ShuhadiV, or martyrs on the Moslem side, were buried
in Hajr, the second town of importance in the district, about two
days’ journey distant from Yem&mah town to the north-west.

Or met with accident (lit., state, condition) after accident, in- Arabic
ralciba tabaqan * an tabaqin, where the preposition 'an, from, takes the
meaning of lit da, after, as in Koran, lxxxiv. 19 : “(And I swear,
etc.) that state after state yeVill encounter.”

Who has disappointed his master, lit., who is a burden (hall) to his
master, again taken from the Koran, xvi. 78 : 44 God also propounds
a comparison between two men, one of whom is dumb, and hath no
power over anything, and is a burden to his lord (wa •huwa hallun \dd
mauld-hu ): direct him where he will, he cometh .not back with
success.”

Is this the tardiness of Find along with the failure of thy fire-shaft ?
—This is meant as a reproach for being late on his errand, and,
after all, returning without having accomplished it. The allusion is
to the proverb abta'a min findin , “ slower than Find,” a freedman of
'Ayeshah bint Sad, who sent him one day to fetch fire from a neigh¬
bour's house. On his way he met some people who were travelling
to Egypt, and, joining them, he stayed away for a whole year. After
his return, he borrowed the fire-brand for which he had been sent,
and ran home with it, but he stumbled and fell, and the fire got
extinguished, whereupon he exclaimed, c£ Hurry be cursed!” (Ar.
Prov., i. 197, 236).

More busily engaged than the woman of the two butterrbags, in the
original as hgh ahi min zdti } n-nihyuini, a proverb of which Hariri
himself gives the following account: She was a woman of the tribe
Taim Allah ibn Salabah, who was present at the fair of *Okaz with
two butter-bags. Khauwat ibn Jubair (who afterwards was con¬
verted and became one of the Helpers or Ansaris) took her aside
under the pretext of buying them, opened them, tasted the contents,
and returned them to her one after the other, and while she was
holding thorn under her arms and kept their mouths closed with
her hands, he outraged her. When he went away from her, she said
to him : “ May it do thee no good.” As for the tribal name Taim
Allah, it is a corruption of Taim al-Lat, servant of Lat, an idol of
the time of Ignorance, for which the religious ardour of the Faithful

■ 19—2


292


NOTES .


substituted the name of the true God in their anxiety to eliminate
all traces of paganism from their early history. The comparative
ashghalu is another instance of the measure aftal, derived from
maful instead of f&'il, for which comp, the note on ahmad , p. 283,
above (Ar. Prov., i., 463, 687).

There is no blame on him who goes to the privy. —Sherishi here
inserts the story of the youth of Kufa, who visited an uncle of his
at Medina, and during a year’s stay was never known to enter that
place. When he had returned to his home, it came out on inquiry,
that whenever he had asked his uncle's slave girls for it by one of
the numerous names by which it is more or less euphemistically
called by the Arabs, they answered him by a verse of some popular
poem, in which the same word occurred with a different and per¬
fectly guileless meaning, leaving the poor lad no wiser than before,
and throwing him mercilessly back on his own resources for
expedients, to which he took with a vengeance.

A youth like Samsdmah , i.e., straight and sharp like a sword.
According to Sherishi, §ams&mah is in particular the name of a
sword belonging to 'Amr Mad'&karib, the sharpness of which was
such as to cut iron as easily as iron cuts wood.

Nor seek traces after the substance is gone. —Comp. Ar. Prov., i. 221,
and Chenery’s note, vol. i., p. 362.

He frowned and he turned his back , beginning of Sura lxxx., to
which Rodwell remarks in a note: “We are told in the tradi¬
tions that, when engaged in converse with Welid, a chief man among
the Koraysh, Mohammed was interrupted by the blind Abdallah Ibn
Omm Maktftm, who asked to hear the Koran. The Prophet spoke
very roughly to him at the time, but afterwards repented, and
treated him ever after with the greatest respect. So much so that
he twice made him Governor of Medina."

So trust to the stream of my mountain-slope , i.e., to my word and
promise. If no confidence is felt in the sincerity of a man’s pro¬
testations, it is said to him, “I trust not in thy mountain-slope"
(Id asiqu bi-tal'ati-ka), viz., that any water will flow down from it,
the water, as has been mentioned frequently, serving as a simile for
liberality and generous disposition (Ar. Prov., i. 49). The expres¬
sion tal'ah y lit., a rising ground, or the watercourse down from a
mountain, occurs also in the proverb; “I am afraid of nothing but


NOTES. 293

the current from my mountain-slope,” meaning thereby one’s nearest
relations.

Where the wolf howls , metaphorical for a deserted place, a “ howl¬
ing ” wilderness.

If thy father had lorded it over 'Aid Mandf, or if 'Aid aUMaddn
had leen thrall to thy maternal uncle. —’Abd TVIanaf, surnamed al-
Mugliairah, was the eldest son of Kossai, and one of the most famous
chiefs of the tribe Koraysh, for whose glory, as the Commentators
remark, it would suffice that he belonged to the ancestors of
Mohammed. 'Abd al-Madan was proverbial for nobility and
prowess in warfare. The poet Laqit alludes to him in the line :

“I drank wine until I fancied myself to be 'Abd al-Mad&n or Abu
Kahns.”

Beat not cold iron, from the proverb “thou beatest cold iron”
(Ar. Prov., i. 218), which is applied to one who wishes for some¬
thing unattainable. Al-Mubarrid quotes the following verses of
Abu ’sh-Shamaqmaq on Said Ibn Salm:

“Alas ! thou beatest cold iron if thou wishest for a gift from Sa'id ;

By Allah, if he were possessed of all the seas together and a Moslem
came to him in the time of flood

Begging from him a draught to perform his ablution, he would deny it
to him and say, Make thy ablution with the sand of the ground.”

The nose in the sky and the rump in the water, proverbially said of
a grandiloquous boaster whose performances are poor (Ar. Prov.,
i. 23).

And art ruthless with the ruthlessness of the cat, allusion to the
proverb a'aqqu mina 1 l-hirri, more ruthless than the cat, who is said,
like the hyena, occasionally to devour her young. It was applied
by a poet amongst the partisans of Ali to 'Ayeshah, when she set
out for the battle of the camel. As I have a tender corner in my
heart for this animal, which I consider much maligned by those
who call it devoid of affection, I gladly take note of the statement
of Hamzah A1 Isbahani, that the Arabs say also, in flat contradiction
to the above, “ more affectionate (alarm) than the cat,” maintaining
that the devouring, if it is done now and then, proceeds from pure
excess of love, in order to preserve the little ones from all future
trouble. It is true he adds that they offer no satisfactory argument
in proof, but then he ought to repeat their arguments, such as they


>4


NOTES.


3 , and allow us to form our own judgment. Meanwhile I am fain
credit the soundness of their saying and solemnly declare on
half of my four-footed friends : “Well said, ye Arabs, faithful
lievers in feline kindliness, who deserve for aye to live in the
ateful remembrance of the tribe of Puss, son of Grimalkin, son of
iterwauler. ”

Less occupied them the cupper of Sdbdt (Ar. Prov., ii. 227).—The
le goes that for want of customers he cupped soldiers for a daniq
mall fraction of the dirhem) apiece, payable at their convenience,
.d when for some length of time none presented himself, he
actised on his mother, so as not to be reproached with idleness,
Ltil her blood ■fras exhausted, and the poor lady died of inanition.
Heavy of kernel. —Here I have taken a liberty with the words of
e text, saqilu-’l-ishtirdti, the literal translation of which would bo
heavy in making stipulations.” But as this would come pretty
uch to the same as the preceding “ excessive in his charges,” I
>pe the substitution will be condoned, while it introduces a fresh
em into the description of what a cupper ought not to be.

That he was complaining to one who would not silence his complaint, a
'overbial expression applying to a person who is not concerned at
rother’s condition, and does not care for the removal of his com-
aint, for if he alleviated it, the other would cease complaining (see
r. Prov., i. 219). Thus a poet says, addressing his camel:

“ Thou eomplainest to one who will not still thy complaint; so bear thy
javy burden patiently or die.”

Of a similar purport is the proverb .which will follow a little lower
Dwn : hCma ‘aid ’l-emlasi md Idqd 'd-dabira, “what befalls the back-
ire sits lightly on the smooth-skinned” (Ar. Prov., i. G53).

His sleeve became torn, literally, his sleeve recited the Sura inshiijdtj,
ie splitting asunder (Ixxxiv.), the sound of the tearing garment
)ing whimsically compared to the sound of a reading voice.

Hast thou not heard what is said of him who exercises forgiveness ?—
llusion to a saying reported by Tradition of Mohammed : “ He
ho remits the offence of a believer, Allah will remit to the same
is offence on the day of resurrection.”

My surroundings over-tax my liberality, meaning, that his household
ependiture leaves him no surplus, which he might spend on others,
he Arabic for surroundings is shidb, pi. of shi'b, a mountain cleft


NOTES.


295


or valley, here used in the sense of nawAM, neighbouring parts, for
family, etc.

They are of no account, even though he should be a liar, in Arabic
la hand wa lau JcAnct zA mainin, lit., the two have not been, even if he
be possessed of lying, which a marginal note in my MS. paraphrases
by: “ There is no value in the two dirhems, even if the old man
should have told a lie.”

A milk-flow, half of which belongs to thee, taken from the proverb :
uhlnb halaban la-ha shatnirhu, milk the milk of which half shall be
thine, inciting to the pursuit of an object by the promise of an equal
share in the result (Ar. Prov., i. 345).

As nicely as the fruit of the dwarf palm splits, Arabic shiqqa
’l-ublumati (also read ablimati and ablamati). —According to Sherishi
ublumah is synonymous with daumah, wild or dwarf palm, whose
leaves split into two equal halves. Abft Ziyad says it is a plant
growing horn-shaped fruits like beans, and which splits lengthwise
in two halves of perfect equality. Hence the proverb : al-mdlw baini
wa baina-ha shiqqa ’l-v^lumati, the money is or shall be equally divided
between myself and thee, where the accusative shiqqa is that of the
infinitive of corroboration, i.e., divided with the splitting, etc. (Ar.
Prov., ii. 618).

Any shoe suits the barefooted who walks on flints, said of one who
adapts himself to the circumstances as best he can (Ar. Prov., ii. 317).


THE PORT Y-EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.

That He would let me alight in her, in Arabic yumtiyani qardM,
lit., would make me bestride her back.

AM munzir had called out his admonition to the sleepers. —Abft
munzir, the father of the admonisher, is a nickname of the cock,
because he exhorts the sleepers to rise for prayer, which idea I
preserve in adding the supplementary words ic his admonition” to
the translation of the verb hatafa, “he had called out.” De Sacy
quotes here a tradition, reported by A.b£t Hurayrah, according to
which Mohammed used to say : “ When ye hear the cocks crow thev
have seen an angel: so ask Allah for His bounty; but when you


NOTES. .


293


rent from my mountain-slope,” meaning thereby one’s nearest
is.

re the wolf howls , metaphorical for a deserted place, a “ howl-
ilderness.

\y father had lorded it over Abd Mandf or if Abd al-Mad&n
in thrall to thy maternal uncle. —'Abd Manaf, surnamed al-
Arah, was the eldest son of Kossai, and one of the most famous
of the tribe Koraysh, for whose glory, as the Commentators
it would suffice that he belonged to the ancestors of
imed. 'Abd al-Mad&n was proverbial for nobility and
ss in warfare. The poet Laqtt alludes to him in the line :

rank wine until I fancied myself to be 'Abd al-Madan or Abft
>?

not cold iron , from the proverb “thou beatest cold iron”
rov., i. 218), which is applied to one who wishes for some-
unattainable. Al-Mubarrid quotes the following verses of
h-Shamaqmaq on Said Ibn Salm :

jS ! thou beatest cold iron if thou wishest for a gift from Said ;

Ulah, if he were possessed of all the seas together and a Moslem
> him in the time of flood

ing from him a draught to perform his ablution, he would deny it
and say, Make thy ablution with the sand of the ground.”

nose in the shy and the rump in the water , proverbially said of
idiloquous boaster whose performances are poor (Ar. Prov.,

\ art ruthless with the ruthlessness of the cat , allusion to the
b a'aqgu mina 7 l-hirri t more ruthless than the cat, who is said,
le hyena, occasionally to devour her young. It was applied
poet amongst the partisans of Ali to 'Ayeshah, when she set
r the battle of the camel. As I have a tender corner in my
for this animal, which I consider much maligned by those
ill it devoid of affection, I gladly take note of the statement
mzah A1 Isbahani, that the Arabs say also, in flat contradiction
above, “more affectionate {aharru) than the cat,” maintaining
hie devouring, if it is done now and then, proceeds from pure
of love, in order to preserve the little ones from all future
e. It is true he adds that they offer no satisfactory argument
of, but then he ought to repeat their arguments, such as they


296


NOTES.


hear the braying of asses, they have seen a Satan : so take refuge
with Allah from Satan, the stoned.”

One all wrapped up in signs of the twice-read chapter , the other charmed
by tunes of the strings twice twisted. —The couplet, and those which
follow in connection with the preceding expression, “holy things
and worldly,” in Arabic din wa dunyd, lit., religion and world, offer
an instance of the rhetorical figure tasfir 9 which is closely related to
that called laff wa nashr, and for the benefit of the student, both
may here be illustrated together. The latter one means verbally
“ rolling up and unfolding,” and an example of it has occurred in
Assembly XXX., p. 30, above, in the line :

A

“ And her sons and their abodes are lustrous stars and astral mansions.”

It consists in the juxtaposition of two nouns, here “ sons ” and
“ abodes,” which are followed by two joined attributes or predicates,
here “stars ” and “astral mansions,” leaving it to the discernment
of the hearer to refer either of them to the proper subject. Similarly
we read in the Koran, xxviii. 73 : “Of His mercy He hath made for
you the night and the day that ye may take your rest in it, and
that ye may seek what ye need out of His bounteous supplies,”
where Eodwell himself has made the adjustment which the text
reserves to the reader in translating: “ the night that ye may take
your rest in it, and the day that ye may seek,” etc. Tafsir 9 on the
other hand, which in a more general sense means commentary, in
particular of the Koran, in the present special signification, consists
in enouncing a word or several woyds, and then, on the supposition
that they want an explanation, supplementing such explanation in
the sequel of one’s speech. Thus, Koran, xi. 107-110 says : “ When
that day shall come no one shall speak a word but by His leave, and
some shall be miserable and others blessed . And as for those who shall
be consigned to misery —their place therefore the Fire! their lot
therein sighing and moaning!—Therein they abide while the Heavens
and the Earth endure, unless thy Lord shall will it otherwise ; verily
thy Lord is the mighty worker of His will. And as for the blessed
ones —their place therefore the Garden! therein they abide as the
Heavens and the Earth endure, unless thy Lord shall will otherwise
an uninterrupted boon.” A more complicated instance is contained
in the following verses of Ibn Ar Eftmi:


NOTES.


297


“Your views, your faces, your swords, when calamities gloom, are
stars:

Therein they are road-signs for guidance, and lamps that light up the
darkness, and lastly showering missiles,”

meaning that their counsels lead their people to success, as the stars
guide the wanderer in the desert, that their faces resemble the stars
in cheering brightness, and that their swords bring destruction on
the enemy, as the stars are hurled against the listening Satans. In
the passage of our text “ signs ” (Ay At) is the well known term for
Koranic verses. “ The twice-read chapter” and “the strings twice
twisted ” are in Arabic masAn% for which, in the former sense, see
vol. i., p. 301, and in the latter signification compare*Assembly XXI.,
ibid., p. 228 : “ I charm as charm not the triple-twisted strings/’

How many there who wear their eyes by reading , or wear their trays by
feeding the needy stranger. —In the original this runs: wa ham min
qari’in fi-h& wa gdrin azarrd hi ’ l-jufilni wa hi ’ 1-jifAni , lit., how many
a reader is therein, and how many an entertainer, who spoil their eye¬
lids (pars pro toto for the eyes), and their platters; another instance
of the figure laff wa nashr, described in the preceding note : these two
nouns “reader ” and “ entertainer ” are qualified by the statement that
by excessive indulgence in their favourite pursuit they damage their
sight and their substance respectively. My translation follows here,
for the sake of greater clearness, the example set by Rodwell in
rendering the above-quoted passage of the Koran.

At sundown, in Arabic, 'inda duMhi bardJii — DuMJc , for the setting
of the sun, occurs in the Koran, xvii. 81 : <c Observe prayer at
sunset, till the first darkening of the night ” (li-duWri ’sh-shamsi), and
bar AM is a nickname of the sun, undeclinable in Icasrah (i) like
Hagfimi, laqab of ZarbV A1 Yemfimeh, on account of the sharpness of
her eyesight, from the verb hazm , to cut.

The discussion on interchangeable letters , Le., the letters which in
certain dialects can take each other’s place, as a and w in ahad, for
wahad, one; t and s in nAt for nds } men; / and g in jada for jadad ,
tomb ; j and y in 'ashijj for t ashiyy ) evening ; h and h in zahl for zahl,
a small quantity of water; h and hh in hams for khams , the sub¬
siding of a wound.

As the snatching of a firebrand of one in haste , a proverbial expres¬
sion for time that passes quickly or for speed. A poet says :


298


NOTES.


“ And. many a visitor whose visit is no visit, as though he had come to
borrow fire” (see An Prov., ii. 344).

The loops were loosed for standing up, in Arabic, hullati ’l-hubd li
'l-qiydmi. —To loose the loops is in itself a metaphor for rising, as
has been shown vol. i., p. 412. Here the word qiydm , rising, is
added because it is used in the technical sense of standing up for
prayer, in conformity with the injunction of the Koran, ii. 239:

“ Observe strictly the prayers, and the middle prayer, and stand up
with devotion before God (qdmu li ’ll&M qdtinina ).” Qdtin, translated
“ with devotion,” is active participle of the verbal noun qunM,
occurring in the next sentence, the original meaning of which is
sukut, silence, according to the traditionist Zayd ibn Arkam, who
relates : “ We used to converse during prayer, until the words
of Allah qdmu li ’lldhi qdtinina, rise to Allah in silence, were re¬
vealed.”

The facundity of al-Hasan, for whom see the Notes to Assembly
XL., p. 247, above.

Whom I have taken for my intimates and confidants (JcarisM wa mbatt),
lit., for my stomach and wardrobe, bearish being the stomach of a
ruminant, and ‘ aibah , a travelling trunk or cloth-press. The mean¬
ing is therefore, whom I have made the recipients of my affections
and the depositories of my secrets, and the pithy expression is said
to originate with Mohammed, who applied it to his companions.

That religion consists in the sincerity of advice, allusion to the
traditional saying of Mohammed: “Keligion is the imparting of
sound counsel.”

Of whom it is said “ No ill fate has he who sits with them,” referring
to the proverb (Ar. Prov., ii. 540) mentioned vol. i., p. 471 : “ No
ill-fate has he who sits with A1 Ka‘k&\” since it was his custom, as
Chenery adds, to relieve all who visited him.

But my misleading soul . . . prompted me, in Arabic fa-sauwalat liya
’ n-nafsu 5 l-muzillatu , an idiom borrowed from Koran, xii. 18: “And
they brought his (Joseph’s) shirt with false blood upon it. He said :
Nay, your own minds have contrived this affair” (lit., your own
souls have prompted to you a thing, sauwalat la-hum' anfusu-Jcum
amran).

To be boon-companion to the mighty topers, and to pass round the
tankards. —The translation “mighty topers,” for dbtdl, literally, “a


NOTES .


299


valiant man,” is founded on Sherishi’s explanation that it means
here fursdnu ’ l-Tchal&'ah , knights of debauchery or profligates. The
tankards, artal, are, according to the same commentator, the four of
which Abfi Nuw&s speaks in the lines:

“ I found the tempers of men to be four originally, therefore four to the
four, to each temper a tankard.”

On the fifth day . . . and during its sacred night , in the text fi yaumi
’l-khamisi . . . wa fi 'l-laitati ’T-aharrd’ij on the fifth day, the day of
gum ah, also called al-yaumu H-azhar, the resplendent day, and in the
bright night, ie., the night of Friday. Both expressions are taken
from the Tradition : “ increase your prayers on the resplendent day
and in the bright night.” #

When he had satisfied his need , in Arabic lammd qazd 9 l-watara, , allud¬
ing to Koran, xxxiii. 37, where, however, the context requires the
slightly altered translation: “.And when Zayd had settled the necessary
matter of her divorce,” etc.

Though I spoke this in strains of verse , yet my speech leads aright and
true , a stricture on the poets, in the sense of Koran, xxvi. 224-226 :
“It is the poets whom the erring follow : Seest thou not how they
rove distraught in every valley ? And that they say that which
they do not V 9

On the spot , in the text' aid ’l-Mfirah, lit., on the ground which
the hoofs of horses have dug, taken from the proverbial phrase, on
bargaining for a horse : anmagdu ' inda , l-hdfirah ) the meaning of
which is “ ready money to begin with.” From the signification
“ beginning ” the word passes to that of initial condition, as in
Koran, lxxix. 10: “The infidels will say, Shall we indeed be
restored to the former state T


THE FORTY-NINTH ASSEMBLY.

When he had neared ninety-three years , lit., the fist, al-qabzah 9
which, in the method of calculation carried on by the hand and
fingers, indicates the said number. Others explain the word by
“ the grip of death.”

For one like thee it needs no tapping with the staff, nor an awakening
by the throw of pebbles.— This alludes to the proverb : “ The staff is not


300


NOTES.


knocked to the ground for him, nor are pebbles thrown for him ”
(Ar. Prov., ii. 343), which is applied to one experienced and wide
awake. The first part of it refers to 'Amir ibn az-Zarab, a judge in
the time of ignorance, who, when he had reached a great old age,
committed errors in his decisions, so that people began to doubt
him. This came bo the knowledge of his daughter, and she re¬
monstrated with him, whereupon he enjoined on her to tap with his
staff on the floor whenever she noticed that his wits were beginning
to wander, in order to call his mind back to the point. The throw¬
ing of pebbles is originally a kind of vaticination from the figures
which they form when shaken and cast on the ground. Here,
however, allusiorf is made to a custom of the Arabs, when they
wished to test the fitness of a man for participating in a journey or
a raid. They left him by himself, until he had fallen asleep, when
one of them took up a small pebble and threw it in his direction.
If the faint sound awoke him, they trusted him, but if not, they
would have nothing to say to him. More on the subject will be
found in the passage of Mayd&ni, quoted above, and -ibid., i. 55, but
it would here be out of place as irrelevant for the explanation of the
context.

He has been called upon to give warning , allusion to Koran, li. 55 :
“ Yet warn them, for, in truth, the warning will profit the believers.”

That which Seth bequeathed not to Nabat, viz., something better
than it, a form of expression for which comp. vol. i., 304, the note :
“ With an earliness beyond the earliness of the crow.” —Rabat is a collec¬
tive noun for the Nabateans, who, according to the commentators,
were the descendants of Seth, thus called because they inhabited the
lowlands between the two Iraks, which abounded in water (nabt).

Nor Jacob to the tribes (asbdt), i.e., to the twelve patriarchs, his sons,
as the progenitors of the Jewish tribes. His behest to them is
recorded as follows in the Koran, ii. 126 : “ And this to his children
did Abraham enjoin, and Jacob also, saying: 0 my children!
truly God has chosen a religion for you; so die not without having
become Moslems.”

Thy smoke will arise aloft , i.e ., thou wilt be able to kindle the fires
of hospitality, and akin to the idiom “ he whose ashes are heaped up
or plentiful,” for which see p. 274, above, and the opposite of which
occurs in the next qarinah but one.


NOTES .


301


The means of livelihood are ministry ( imdrah), and commerce
(tijdrah), and husbandry (zird'ah), and handicraft (sinCiah) —a division
which broadly coincides with the popular German classification of
the four social orders: Wehrstand (order of warding off for civil
and military government), Mehrstand (order of making more, for
commerce as increasing the wealth of the nation), Nahrstand (order
of providing nourishment, for agriculture), and Lehrstand (order of
teaching, for the learned and technical professions).

Like the entanglements of dreams, allusion to Koran, xii. 44 : “ They
said: They are confused dreams ( azghdsu ahldmin, confusions of
dreams), nor have we knowledge in interpretation of dreams.”

The bitterness of being weaned therefrom , meaning pf being dismissed
from office, neatly expressed in the line of a poet:

“ The intoxication of power is pleasant, but the state that follows is
bitter exceedingly.”

Similarly a proverb says: “Command is sweet to suckle, but bitter
to be weaned of” (Ar. Prov., i. 145).

They are subject to risks, in Arabic 'urzutun li ’l-mukhdtardii, the
word 'urzah being synonymous with nusb, butt, target, object to be
aimed at, as Koran, ii. 225 : “And swear not by God that ye will
be virtuous and fear God,” the lit. translation of which Kodweli
gives in a note as: “ Make not Allah the scope for your oaths.” As
for the dangers to which merchandise is exposed, Tradition records
the saying of Mohammed: “ Verily the traveller and his goods are
at the very brink of destruction ('aid qalatin), save that which
Allah takes under His protection.”

Easy to win, lit., cold of booty, said of spoil which is obtained
without exposing one’s self to the heat of battle or exertion.

To the sons of dust, Le., the poor, in Arabic li-bani ghabrda, so
called because the ground is their bed, without pillow or cover. In
the 55th verse of Tarafeh’s Moallakah they are opposed to the
“ owners of the wide-spread leather tent,” meaning the rich, who
enjoy every comfort and luxury (see Arnold’s edition, p. 54).

Who rises and sits down again, i.e., who demeans himself with
impotent and uncontrollable anger.

Wheresoever they alight they pick up, a proverb, for which see May-
d&ni, i. 41G.


302


NOTES.


Thou hast stitched together, but not ripped open, in the vernacular
idiom rataqta tea mdfataqta , for thou hast summarised in thy speech,
but not entered into details or particulars.

From which end the shoulder is to be eaten, allusion to the proverb :
“ He knows from where the shoulder is eaten,” applied to the sharp-
sighted and experienced, who is well aware how a difficult matter is
to be treated in the most efficacious manner (see Ar. Prov., i. 63 5
ii. 144). Asma'i mentions that the Arabs say of a man of weak
intellect, “ He does not eat the shoulder neatly,” and quotes the
verse :

“ I know, in spite of what you see in me of old age, from which end the
shoulder must be tackled,”

i.e., I am in the full possession of my senses.

Be more on the move than the Qutrub. —For this and the following
popular sayings as far as “more aggressive than the wolf that plays
the tiger,” see the proverbs: ajwalu min qutrubin (Ar. Prov., i. 329 ;
i. 643); asra min jarddin (ibid., i. 463); anshatu min zdbyin muq-
mirin (ibid., ii. 184, 788); aslatu min zi'bin mutanammirin (ibid.,
i. 641).

Let down thy bucket into every fountain, taken from the proverb
adli dalwa-ka ft 7 l-dild’i , let down thy bucket among the buckets, for
which see l.c., ii. 436, and the note in vol. i., p. 402.

With the earliness of the raven, and the boldness of the lion. —The
raven, or crow, is called in the text abti zajir, father of the scarer,
because he is roused by shouting, to take augury from the direction
of his flight, and he is proverbial for earliness (see vol. i., p. 304).
The name given to the lion is abti Jidris , father of the prey-winner,
because he is the most powerful of wild beasts for securing his prey,
and he has given rise to the proverb : “ Bolder than the bearer of
the mane ” (Ar. Prov., i. 329, 334, 335).

The caution of the chameleon, here called abH qurrah, father of cool¬
ness, with reference to the proverb “ Colder than the eye of the
chameleon , 57 for which see p. 273, above. The reason for its being
proverbial for cautiousness has been mentioned in a note to Assembly
XXXVI., on p. 222 . The kinyehs, or nicknames, used in the sequel
of the passage are abH ja'dah for wolf \ which is explained in various
ways, the most probable being that jadah is here synonymous with


NOTES .


303


rakhl, lamb, the wolfs favourite tit-bit; the proverbs concerning him
are to be found in the Majma', i. 464, 637 ; ii. 151, 191. AHl \tqbah ,
father of (numerous) progeny, for pig, concerning whose greed the
following anecdote is recorded of Buzurjmirh (see Kalilah wa Dimnah,
p. 9): he was asked “By what means hast thou obtained thy suc¬
cesses ? 55 and answered, “By earliness like the earliness of the crow,
and eagerness like the eagerness [covetousness] of the pig, and
patience like the patience of the ass . 55 AM wassdb, father of the
leaper, for gazelle, the proverb with regard to whose nimbleness has
been quoted on the preceding page. AM 5 l-7msain , father of the little
castle, for fox , on account of his elaborately-constructed hole, or the
cunning manner in which he protects himself, proverbial for deceit¬
fulness, stealth, and craftiness (Ar. Prov., i. 577). AHl aiytib, father
of Job, for camel, proverbial for endurance (Ar. Prov., i. 737). Abu
ahamw&n, father of warfare, viz., against rats and mice, for cat , anent
whom De Sacy 5 s commentary here quotes again the proverb recorded
p. 293, above, “ More affectionate than the cat,” and mentions the
following saying of Ibn al-Mukaffa*: “I have adopted from every¬
thing that which is most beauteous in it, as from the pig its eager¬
ness for that which is good for it and its earliness in providing for
its needs, from the dog his sensibleness and watchfulness, from. the
cat the insinuating gentleness of its purr, its quickness in seizing
its opportunity for game, and its pretty ways of asking , 55 the last of
which accomplishments Sherishi describes with all the glee of an
appreciative observer and connoisseur. Abil bardqish, for a bird,
probably of the heron kind, for which I substitute the humming¬
bird, bocause it is the variegation of its plumage which forms its
characteristic, and has occasioned its figurative use to designate a
person of variable disposition (see Ar. Prov., i. 409, and comp,
vol. i., bottom of p. 477).

Inquire after the state of the market before bringing thy goods to it .—
This and the following idioms are amplifications of the proverb
(ii. 259): “ Before shooting arrows let the quivers be full,” to the
effect that oue ought to make all necessary preparations before
engaging in an important undertaking.

And despair not of the mercy of Allah, taken from Koran, xii. 87 :
“Go, my sons, and seek tidings of Joseph and his brother, and


304


NOTES .


despair not of God’s mercy ( rauli ), verily none but the unbelieving
despair of the mercy of God.”

Promises have their reversals , in Arabic (li ’l-idati mua'qqibdtin , objec¬
tive case dependent on the preceding mm), allusion to Koran,
xiii. 41 : “ And if God pronounces a doom, there is none to reverse
{mu agqib) His doom, and swift is He to take account.”

Display then the patience of those endowed with firmness, an expression
borrowed from Koran, xlvi. 34 : “ Bear thou up, then, with patience,
as did the Apostles endued with firmness and applying, according to
the most trustworthy interpretation, to Noah, Abraham, Moses, and
Jesus.

Hold not thy hand tied to thy neck , etc ., quotation from the same,
xvii. 31 : “ And let not thy hand be tied up to thy neck; nor yet
open it with all openness, lest thou sit thee down in rebuke, in
beggary.”

And gratified with poor fruit and bad measure , proverbially applied
to one who meets with two evils or calamities. Asma'i relates that
Abft Jafar al-Mansur encountered an Arab in Syria, and said to
him : “ Praise be to God that He took from you the plague under
our government.” The prompt reply was : “ Allah does not bestow
on us at the same time poor fruit and bad measure, to wit, your
government and the plague ” (Ar. Prov., i. 368).

For the neighbour before the house, and the fellow-traveller before setting
out on the. road, two popular sayings of self-evident meaning, for
which see Ar. Prov., i. 368.

If I be spared after thee—but may I never taste thy loss , a figure of
speech, called by grammarians hashw, parenthesis, as in Koran,
lvi. 74, 75 : “ And I swear by the places where the stars do set,—
And that is surely a great oath if ye only knew it.”

Hpw like is the night to yesternight, ie., how like is the son to the
• father (Ar. Prov., ii. 615). This proverb, expressive of perfect
equality, is said to originate with the following couplets, ascribed to
Tarafeh, although they are not to be found in his diwan:

“ Every familiar I have treated with true friendship, but as for them,
may Allah not leave them a tooth to show in their smile,

All of them are falser than the fox, how like is the night to yester¬
night.”

“ A tooth to show in their smile ” is a paraphrase of the Arabic


NOTES. oyjo

wdzihah, , which is explained as a tooth that becomes visible ip.. <
laughing, and the phrase itself is a counterpart of the idiom 44 *inay
thy mouth not be harmed,” mentioned in the notes to Assembly
XLVI., p. 289, above.

He who resembles his father does not go wrong , a proverb the meaning
of which is, “ he misplaces not his resemblance, because none is
worthier of the son’s likeness than the father.” Its origin is ascribed
to the line of Ka'b ibn Zohayr:

“ I am the son of one who has never opposed me in his life heretofore,
and he who is like his father does not go wrong” (Ar. Prov., ii. 665).

Above the mandates of Logman, the Sage, after whom Sura xxxi. of
the Koran is named, to the title of which Rod welF remarks : “ The
opinion most generally received is that Lokman is the same person
whom the Greeks, not knowing his real name, have called iEsop,
Le. f ZEthiops.”


THE FIFTIETH ASSEMBLY.

Not engaged in children's business , lit., whose children were not
called upon. This proverbial expression is variously interpreted, but
the most satisfactory explanation seems to be that of Abft Obaydeh,
who says it is applied to an affair of great importance, to which no
children are summoned, but only their elders. It appears, however,
from various quotations in De Sacy’s commentary, that in course of
time the original meaning of the phrase has been forgotten, and
that it has been joined to any noun, in order to emphasize the idea
contained in it. For instance, Mbah, “ repentance,” followed by Id
yunddd walidu-hd, lit., “whose child is not called upon, would
signify a repentance of intense acuteness (see Ar. Prov., ii. 895).

Heedless of knocks and pushes, in Arabic ughzi li ’Vldkizi wa ’ l-wdkizi ,
“conniving at him who strikes with his fist and him who pushes
aside.”

She boasts of them the straightest kiblah , for it is stated that the
kiblah for the people of Basra, that is to say, the direction to be
observed by them in prayer, points exactly to the door of the
Ka’beh.

Opposite the poiial and the station , i.e., the door of the Ka'beh (see

90

VOL. II.


306


NOTES,


the preceding note) and the structure which is called the station of
Abraham, and for which see the article “ Maqumu Ibrahim ” in the
“Dictionary of Isl&m,”p. 313.

One of the two wings of the world , alluding to a saying attributed
to Abfi Hurayrah, that the world represents the shape of a bird,
whose wings are Basra and Cairo, and that, if those two were
destroyed, a general downfall would ensue. Others say: “The
world is a bird, with Basra and Kufa for its wings, Khorasan for its
breast, Transoxania for its head, Mecca for its heart, Yemen for its
rump, Syria and Maghrib for its thighs, and Egypt for its skull.”

A city founded on the fear of God , as built by the Moslems under
the Khalif 'Omw, and not inhabited, like the surrounding places,
by fire-worshippers and other idolaters.

Therein meet the ships and the saddle-beasts , on account of its being
equally accessible by roads traversed by travellers on land, and
sea-routes frequented by voyagers. Similar meanings are conveyed
by the meeting of the fish and the lizard, as the former lives ex¬
clusively in the water, which is avoided by the latter; by that of the
camel-driver and the sailor, of the herdsman and the swimmer,
while other juxtapositions point to the variety of trades pursued in
a city of such importance.

The marvel of the tide that swells and the ebb that sinks , the fluctua¬
tions of the Indian Ocean affecting the river up to Basra in a similar
manner as the tide influences the Thames at London.

Your ascetic is the most devout of mankind, etc. —The ascetic here
alluded to is Hasan Al-Basri, who has been mentioned in Assembly
XL., p. 247, above. Your scholar is meant for Abfi 'Obaydeh, born
A.H. 110, the same year in which Hasan Al-Basri died, and deceased
about A.H. 200, a great grammarian and the first who explained the
aharibdn, or more recondite expressions in the Koran and the
Traditions. He who originated and laid down the doctrine of-grammq/r
is Abu l-Aswad Zalim ibn 'Amr, who was slain in the battle of
giffin, and he who discovered the measures of poetry is Khalil, of whom
also mention has been made in Assembly XL., p. 248, above.

The imitation of the ceremonies at 'Araf&t ... the morning bounty in
the holy month.—Yauma 'arafata is the ninth day of the month ZH
} l-hijjah } on which the pilgrims congregate and pray on Mount
'Arafat, and it became the custom of Mohammedans living in towns


NOTES .


307


distant from Mecca to imitate on that day the ceremonies per¬
formed on this occasion by processions and devotions outside their
gates, a practice which was called ta'rtf, and is tersely explained by
the commentators as “ a celebration of the day of 'Arafah without
Mount 'Araf&t.” It was instigated at Basra by Mohammed's cousin,
'Abdallah Ibn 'Abbas (for whom see vol. i., p. 332), and the obser¬
vance soon spread to other Moslem communities. Tashir , from
sahar, the dawn before sunrise, is another custom introduced by the
inhabitants of Basra, which consisted in holding a market for the
supply of food in the early mornings during the month of BamadUn,
where the poor were allowed to satisfy their wants on their asking
for leave.

But as for me , he who knows me — well , I am such , ie., as he has
learnt to know me from long acquaintance, meant, in connection
with the clause following, as a hint to A1 H&rith not to betray him,
which would be a mean action under the present circumstances.

The hoofs of camels and their humps. —This may be taken literally,
meaning the camels that have carried me on my numerous journeys,
or figuratively, as a note in my MS. explains, in the sense of.“ people
high and low.”

Ilow many u flint I have made to split by my spells , lit., on how
many a stone I have practised magic until it split asunder, i.e. } how
many a miser I have wheedled into liberality.

And the hair of my temple raven-black , in Arabic wa ’l faudu
ahirUbun. —The commentators agree that the meaning of the word
(jhirbib is “ intensely black,” but while some derive it from gkurdb ,
raven or crow, others trace it to the infinitive of the 4th from
ighrtib) being far removed, as a black which surpasses in blackness
everything else, and consider the name of the raven to be a deriva¬
tive of the same verbal noun, either on account of his colour, or of
his living at a distance from human habitations. In the Koran the
term occurs in a corroborated form, which by Zamakhshari is ex¬
plained with great subtilty and described as a highly energetic mode
of expression, in the passage xxxv. 25 : “Seest thou not that God
sendeth down water from the Heaven, and that by it We cause the
upgrowth of fruits of varied hues, and that on the mountains are
tracks of varied hues, white and red, and others are of a raven black.”
The last two words of Kodwell’s translation are in the original

20—2


308


JSTOTES.


ghardbibu sudun , literally, ravenish (or exceedingly) black, and the
peculiarity of the idiom as a corroborative consists in the idea being
twice expressed, first in an implied form (. ghardbMbu , pi. of ghirbib)
and then in reality (sddun). Similarly the poet Mbighah says :

“By Him who protects the seekers of refuge , the birds , whom the
pilgrims to Mecca pass between Ghil and Sanad”

where the birds who first were intimated by the expression “ seekers
of refuge ” are subsequently explicitly named by way of explanation
and corroborative emphasis.

That on every day a glance from Allah , be He exalted , falls upon you ,
i.e.j a glance of compassion and benevolence. A tradition attributes
to Mohammed the prophetic saying : “ On every day God Almighty
vouchsafes two glances, one upon the people of the earth to the
East and West, the other upon the people of Basra.”

For He is lofty in dignity , etc., allusion to Koran, xl. 15: “ Of
exalted grade,” and xlii. 24 : “He it is who accepteth repentance
from His servants, and forgiveth their sins and knoweth your
actions.”

Would that I had been afore forgotten , in Arabic nisyan , or nasyan , a
thing forgotten that on account of its contemptibleness does not
occur to the mind, a word borrowed from the Koran, xix. 23 : “ And
the throes came upon her (Mary) at the trunk of a palm. She said:
Oh would that I had died ere this, and been a thing forgotten,
forgotten quite [nasyan mansiyan).”

To whom their hearts incline , in Arabic saghat quMbuhum ilai-hL
The verb saghw , like its synonym mail , may have the meaning of
inclining, tending towards, or of declining, deviating from, according
to the preposition by which it governs. Here this preposition is
ild , to, but the same verb occurs in the opposite sense, Koran, lxvi. 4 :
“If ye both be turned to God in penitence, for now have your
hearts gone astray [saghat quMburlcumfi)f where * an-hu , from him, is
to be supplied, so that the literal translation would be “your hearts
have declined or deviated from him.”

Is there any rare news 1 —In the original: hal min mugharribati
khabarin , lit., “is there any astounding matter of a report,” a pro¬
verbial expression (Ar. Prov., ii. 883), as frequently employed as
the favourite Yorkshire phrase “Aught fresh]” Instead of the


NOTES .


309


usual reply, “Nought ” (to be pronounced “ noute ”) with which the
latter meets, here the answer is, “ News rarer than the ' AnM ,” alluding
to the fabulous bird (Ar. Prov., i. 356) so frequently mentioned in
Oriental poetry, “and more marvellous than the sight of Zarkti”
proverbial for sharpness of sight (Ar. Prov., i. 192, 401; ii. 68).

Who had donned the wool-cloth (s?2f), i.e., who had become an ascetic
or Sufi.

Amongst those whose token is the trace of 'prostration in their faces ,
taken from Koran, xlviii. 29 : “ Thou mayst see them bowing
down, prostrating themselves, imploring favours from God and His
good pleasure in them. Their tokens are on their faces , the traces of
their prostrations. 11 ,

And fond farewells to farer fair , lit., and (memories) of the
traveller bidden (or bidding) farewell. In this translation I take
the word zcVin, which by the Commentators is simply rendered with
musdjir , traveller, although grammatically a masculine, as logically a
feminine, similar to hdmil, a pregnant female, or MHz, a menstruous
woman, because the verb za*n means more particularly travelling in a
za'tmh, litter, an essentially feminine mode of locomotion, from which
a woman travelling in a litter is herself called za'tnah. This appears
also to be the opinion of the editors of the second edition of De
Sacy, who say: “This first verse seems to refer to the usual
beginnings of Kasidehs, in which the places now desolate and for-
saken are celebrated, that had formerly been inhabited by a mistress.”
Readers who prefer the letter to the spirit are at liberty to substitute
“ faring friend ” instead of “ farer fair.”

And reckless of His tardy wrath, in the original aminta makra-hu,
lit., thou held’st thyself secure against His scheme or stratagem,
meaning the punishment He has planned for thee. This is an
allusion to Koran, vii. 97 : “ Did they then think themselves secure
from the deep counsel of God ? But none think themselves secure
from the deep counsel of God, save those who perish.”

How often . . . wast thou neglecting carelessly the duties of His cove¬
nant , lit., didst thou not observe that which is incumbent of His
injunction to be followed, again alluding to Koran, xxxvi. 60 : ‘ Did
I not enjoin on you , 0 sons of Adam, Worship not Satan, for that
he is your declared foe V }


310


NOTES .


That goal of pilgrims of long syne, of countless pilgrims yet to come .—

Compare with this the following lines of a poet:

“ Life is a sleep, and death the awakening thereof, and man between
them a phantom that fares at night ;

Fulfil then , your needs hastily, for your existence is but a journey
amongst journeys.”

Possessed of all the riches of a Tobba' king. —Tobba' is the name
of three kings of Yemen, the first of whom, called Shamar, is said to
have conquered China and devastated Samareand; the second,
As'ad, slaughtered, according to popular tradition, six thousand
camels at the holy house, and provided it with a door of gold ;
while the third, Abft Hassfin, is not credited with any particular
feat of his own, but seems to have contented himself with the glory
of his predecessors (comp. Caussin de Perceval's Esai, i. 61 and
following, and Reinaud’s Introduction to his “ G^ographie
d’Abuffbda,” p. 355).

Separated hither and thither , in Arabic tafarragu shaghara baghara, a
proverbial expression for dispersing in all directions, for which see
Ar. Prov., i. 502.

And wept as not Jacob wept , allusion to Koran, xii. 84: “And he
turned away from them and said, Oh! how I am grieved for
Joseph ! and his eyes became white with grief, for he bore a silent
sorrow.”

If thou makest a resolution, put thy trust in Allah, quotation from
Koran, iii. 153: “Therefore forgive them and ask for pardon for
them, and consult them in the affair of war, and when thou art
resolved, then put thou thy trust in God; Verily God loveth those who
trust in Him.”

Keep death in view , lit., make death the target of thy eye, taken
from the proverb ja'altu-hu nasba *aindya , I have made him or it the
target of both my eyes. For nasb most Arabs say nusb, a fu'l with
the meaning of maftcl, like ukl, food, for ma'hul, that which is
eaten, so that nusb would stand for mansUb, that which is set up,
hence a butt or target.


INDEX.


INDEX.

[Whenever the references to names or subjects are very numerous, the numbers
of the pages alluding to them will be found in Appendix A, so that the Index
itself may bo shortened.]


Aaron, i. 267

Ab&bil, supposed by some to be the name of certain birds, but Baydawi
says it means “in heaps,” i. 331

'Abftdileh, The, or the four Abdallahs, the four transmitters of Traditions
of the some name in the first century of the Hijra, i. 396
'Abbfrd ibn Auf, the story about his giving a bribe, i. 375
Abbasidc Khalifs, The, i. 3, 457 ; ii. 247, 248
'Abbas, son of 'Abd al Muttalib, and uncle of Mohammed, i. 332
'Abbfts, son of Merdfis and of Khansa the poetess, i. 52
'Abd al Hamid, famous for eloquence and caligraphy, i. 81; ii. 104, 248
'Abd al Hftrith, said to have been the name of the first child of Eve, so
called in honour of Al Il&rith the Devil, i. 378
'Abd al Madfm, an Arab proverbial for nobility and courage, ii. 158, 293
'Abd al Melik ibn Merwfm, the fifth Omayyide Khalif, i. 94, 350
'Abd Man&f, ancestor of Mohammed, a chief of the tribe of Koraysh, and
surnamed Al Mughairah, ii. 158, 293

'Abd al Muttalib, grandfather of Mohammed the Apostle, i. 269,332,439 ;
ii. 204

'Abd al 'Ozza, or Abft Lahab, uncle of Mohammed, and his great enemy
and persecutor, i. 439. See Abft Lahab
'Abd al Wahhftb, nephew of Al Mansur, the second Abbasido Khalif, i. 493
'Abd al Yaghfith, father of Al Tlakam, the archer, i. 404
’Abd Allah and 'Abd-ar-Bahmfm, the most acceptable names to God,i. 278
'Abd Allah bin 'Ainr bin 'Usm&n, a poet, ii. 215

'Abd Allah, brother of Durayd ibn as Simm&h, and owner of the horse
Karab, ii. 282

'Abd Allah ibn 'Abbiis, tho Traditionist, commonly called Ibn 'Abb&s,
which see,i. 14, 327, 332, 396; ii. 307
'Abd Allah ibn al Mokafia', the Persian, translator and author, i. 33; ii. 303


314


INDEX.


'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al 'Asi, the Traditionist, i. 396
'Abd Allah ibn Az Zobayr, the Traditionist, and one of the revisers of the
Koran, i. 93, 396, 482; ii. 230
'Abd Allah ibn Ghatafan, The tribe of, i. 411
'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, the Traditionist, i. 396

'Abd Allah ibn Mnljim, the nmrderer of 'Ali, the fourth Khalifah, i. 327
'Abd Allah ibn Omm Maktum, a blind man twice Governor of Medina,
ii. 292

'Abd Allah ibn Rawahah, a poet on the side of Mohammed, i. 430
'Abd 'Amr, a favourite of 'Amr, King of Hira, i. 360. 361
'Abd ar Rahm&n, son of Hassan ibn Th&bit, the questions asked him by
his father, i. 430

Abdera, a Greek town, i. 82; ii. 146
'Abd Shems, an Arab ancestor, i. 376, 426
Abel, i. 296, 531, 538

Abgarus, the King of an old city, since called Edessa and Ar Roha, and
connected with the legend of Christ’s picture, i. 489
'Abkar, a residence of the Jinn, said to have been in the region of
Yemameh, i. 478, 479
'Abkari, a sprite of Abkar, i. 478, 479
Ablak Al, a castle in Tayma, i. 490, 491

'Ableh, the damsel wooed and won by the poet-warrior 'Antarah, son of
Sheddad, i. 317

Ablution, one of the five things on which Islam is founded, i. 392; ii. 37,
39, 40, 41, 205, 293

Abraham, the Patriarch, i. 87, 267, 315, 316, 325, 396, 400, 427, 431, 461,
467, 489 ,* ii. 19, 32, 34, 177,196, 253, 300, 304, 306
Abrahet al Ashram, or Abraheh, an Abyssinian King who marched against
Mecca, i. 279, 331

Abu 'Abd Allah, theWazir killed at the instigation of Ar Rabi', i. 493
Abu 'Abd ar Rahm&n ibn Ahmed al Farahidi, the great Grammarian,
ii. 248. See Khalil

Abu Adineh, or Odayneh, a poet, i. 377, 496, 522

Abu Akhzam, said to be connected with a proverb, i. 485, 522. See
Akhzam

Abu 'Ali Hosayn al Khoshnabi, father-in-law of Hamadani, i. 272
Abu. 'Ali, the Grammarian, i. 508

Abfi 'Amr ash Shayb&ni, celebrated for Koran-reading, i. 81, 539 ; ii. 104
Abu 'Amr Rubban, or Zubban ibn al 'AM, noted for his profound know¬
ledge of the Koran, ii. 248

Abu. Barakish, a bird of gaudy and changing plumage, used figuratively to
express a person of variable disposition, i. 232,477, 478


INDEX.


315


Abu Bekr al Beratkini, a person referred to by Ar R&zi, the Commentator,
i. 24

Abfi Bekr ibn al Hosayn ibn Dorayd, a composer of forty stories of rare
and strange phrases, i. 271
Abh Bekr Mohammed az Zahiri, i. 399

Abu Bekr, the first Kalifah, i. 14, 52, 98, 289, 305, 318, 478, 479; ii. 245,
253, 262, 290

Abft Bekr Yahya ibn 'Abd ar Rahm&n, celebrated for his compositions in
various metres, i. 867

Abu’d-darrfij Wallaj, son of Kharraj, fanciful names, ii. 28, 200
Abu Dulaf al 'Ajili, the celebrated general of the Khalifs Ma'mun and
Mo'tasim, and rebuilder of the city of Kerej, i. 76 note, 515
Abu Dulaf al Khazraji, a poet, i. 76 and note, 287 %

Abu DuMmeh, son of an emancipated black slave, and a poet who im¬
mortalized his mule by a Kasideh, i. 80; ii. 104, 247
Abu Dulftmeh’s mule, often referred to in Arabic literature for his dirty
tricks, i. 80; ii. 104, 247

Abu Farwat al Ilaff&r, ancestor of Ar Rabi', i. 493

Abu H&mid al Isfarayni, i. 358. See Shaykh Abu Hamid

Abft Hanbal at Tfi'i, a model of faith-keeping, i. 493

Ahu Hanifeh, i. 392; ii. 279, 286

Abu Hassan, one of the Tobba' Kings of Yemen, ii. 310

Abu Hazrah ibn 'Atiyah, ii. 248. See Jerir

Abh Hurayrah, the Traditionist, i. 445, 473, 515; ii. 295, 306

Abu Ja'far ibn Tofayl, the writer of a philosophical romance, i. 278

Abu Ja'far al Mansur, ii. 304

Abu Jahl, a great persecutor of Mohammed, i. 375, 415, 438
Abu Kalamim, the lizard, used figuratively to express a person of variable
disposition, i. 478

Abu K&rib, Governor of Hejer or Bahrayn, i. 361

Abft Kayd, the father of Deceit, i. 242, 490

Abft Kil&beh, the Arab who saw Irem al 'Im&d, i. 369

Abu Lahab, uncle of Mohammed, and his great enemy and persecutor.

Also name of Sura cxi. of the Koran, i. 52, 439, 440
Abu Maryam, an expression used to designate under that name the officers
or ushers of a Kadi’s court, i. 157, 349
Abfi Mohammed al Hosayn ibn Waki', a writer on the plagiarisms of the
poet Mutenebbi, i. 483

Abfi Mohammed al Ktlsim ibn 'Ali ibn Mohammed ibn 'Othman al Hariri,
the full name of Hariri, i. 3,186, 337

Abii Mohammed ibn Sarat ash Shantarmi [of Santarem], i. 516. See Ibn
Sarah


316


INDEX,


Abu Munzir, a nickname of the cock because he exhorts the sleepers to
rise for prayers, ii. 164, 295

Abu Murrah, or Abu ’1 Murrah, a nickname for the devil, i. 278; ii. 142,
166, 280

Abu Musa Abdallah ibn Kais al Ash’ari was appointed arbiter with Amr
ibn al As between r Ali and Mu'awiyeh after the battle of Siffin, ii. 146,
283. See Mirkhond, Part II., vol. iii., pp. 351-859 for the story
Abu Na’ameh, or Na’&met al Katari ibn al Fuja’ah, a poet and orator,
head of the rebellious Az&rikah sect, i. 135, 326, 327
Abu Nuw&s, the poet, i. 525, 526; ii. 232, 299
Abu 'Obadeh, the poet, i. 114, 292. See Bohtori

Abu 'Obaydeh, the Philologist and Grammarian, i. 411, 521; ii. 205, 289,
305, 306

Abu 'Othman al Mazini, the Grammarian, story told about him, i. 497, 499
Abu Sa'id 'Abd ar Rahman ibn Mohammed ibn Dost the H£kim, a
collector of Hamadani’s epistles, i. 270, 271
Abu Sufrah, an Arab ancestor and race descended from him, ii. 114, 255
Abu Salih, the story about him, i. 471

Abu Samamah, or Sumamah, surname of the false prophet Musaylimeh,
also called Al Kazzab the Liar, ii. 103, 245. See Musaylimeh
Abii’sh Shamaqmaq, a poet, ii. 293

Abu Sofy&n ibn Harb, the father of Mu'&wiyeh, the first Omayyide Khalif,
i. 375, 405, 439

Abu Tahir, a commentator of Hariri’s Assemblies, i. 82
Abu Temmarn, or Habib ibn 'Ows, the poet: his Ham&seh is celebrated,
i. 55, 57, 292, 482

Abu Therr al Ghaf&ri, a Companion about whose future Mohammed
prophesied, i. 421.

Abu W&thilet Iy&s ibn Mu’&wiyet ibn Korrah, called Al Muzani, i. 333.
See Iy&s

Abu Yahya. Yahya is an Arabic name for John the Baptist, but Abu
Yahya is used as a bye-name of Death, i. 216, 447
Abu Yusuf, an eminent lawyer, ii. 142, 279

Abu Zayd, the name of the Improviser in Hariri’s Assemblies (his first
appearance at Basra, i. 21, 22; his character, i. 23, 24), i. 25-28 (his
wit and cynicism, i. 35), i. 37, 38, 42, 58, 71, 75-83, etc. For further
references to him, which are very numerous, see Appendix A
Abu Ziy&d, an Arabic author, ii. 295

Abu ’1 'AbMs Ahmed ibn 'Abd al Mu’min al Kaysi ash Sherishi, the Com¬
mentator, i: 265. See Sherishi

Abu ’1 'Abb&s Ahmed ibn 'Omar ibn Surayj, i. 358. See Ibn Surayj
Abft ’1 Abb&s al Layti, a friend of Sherishi, i. 405


INDEX.


317


Abfi ’1 Abb&s Mohammed, son of Hariri, and succeeded his father in hi
post at Mesh&n, i. 38

Abfi ’1 'Ala, the poet, i. 14, 56, 337, 460, 479

Abu ’1 Aswad ad Du’li, the Grammarian, l 7, 66, 94, 458; ii. 306

Abu ’1 Atahiyah, the Poet, ii. 228, 253, 254

Abfi ’lFaill ar Babi' ibn Yftnus, the Chamberlain to Mansur, the second
Abbaside Khalif : his story, i. 493, See Ar Eabi'

Abfi 1 Faoll Ahmed ibn al Hosayn ibn Yahya ibn Sa'id alHamadani, com¬
monly known as Badi' az Zeman, or “ The Wonder of the Time,” i.
13, 270. See Hamad&ni and Badi' az Zem&n’

Abfi 1 Faraj Al Isfahttni, his allusion to the poetry of Abfi 'Obadeh or
Bohtori, i. 292, 340

Abfi 1 Faraj [Barhebrseus], i. 489 #

Abfi T Faraj Ibn Ja'far Ibn Kodamet Ibn Ziyad, a scribe of Bagdad, i, 274,
275. See Kod&meh

Abfi 1 Faraj Mohammed ibn Ahmed al Ghassani, called Al Waw&, a poet,
i. 294

Abfi T Fath al Iskenderi, the name of the Improviser in Hamadam’s
Assemblies, i. 19, 25, 28, 38,105, 271, 272
Abfi’ Fath, the story about him, i. 457
Abfi T Futflh al Ghazzali, i. 526. See Ghazzali
Abfi ’1 Ilasan, i. 457. See Ibn Sam’fln
Abfi ’1 Ilasan 'Ali the K&tib, his biography, i. 469, 470, 471
Abfi T Ilasan Mohammed, the H&shimi, an elegant poet of the fourth
century of the Hijra, i. 523. See Ibn Sukkereh
Abfi 1 K&sim 'Abdallah, the son of Hariri and an official at Bagdad, i. 21,
38; ii. 163

Abfi T Kasim Ali ibn Aflah, i. 28
Abfi 1 KUsim as Salimi, a poet, ii. 238

Abfi ’1 Kftsim Ilammftd, the celobrated reciter, a marvel on account of his
momory, i. 17, 388, 884. Soe Ilammad
Abh 1 Khatt-ftb Kat&doli, a blind man: the story about him, i. 468
Abfi T 1 Mansflr ath Tha'labi, an account by him of Badi' az Zeman’ or
Hamad&ni is given in the Commentary of Sherishi, i. 270. See
Tha'labi

Abfi Tilhir ibn Mohammed ibn Yflsuf, of Cordova, who wrote fifty
Assemblies in imitation of Hariri, i. 97
Abfi’t Mohammed ibn 'Ali al TIM, the story told by him about Ibn
Sam'fin, i. 457
Abfi’t Taiyib, a poet, ii. 231
Abyssinia, i. 446, 467
Abyssinian, i. 279, 280, 831


318 INDEX.

Abyssinians, i. 64, 372, 467
Academy of Letters, i. 66
Account, Art of, i. 230, 231
Accountants, i. 230-232

Ad, an Arab ancestor and his descendants, i. 368, 433, 441, 516
Ad, The people of, a wicked tribe destroyed by God, i. 31, 213, 423,
431-433, 441, 442, 466; ii. 9. For the story compare the Koran,
Tabari, and Mirkhond
Adah, wife of Lamech, i. 43

^dam, i. 267, 296, 329, 342,350, 378, 398, 404, 440, 459, 474; ii. 39, 109,
110,258, 309
Lden, i. 369, 441; ii. 279
Adi ibn ar Ruka', jm amatory poet, i. 275

Adi ibn Nasr, married Rakitsh, sister of Jathfinet al Abrash, King of Ilira,
and was the father of 'Amr, the lost prince, i. 42, 494, 495
Adnan, an Arab ancestor, i. 9, 466, 520

Eacus, the myth or legend about him is connected with tho colonization
of iEgina, i. 92 .

Eneas, of Trojan war renown, i. 92
Esop, i. 33, 277, 362, 477 ; ii. 305,
iirasiab, King of Turan, i. 539
lirica, i. 9, 410 ; ii. 138, 224
Lfrica, Eastern, people of, i. 467

Afrit, a demon supposed to bo of superior nature and more formidable
powers than the Jinn or the Ghftl, i. 330. See Ifrit
iwah al Awadi, a poet, ii. 230

.ghlab [Al] al 'Ajili, said to have been the first composer of a regular
poem or Kasideh in rejez metro, i. 55, 304
hkaf [Al], tracts of sand in the region of Ash Shihr, i. 441, 517
hlwardt, William, of Greifswald, a German Oriontalist, i. 340
hwaz, a town and district, i. 258, 499, 525
'jamt, or foreign, i. 66 ; ii. 139, 192, 215, 277
Ajaz [Al], a poet, i. 55

kMf ibn Wad&'ah, a man alludod to by Mohammed, i. 370 ; ii. 271
kameh, a placo in Yemen, i. 404

khfash [Al], The Elder, or Abb T Khattfib the Grammarian, i. 56, 301,
498

khfash [Al], The Younger, also a Grammarian, i. 498, 499
khnas [Al] ibn al Iva'b, a man of Johayneh, his story, i. 476
khtal [Al], the great poet of the tribe of Temim, i. 849 ; ii. 227, 248
klizam, an Arab of very generous disposition, whose name is connected
with a proverb, ii. 140, 278. See Abb Akhzam


INDEX ,;


3-19


Akil ibn 'Xlllafeh, a poet of Koraysh, the story about him, i. 485;
ii. 278

Akk, Land of, on the sea-coast in the northern part of Yemen, i. 425
Akra' [Al], a person mentioned in some verses by Abb&s, son of Merdas,
addressed to Mohammed, i. 52

Aktham ibn Sayfi, an elder of the Benu Temim, to whom is attributed a
proverb, i. 278

'Alaaddin Abfi’sh SMm&t, Story of, in the “ Thousand and One Nights,”
i. 440

Al 'Abd, son of Sofyan, -son of Harmaleh, of the tribe of Bekr W&’il, and
father of the poet Tarafeh, i. 859

'Alak [Al], the name of the ninety-sixth Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 52
Aleppo, ii. 135, 138, 146, 147 .

Alexander the Great, L 92
Alexandria, i. 88, 105, 151, 152,157

Alexandrian, The, i. 38, 273. See Abu 1 Fath al Iskenderi
Alfiyeh, The, by Ibn Malik, the most complete and celebrated of the
Arabic grammatical poems, i. 12, 55, 98, 273, 290, 303, etc. See
Appendix A

'Ali, son of Al Mahdi, the third Abbaside Khalif, i. 523
'Ali, the fourth Khalifah, son of Abb Talib, adopted son and cousin of
Mohammed, i. 7, 14, 31, 60,281, 290, etc. See Appendix A
AJif, the first letter of the alphabet, ii. 35. See Elif
Alkali, its qualities described, i. 144
Alkamat ibn 'Ol&theh, the story about him, i. 375, 488
Alkamat ibn Khatafah, the father of Zebba, the wife of Al Harith ibn
Sulayk, the Asadi, story about them, i. 408
Allat, a goddess, one of the Arab idols, i. 404, 405; ii. 291
Alms, one of the five things on which Islam is founded, i. 392, 460; ii. 27,
31, 37, 46, 58, 163, 206

Alp Arslan, the second Sultan of the SaljuMde dynasty, i. 5, 526
Alphabetical poems and pieces as given in the Bible and other works,

i. 87-89

Alyas, son of Modar, an Arab ancestor, and husband of Khind&f, i. 10;

ii. 246

Amalek, or Al Amalek, an ancestor and tribe, i. 397, 466
Ameuney, Professor, of King’s College, London, i. 101
American Indian, i. 386
American missionaries, i. 367
'Amileh, Tribe of, i. 362

Amin [Al], son of H&rftn ar Reshid, and sixth Abbaside Khalif and pupil
of Al Kis&’i, the Grammarian, i. 498


320


INDEX.


Amineh, mother of Mohammed, i. B64

'Amir bin Harisah al Azdi, father of 'Amr Muzaykiya, ii. 199; called also
M&’u’s-sama, which see

'Amir ibn az-Zarib, a judge in the Time of Ignorance, ii. 300

'Amir ibn at Tofayl ibn Malik ibn Ja'far, the story about him, i. 375,488

'Amir ibn Harith, i. 351. See Kosa’i

'Amir ibn Sinan, of the tribe of Temim, and father of Sulayk, i. 352. See
Sulayk

Ammon, i. 87

'Amr, a friend of Munthir ibn Ma’as Serna, King of Hira, and buried alive
by the latter, i. 385 ,

'Amr al Jahiz, an author, i. 266

'Amran the Diviner, brother of 'Amr ibn 'Amir Muzaykiya, i. 423, 425
'Amr ibn 'Adi, son of 'Adi ibn Nasr, and of Rakash, the Kin g Jathimeh s
sister, the story about him, i. 494, 495 ; ii. 190, 206
'Amr ibn al 'As, appointed as arbiter with Abb Musa after the battle of
Siffin, ii. 283. See Abu Mftsa]

'Amr ibn Al H&rith ibn Al Modad, prince of the Jorham, to whom some
beautiful verses are attributed at the expulsion of his family from
Mecca, i. 384

'Amr ibn Abi Rabi'at al Muzdalif ibn Thohl, the story about him, i. 529
'Amr ibn 'Amir Muzaykiya, the Tearer, and husband of Zarifeh, who pre¬
dicted the bursting of the dyke of Marab, i. 41, 42, 288, 372, 423-426
'Amr ibn Al Harith ibn Shayban, the story about him, or 'Amr ibn 'Adi
above, i. 529

'Amr, King of Hira, son of Munthir III., and commonly called 'Amr ibn
Hind, the name of his mother. He caused the death of the poet
Tarafeh, i. 61, 358, B60, B61

'Amr ibn Kulthum, a pre-Islamite poet-warrior, and author of one of the
Mo'allak&t, i. 56, 351, 361, 376, 501, 539
'Amr ibn 'Obayd, a celebrated ascetic and preacher, i. 228, 467, 468
’Amr ibn 'Odas, author of a proverb, i. 74

Amr ibn 'Otkm&n ibn Kanbar, the full name of Sibawayh, the Gram¬
marian, i. 497. See Sibawayh
'Amr Mad'akarib, the owner of the sword Sams&mah, ii. 292
'Amr, son of Barr&k, a great runner, i. 353

'Amr, son of Harith, son of Sherid, son of Sulaym, and father of Khans&,
the celebrated Arab poetess, i. 387

’Amr, son of Homran, whose generous speech is connected with a proverb,
i. 443

'Amr, son of JAbir, a man of the Fazarah, with whom Imr al Kays the
poet sought protection, i. 491


INDEX ..


321


'Amr to Zayd, a phrase meaning “ from one person to another,” i. 257, 522
Anacreon, the Greek poet, i. vii

*Anah, a city celebrated at an early period for its wine, i. 168, 172, 173.

351, 374

An'am, or Ashkam, or Mathan, son of Lokman the "Wise, i. 477
Anas ibn Malik, the transmitter of Traditions, i. 364, 401,450
Anas, son of An Nadr, a martyr for Islam, i. 401
‘Anazeh, tribe of, i. 472

Ancyra, the place where the poet Imr a! Kays died, i. 492
Andalusia, i. 2, 84, 265, 304, 410
Andalusian, i. 69
Andalusians, The, i. 368

'Anka, The, a fabulous bird, i. 469 ; ii. 181, 309 %

Anm&r, a sub-tribe of the sons of Kays, i. 476
An-Nas, the name of the 114th Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 52
Ansar, The, helpers and auxiliaries of Mohammed at Medina, i. 295, 373.
398,429; ii. 214, 291

'Antarah, the warrior-poet, son of Sheddad, i. 30, 56, 295, 317, 318, 331,

352, 390, 438 ; ii. 282

“ Amthologie Grammaticale Arabe,” by De Sacy, i. 12, 296,384, etc. See
Appendix A
Antioch, i. 531
Antiquities, i. 46, 63, 100
Antiquity, i. 62, 73, 91, 92, 426

Anushirwan, the AVazir, i. 25, 26. See Sheref ad Din Abu Nasr Antishir-
wan al Isfahan!

Anwari Sohayli, a Persian story-book, i. 33
Arab, i. 8, 5, 10, 12, etc. See Appendix A
Arabia, i. 9, 10, 41, 43, etc. See Appendix A
Arabia Felix, ii. 263
Arabia, the daughter of Justin II., i. 492
Arabian, i. 50, 66,126, 321; ii. 39

“Arabian Nights,” The, i. 308, 330, 345; ii. 201, 255. See “Thousand
and One Nights ”

Arabic, i. v-vii, ix, x, 1, 2, 4, 5, etc. See Appendix A
“ Arabic Authors/' ii. xi.

Arabic Proverbs, ii. ix, 187, 204

Arab m ann ers and customs, i. 6, 13, 15, 18, 22, 54, etc. See Appendix A
Arabs, i. ix, 4-8, 10, 13-16, etc. See Appendix A

“ ArabumProverbia,” Freytag’s edition in three volumes, i. 273, 277. See
Proverbs, Arab
Arafah, Day of, ii. 307


VOL. II.


21


322


INDEX.


'Araf&t, Mount, i. 392; ii. 34, 178, 202, 203, 306, 307
Archaeologists, i. 90

Arcturus, a constellation mentioned in the Book of Job, i. 336
'Arim, ii. 199. See Sayl al 'Arim

Ark;am [Al], the Ghassani, father of Kaylah, said to have been the
ancestress of Ows and Khazraj, the sons of Thalabeh and the heads
of two tribes who inhabited Yathrib or Medina in the time of the
Prophet. The quarrel between these two tribes, in which the latter
were defeated, brought the Khazraj to Mecca to obtain assistance
from the Koraysh, which was refused. They then applied to
Mohammed, and this led to the two meetings at 'Akabah, and
eventually to the flight from Mecca, i. 295. Comp. Tabari and
Mirkhond *

Armenian, i. 21

Arnold, Fr. Aug., his edition of the “Mo'allak£t,” i. 332; ii. 267, 301

Arphaxad, an ancestor, i, 369

Ar-Eakim, The men of: their story, i. 414, 415

Arthur, our legendary King, i. 539

'Arus, a man connected with a story about a proverb, i. 346, 347
Aryan, i. 312

As'ad, one of the Tobba’ Kings of Yemen, ii. 310

Asad, son of Mudrik, slayer of Sulayk, i. 352

'Asam, an old woman referred to in a proverb, i. 356

A'sha [al], or Maymun al A'sha the Great, son of Kays, a renowned poet,

i. 389 ; ii, 288

Ash'ab, a servant of the Khalif 'Othm&n, proverbial for his covetousness,

ii. 6,190

Ash'ath [Al] ibn Kays al Kindi questions the Prophet, i. 520

Ashmflni [Al], the Grammarian, i. 315, 508, 512, 514

Asia, i. 5, 92

Asia Minor, i. 13, 493

Asia, Northern, i. 466

Asia, Western, i. 489

Asid ibn J&bir, a famous runner, i. 353

Asma'i [Al], the most famous man of letters of his time, born a.d. 740,
died a.d. 831. He was a complete master of the Arabic language, an
able grammarian, and the most eminent of all those who transmitted
orally historical narrations, anecdotes, stories, and rare expressions
of the language, i, 18, 132, 255, 281, 319, 340, 368, 391, 394, 475, 487,
498, 520, 521, 539; ii. 79, 196, 229, 248, 249, 302, 334'

Assemblies of Abft *t T&hir, of Cordova, written in Arabic in imitation of
Hariri, i. 97


INDEX .


323


Assemblies of Hamadani, supposed to have been imitated by Hariri, i. 13,
19, 20, 62, 805

Assemblies of Hariri, i. viii-x, 2, 8, 12, etc. See Appendix A
Assemblies of Nasif al Yazaji, of Beyrout, i. 62, 98-101, 314, 382, 398, 896,
464, 487, 518, 525


Brief Summary of each of HarIri’s Assemblies.

Assembly I.—Of San*A Abu Zayd preaches against self-indulgence, and
exhorts to repentance, but which he does not put into
practice, as the sequel shows, i. 108
,, II.—Of Holwan. Full of rhetorical subtleties, i. 112, 118

,, III.—Of Kaylah. Abh Zayd improvises both yi praise and dis¬
praise of money, i. 117

,, IY.—Of Damietta. Discourse on duty towards a neighbour

between Abb. Zayd and his son, i. 121
,, V.—Of Kufa. How Abu Zayd obtains money from a company

of generous scholars, i. 126, 127

„ YI.—Of Meraghah. About an address to the Governor, with
pointed and unpointed letters, i. 132, 133
„ YII.—Of Barka'id. About Abu Zayd and the old woman who
circulates his curious papers, i. 139, 140
„ YIII.—Of Ma'arrah. About Abu Zayd and his son, and their com¬
plaints to the Kadi of that place, and the sequel, i. 145, 146
,, IX.—Of Alexandria. About the complaints of Abb Zayd’s young

wife to the Kadi against her husband, i. 151, 152
,, X.—Of Kahbah. About Abu Zayd and his son before the

Governor, and the sequel, i. 158

,, XI.—Of S£weh, An elaborate sermon on the certainty of death

and judgment, in rhymed prose and in verse—a master¬
piece, i. 163, 164

,, XII.—Of Damascus. Abu Zayd prepares a magic form of words
for the safety of certain travellers, and the sequel, i. 168,
169

„ XIII.—Of Bagdad. Abu Zayd, disguised as an old woman,
followed by some lean and feeble children, obtains alms by
his address and his verses, i. 176

,, XIY.—Of Mecca. Abft Zayd and his son obtain relief through
their representations and verses, i. 181
,, XY.—The Legal. This contains a legal puzzle about the heirs to
certain property, and a long story to introduce it, i. 185,
186


324


INDEX .


Assembly XVI.—Of the West. AM Zayd performs an extraordinary
feat of scholarship in reciting lines of poetry, each of
which may be read forwards or backwards without
change of sense, i. 194

„ XVII.—The Reversed. Another Assembly of the same kind as

the last, in that the words themselves being reversed
produce a perfect sense, i. 200

„ XVIII.—Of Sinjfir. Abfi Zayd gains a splendid present by the
narrative of an alleged misfortnne. One of the most
poetical in the whole work, and a wonderful description
of a maiden, i. 206, 207

,, XIX—Of Nasibin. Abft Zayd tells his son, in the Tofayli

♦jargon, to bring a repast for Homo friends who had
visited him, i. 214, 215

„ XX.—Of Mayyfifarikin. Abfi Zayd, by his representations,
asks the bounty of the company to provide a shroud,
i. 220

,, XXI.—Of Rayy. Abii Zayd preaches a sermon on life and

morals, and afterwards inditos another discourse in
reproof of the Governor, i. 223

,, XXII.—Of the Euphrates. Abu Zayd dolivox'H a rhetorical

address on the comparative merits of secretaries and
accountants, and the sequel, i. 229

„ XXIII.—Of the Procinct. Abfi Zayd shows his skill in artificial
composition, bringing his son before the Governor, or
criminal judgo, of Bagdad on a charge of theft, and
finally getting some relief for his necessities from the
Governor, i. 234

„ XXIV.—Of the Portion. This Assembly contains grammatical

riddlos and disquisitions, i. 243, 244

,, XXV.—Of Ivorej. Abu Zayd, naked and shivering, crouches on

the ground. Reciting some verses on his unhappy state,
ho obtains furs and cloaks, i. 253

„ XXVI.—The Spotted. Abu Zayd entertains HArith, the son of

Hammfun, and finally explains how he was rowarded
for a eulogistic composition in which the alternate
letters were pointed and unpointed, i, 25H

„ XXVII.—Of the Tent-dwellers. Story about thu lost camel, the
search for it, andtho result, ii. 1, 2

,, XXVIII.—Of Samarcand. Abfi Zayd preaches on the instability
of human destinies, and on the certainty of death. The
sequel, especially the verses, ii. 13


INDEX .


325


Assembly XXIX.—Of W&sit. An amusing story, first full of fanciful and
enigmatical language, and then a proposal for a matri¬
monial alliance, followed by the wedding, which is pre¬
ceded by a wonderful address, and the sequel, ii. 14,15

,, XXX. Of Sftr. Relates an adventure near Cairo at a wedding
ceremony, where Abu Zayd delivers a discourse on the
duties of the rich towards the poor, and on the divine
purpose in founding the institution of matrimony, ii.
24, 25

,, XXXI. Of Ramlah. A composition of exquisite beauty on the
duties of true religion, spoken by Abu Zayd at Mecca,
ii. 81

,, XXXII,—Of Taybeh. One of the most elaborate, important,
longest, and most difficult of the Assemblies, in which
Abu Zayd assumes the character of a Mufti, who
answers various questions on canonical and legal
points, ii. 87, 88

,, XXXIII.—Of Tiflis. In the guise of a mendicant afflicted with
palsy Abfi Zayd appears, and by an eloquent appeal to
the congregation obtains a liberal supply of alms, and
the sequel, ii. 58

„ XXXIY.—Of Zabid. Abu Zayd appears in the character of a
slave-merchant, and sells his son as a slave to Harith.
The boy repudiates the sale, protesting that he is
Joseph. They go before the Kadi, and the sequel,
ii. 62, 63

„ XXXV.—Of Shiraz. Abfi Zayd describes a wine-cask meta¬

phorically under the simile of a maiden, for whom he
desires to purchase wedding attire, and the result, ii. 71

„ XXXVI.—Of Maltiyah. Abfi Zayd proposes twenty riddles, or

conundrums, of a curious kind, and leaves without ex¬
plaining them. Hariri himself does this in a short
commentary at the end of this Assembly, ii. 74, 75

„ XXXVII.—Of Sa'dah. Abi\ Zayd and his son again before the
Kadi, and account of the dispute between them, ii. 83

,, XXXVIII.—Of Merv. Abfi Zayd addresses the Governor of Merv
in some very fine verses in praise of liberality to men
of genius, ii. 89, 90

,, XXXIX.—Of 'Om&n. About a sea-voyage and a magic spell
against the dangers of the sea. A storm, landing
at the port of [an island, and what happens there,
ii. 98, 94


326


INDEX.


Assembly XL.—Of Tebriz. A lively altercation between Abb Zayd and

bis young wife before the Kadi of Tebriz, be complain¬
ing of her contumacy, she of bis abuse of bis conjugal
rights, ii. 101, 102

„ XLI.—Of Tanis. Abb Zayd preaches a sermon full of lofty

moral admonitions, and what happens at the close of
it, ii. 108, 109

„ XLII.—Of Najran. Abb Zayd again propounds a series of

riddles, ii. 113, 114

„ XLIII.—A1 Bakriyah. Abb Zayd displays bis eloquence and

mastery of the Arabic tongue in various ways. The
discussion between him and a youth on the subject of
r matrimony is worthy of Rabelais, ii. 113, 114

„ XLIV.—The Wintry. Abb Zayd furnishes a series of puzzling

statements, which show the double meanings and
curious subtleties of the Arabic language. He leaves
secretly without explaining them, ii. 132

,, XLV.—Of Ramlah. Account of another matrimonial dispute

between Abb Zayd and his young wife before the Kadi
of Ramlah, ii. 141, 142

,, XLVI.—Of Aleppo. Abb Zayd appears as a schoolmaster, and

bis pupils accomplish the most surprising feats in
linguistic artifices, ii. 146, 147

„ XLVII.—Of Hajr. Another fictitious altercation between Abb

Zayd in the character of a cupper, and his son, for the
purpose of obtaining coin from the assembled com¬
pany, ii. 156

,, XLVIII.—The Har&miyeh. Supposed to be the first Assembly
composed by Hariri, with the first appearance of Abb
Zayd the Serbji on the scene, ii. 163

„ XLIX.—Of S£s£n. Abb Zayd urges his son to practise mendi¬

cancy as a fine art, he himself having so practised
it to his profit. A most interesting discourse, and,
Chenery says (p. 83), “one of the finest pieces of
rhetoric in the work,” ii. 169

,, L.—-Of Bsara. The repentance of Abb Zayd, described by

him along with a magnificent encomium of Basra. He
settles down to his devotions, and his farewell versos
are most interesting and breathe the purest spirit of
devotion. Chenery says (p. 83): “ But perhaps the
first place in regard of merit should be given to the
Fiftieth and last Assembly,” ii. 175, 176


INDEX.


327


[The figures in italics under each Assembly of Hariri denote the page where
each assembly and the notes thereon begin; the other figures denote the references
to each.]

Assembly the 1st.—i. 37, 108 , 278 , 294, 302, 328, 385, 387 ; ii. 211

„ the 2nd.—i. 106, 112 , 274, 285 , 303,304, 319, 338, 356, 357, 384,

448, 453; ii. 217

„ the 3rd.—i. 55, 75, 97, 117 , 229, 295 , 300, 310, 344, 381
„ the 4th.—i. 121 , 302 , 328, 331, 365, 394, 417, 463, 473
„ the 5th.—i. 55, 126 , 300, 304, 308 , 322, 398, 417, 500; ii. 220

„ the 6th.—i. 75, 132 , 274, 321 , 349, 396, 414,416, 446, 524

„ the 7th.—i. 139 , 328 , 334, 339, 417, 509; ii. ?58

„ the 8th.—i. 75, 79, 145 , 336 , 347 ; ii. 71, 113

„ the 9th.—i. 151 , 344 , 436; ii. 141

„ the 10th.—i. 158 , 336, 339, 351 , 381, 393, 409, 466, 465, 532, 537
„ the 11th.—i. 163 , 364 , 375, 429, 490; ii. 254

„ the 12th.—i. 80, 168 , 289, 353, 368 , 420, 435, 538 ; ii. 281

„ the 13th.—i. 176 , 296, 299, 355, 380 , 391, 396, 477; ii. 225

„ tho 14th.—i. 181 , 391 , 465; ii. 289

„ tho 15th.—i. 185 , 398 , 407, 419,434, 449 ; ii. 269

„ the 16th.—i. 194 , 274, 308, 408, 410 , 422, 456, 463, 480, 483

„ tho 17th—i. 41, 200 , 274, 288, 322, 402, 419 , 442
„ the 18th—i. 206 , 371, 414, 417, 427 , 441, 464; ii. 255

„ the 19th—i. 214 , 287, 320, 324, 408, 443 , 450, 456, 527 ; ii. 266

„ tho 20th—i. 36, 220 , 452 , 460, 464

„ tho 21st.—i. 223 , 455 ; ii. 275, 297

„ tho 22nd.—i. 11, 229 , 383, 409, 469 ; ii. 239

„ the 28rd.—i. 234 , 274, 340, 480 , 486, 500

„ tho 24th—L ix., 72, 243 , 274, 493 , 497, 499 : ii. 221

„ the 25th—i. 106, 253 , 274, 514

„ tho 26th—i. 75, 258 , 274, 848, 363, 449, 460, 488, 524 , 537 ;

ii. 237

„ tho 27th—i. 277, 417, 441, 539; ii. 1 , 187 , 206, 246
„ tho 28th.—i. 75, 274, 526; ii. 8 , 15, 191 , 194,197

„ tho 29th—i. 75, 79, 274, 290, 434, 526; ii. 14 , 71, 113, 194 ,

261

„ tho 30th—i. 76, 215, 287 ; ii. 24 , 198 , 200, 296
„ tho 31st—i. 76, 416; ii. 31 , 201

„ tho 32nd—i. 34, 77, 79, 81, 82, 274, 284, 305,319,402,465,489;
ii. 37 , 38, 132, 204

„ the 33rd—i. 78, 291, 294, 382 ; ii. 50, 58 , 208


328


INDEX.


Assembly the 34th.—i. 78, 318, 383, 472; ii. 62 , 211 , 273

„ the 35th.—i. 71, 79, 460; ii. 71 , 113, 217

„ the 36th.—i. 73, 79, 81, 490, 514, 525 ; ii. 74 , 113, 219 , 239, 302

„ the 37th.—i. 72, 79, 280, 311, 318, 332, 383, 418, 525, 537 ; ii.

83 , 224 , 233

„ the 38th.—i. 79, 390, 431, 531; ii. 89 , 234 , 235, 244,263

„ the 39th.—i. 80, 412, 418, 495 ; ii. 93 , 238

„ the 40th.—i. 80, 82, 152, 347, 484; ii. 101 , 102, 141, 142, 243 ,

290, 298, 306

„ the 41st.—i. 81, 336, 368, 399; ii. 108 , 109, 251 , 253

• „ the 42nd.—i. 81, 341; ii. 113 , 255

„ the 43rd.—i. 81, 310, 312, 370 ; ii. 119 , 260 , 263, 266

„ the 44th<—i. 81, 299, 303, 402, 485, 522, 527; ii. 132 , 273 , 277,

278

„ the 45th.—i. 36, 82, 348, 391,460; ii. 141 , 142, 279

„ the 46th.—i. 82, 274, 311, 321, 368, 471, 500, 524, 525; ii. 146 ,

267, 284 , 289, 305

„ the 47th.—i. 37, 38, 83, 272, 321, 479 ; ii. 156 , 290

. „ the 48th.—i. 21, 24, 37, 83, 108; ii. 163 , 175, 214, 245, 295

„ the 49th.—i. 37, 83, 287, 288, 332, 382, 402, 406, 537; ii. 169 ,

299

„ the 50th.—i. 6, 7, 9, 37, 83, 296, 382, 431; ii. 175 , 305
Assyrians, ii. 240
Astronomy, i. 100

Aswad [Al], son of Munthir, King of Hira, i. 377, 496
Aswad [Al], the rival prophet slain at the time of Mohammed’s death,
i. 279

Athenian, i. 6
Athens, i. 88
Atlas, Mount, i. 344

A'yas, The five, of the tribe of Koraysh. These were five sons of 'Abd
Shems, who had all similar names, i. 376
'Ayisheh, third wife of the Prophet, i. 14, 93, 308, 337, 329, 353, 355, 364,
883, 390, 401, 418, 430, 473; ii. 293
'Ayn ibn Dobay', father of Naw&r, wife of the poet Farazdak, i. 350
Azar, father of Abraham, i. 467

Az&rikah, a fanatical sect, implacable enemies of the House of Omayyah,
or the Omayyides, i. 326, 327
Azd, an Arab ancestor, i. 423. See Benft Azd

Azerbijan, the north-west province of the present Persian monarchy, i. 132
Azz ad Din al Mukaddasi, a writer of moral allegories, edited by Garcin
de Tassy, i. 277


INDEX.


329


Babylon, i. 209, 325, 434
Bacchanalian, i. 35, 168

Badi' az Zemfin, or “ The Wonder of the Time,” a title give to Hamadiini,
i. 20, 26,27,105,106, 186, 270-272,278, 315, 455. See Hamaddm [Al]
Bagdad, i. 5, 6, 18, 26-29, etc. See Appendix A
Baghid, an Arab tribe, i. 316

B&hileh, one of the least esteemed of Arab tribes, i. 309, 520, 521

Bahman, a Persian Prince, i. 287

Bahrayn, i. 10, 361, 446, 452

Bajazet I., the Ottoman Sultan, i. 489

Bajileh, Tribe of, i. 353

Baki, a Turkish poet, i. vi.

Bfikil, a man of Rabi'ah or of Iyld, who had an impediment in his speech,
and is alluded to in the proverb as “more tongue-tied than Bakil,
i. 197, 263, 417, 537
Balaam, i. 44

Baldwin, one of the Crusaders, i. 13, 20, 489
Baqi', the cemetery of Medina, ii. 50
Barajim, a tribe, i. 361
Barftkish, wife of Lokm&n ibn 'Ad, i. 516

Barka'id, a place described as the chief town of the Diyfir Rabi'ah, and
near Mowsil, i. 139, 140, 329

Barrah, a celebrated woman’s name among the Arabs; one sister of
Tomim, another ancestress of Koraysh, i. 318 ; ii. 225
Barrah, mother of the boy Zayd, i. 130, 132, 318; ii. 220
Basit, an Arabic metre, i. 55, 56, 524
Basra X., i. 1, 3, 6-11,13, 18, etc. See Appendix A
Basrian, The, i. 90, 315
Basrians, The, i. 72, 503, 505
Basfis [Al], an Arab woman, i. 527, 528
Basils, an Israelitish woman, i. 530

Basfis, War of, i. 74, 260, 317, 382, 449, 526, 527, 530 ; ii. 277
Bathiloh, or Sulayma, wife of the warrior Sakhr, the brother of Kliansa,
the poetess, i. 388, 389
Batlhali, Swamps of the, ii. 15, 22
Bfitir, an ancestor, i. 369
Ba$n Marr, in the territory of Mecca, i. 288

Battlo of the Camel, ii. 293. See Mirkhond, Part II., vol. iii., p. 212
Bawwfm, The valley or pass of, i. 368

Baycjfi, near Shiraz, and the birthplace of Sibawayh, the Grammarian, i. 498
Bayd&wi, the Commontator on the Koran, i, 31, 39, 96, 97, 267-269, etc.
See Appendix A


330


INDEX.


Beauties of the I'r£b, or desinential syntax, a treatise on Grammar
Hariri, i. 12

Beeca, another pronunciation of Mecca, i. 891
Bedouin, i. 4, 64 ; ii, 1
Bedr, Battle of, i. 81, 824, 438, 440
Beggary or Begging, ii. 83, 85, 229
Beggary, Shame of, i. 280, 311

Bekr ibn W£'il, an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 352, 359, 515, 527
Belkayn, a contraction of Benu’l Kayn, i. 340
Benjamin, youngest son of Jacob, i. 398, 417
Benh 'Abs, an Arab tribe, i, 130, 316, 317
,, 'Amir ibn Sa'sa'ah, i. 375
„ Asad, i. 64, §40, 348, 357, 386, 388, 401, 408, 491
,, Asfar, ii. 48, 207
,, Azd, i. 353, 425, 426
„ Bekr, i. 10, 455, 527, 529, 530
,, pabbah, L 428
,, Fezsirah, i. 375, 376, 396, 491

„ Ghass&n, i. 64, 133,138, 154, 248, 288, 289, 295, 327, 377, 496
„ Ghataf&n, i. 64, 316, 318, 387, 401, 405, 411, 428, 476
„ Har&m, i. 10, 21, 24 ; ii. 163, 164,175
,, Harb, ii. 38

,, Hilftl ibn 'Amir, i. 375, 376 ; ii. 246

,, Hotkayl, i. 64

,, Iy&d, or lyy&d, i. 64, 417, 538

,, Ja'far, i. 502

,, Joth&m, i. 64

,, Kand, ii. 272

,, Khoza'ah, i. 64, 426, 434

,, Kin&neh, i. 64, 434

,, Kod&'ah, i. 64, 495

,, Koraysh, the most distinguished of the Arab tribes, i. 8, 16, 30, e
See Appendix A
,, Lakham, i. 64

■„ ’1 H&rith ibn Ka'b, i. 428, 498, 537, 538

,, M& } as-sama, ii. 199
,, M&zin, i. 497
,, Murrah, i. 38^7

,, Nomayr, i. 20^; their descent, i. 427, 428
,, 'Okayl, i. 467

,, Omayyeh, Mosque of the, i. 369; the tribe, i. 406
,, Babi'ah, i. 64, 352


INDEX.


331


Benft Sa'd ibn Thoby&n, i. 351
„ Salam&n, i. 353
„ Salih, i. 288, 289
,, Sa'sa'ah, i. 428
„ Shaibah, ii. 38, 204

„ ShayMn, a branch of the Benft Bekr, i. 529
„ Snlaym, i. 387-389
„ Taghlib, i. 10, 376, 448, 527, 529, 530
„ Tay, i. 292, 348, 426, 491

„ Temim, a distinguished Arab tribe, i. 10, 31, 38, 64, 94, 273, 349,
352, 361, 430, 434-436, 453, 497, 527 ; ii. 83, 214, 225, 231
„ Thakif, i. 64, 405

„ 'Uzrah, ii. 114, 255, 280 #

,, Yarbu', i. 518

Beyrout, i. 41, 98, 367 ; ii. 197, 198, 226, 241, 244, 263, 268, 280
Bible, The, i. 45-47, 85, 97, 316, 407 ; ii. 206
Biblical, i. 88
Bidpai, Babies of, i. 33

Bilkis, Queen of Sheba, i. 80, 283, 425; ii. 104, 245
Black Sea, ii. 252
Bohemian, ii. 1

Bohtori [Al], the Poet, 14, 292, 294, 418, 482, 487. See Abu 'Ob&deh
Bokhari [Al], the Traditionist, i. 268, 316, 365, 393

Bor&k, the name of the animal on which Mohammed made the reputed
night journey to heaven, ii. 253
Bosphorus, The, i. 4
Boulak, i. 300, 315, 508; ii. 241

Bunduqah, the name of a tribe, or a pellet, ii. 104, 249, 250
Bhran, probably the wife of M£mun, the seventh Abbaside Khalif, i. 80;
ii. 104, 246

Burdeh, The, or Poem of the mantle, by Ka'b ibn Zohayr, i. 397, 501

Burjan, People of [the Danubian Bulgars], i. 466

Burkhardt’s “ Travels in Arabia,” ii. 202

Burton, Sir Richard, the Traveller and Orientalist, ii. xi, 202

Butter-bags, Story of the woman of the two, ii. 157, 291

Buzurjmihr, minister of NushirvUn, King of Persia, ii. 303

Byzantine, i. 90, 381, 539

Byzantines, The, i. 22, 92, 391

Cabul, i. 467

Caesar, name applied to Roman Emperors, i. 451,491, 532
Cain, i, 43, 296, 340, 631, 538


332


INDEX.


Cairo, i. 25, 41; ii. 24, 25, 30, 306
Calcutta, i. 39, 99, 316, 481
Calendar, Arabian, i. 391

Callirhoe, or Antiochea, a very ancient city, so called under tlie Seleucidse,
afterwards named Edessa and Roha, i. 489
Cambridge, i. 101
Canaan, Land of, i. 44, 87

Canaan, or Y&m, the son of Noah ,who refused to enter the ark,

i. 466

Canaan, the father of Nimrod, i. 369
Canticles, The, or Song of Solomon, i. 348, 425
Capella of the Pleiades, ii. 237

“Cassandra,” or “Alexandra,” of Lycophron, an iambic poem of 1470
lines, very famous in antiquity, i. 91
Caucasus, The, ii. 208

Cave, The men of the, or the seven sleepers alluded to in the Koran, i. 196,
414-416, 450

Cave, The, name of the 18th Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 414, 416 ;

ii. 231

“ Chalef elahmar’s Qasside,” edited by W. Ahlwardt, of Grreifswald, i. 340
Charlemagne, i. 539

Chenery, Thomas, translator of the first twenty-six Assemblies of Hariri,
ii. vii-xi, 81, 37, 89, 113, 146, 147, 214, 217, 218, 229, 239, 242, 246,
248, 269, 275, 277, 281, 289, 292, 298
Clierithim (see Ezekiel xxv. 16), i. 87
Chess, ii. 241

“ Chiliads,” The, a work by John Tzetzes, i. 539, 540
China, ii. 310
Chinese, i. 344, 466

Chosroes, a title given to certain Persian kings, i. 31, 218, 451, 539; ii. 219
“ Chrestomathie Arabe,” by Be Sacy, i. 101, 139, 151, 270, 271, etc. See
Appendix A
Christ, i. 88, 425, 530
Christendom, i. 1

Christian, i. 3, 13, 32, 38, 45, 98, 267, 269, 350, 370, 385, 397, 414, 465,
489, 500; ii. 270, 271
Christianity, i. 289, 385, 537

Christians, i. 34, 46, 164, 322, 347, 421, 439, 442; ii. 113, 152, 256
Cities of the Plain, or the subverted cities, i.e., Sodom and G-omorrah,
i. 431

Colocynth, i. 461, 462
Commentaries, i. 67, 70; ii. 199


INDEX ,


333


Commentary, i. 77, 92 note, 101, 856, 862, 882, 890, 891, 394, 429, 486,
442, 446, 449, 495, 529, 531; ii. 1, 75, 187,189, 248, 273,274, 278, 296
Commentary of Bayawi on the Koran, i. 96, 269, 312, 325, 404, 407, 432,
433; ii. 270

Commentary of De Sacy on Hariri’s Assemblies, i. 98, 269, 312, 318, 347,
370, 375, 381, 382, 385, 414, 420, 441, 444, 451, 456, 479, 482, 483’,
487, 488, 495, 500, 518, 520, 525, 537; ii. 193, 195, 201, 205, 207, 225,
251, 256, 266, 276, 303, 305

Commentary of Hariri, ii. 189, 191, 219, 244, 273, 274, 277, 278
Commentary of Ibn 'Akil on Ibn Malik, i. 99
Commentary of Sa'd at Taftazani, i. 99

Commentary of Sherishi, i. 308, 322, 350,353,356, 438,451,467, 483, 520;

ii. 217, 259 §

Commentary of Tabrizi, ii. 212
Commentary of Zamakshari on the Koran, i. 39, 97
Commentary on the Arab Proverbs, i. 362, 363, 385, 390
Commentary on the Mo'allakah of 'Amr ibn Kulthftm, i. 539
Commentary on the Mo'allakah of Imr al Kays, i. 386
Commentary on the Mo'allakah of Tarafeh, i. 407
Commentator, i. 39, 96, 265, 266, 294, 340, 357, 368, 413, 415, 420, 429,
444, 446, 471, 573, 504; ii. 299

Commentators, i. 39, 63, 70, 73, 90, 145, 329, 345, 414, 451; ii. 187, 202,
203, 206, 208, 209, 211, 213, 215, 218,227,236, 238, 240,256, 258, 261,
265, 266, 276, 282, 290, 293, 300, 307, 309
Companions of the Prophet, i. 6, 14, 104, 401; ii. 28,198, 200, 247, 265,
298

Composer, i. 231, 232

Composition, i. 230, 232, 234, 265,273,274,297, 359, 382 ; ii. 156, 217, 251
Compositions, ii. 197

Confession or Shah&deh of the Moslem faith, “ There is no God bnt God,
and Mohammed is the Apostle of God,” i. 392
Constantine, the Emperor, i. 289
Constantinople, i. 88, 90, 91, 320, 397, 491
Conundrums, i. 79, 81, 84, 274
Corinthians, Epistle to the, i. 279
Criticism, i. 47

Crusade, i. 3, 20, 347, 489 ; ii. 163
Crusaders, i. 13, 38

Kabbah, or Dabbat, son of Udd, son of Tabikh&h, son of Elyas, son of
Modar, i. 428. The story about him, and how his name became con¬
nected with a proverb, i. 474, 475


834


INDEX.


Dachtenfts, wife of 'Amr ibn 'Odas, i. 74

D&his, the name of a horse which caused the war of D&his, i. 316, 817

Dailamites, name of a people in Gril&n, ii. 137

Daj'am, House of the, the reigning family of the Benft Salih, i. 289

Damascus, i. 16, 57, 168, 206, 207, 368, 369, 437, 4S9

Damietta, i. 121

Damon, the Pythagorean, celebrated for his friendship with Pythias, i. 385
Damrah, son of Damrah, the judge in a mun&farah, who is said to have
taken a bribe, i. 375
Daniel, Book of, i. 88, 380
D&rH, or Darius, the Persian King, ii. 13
Dardanus, the mythical ancestor of the Trojans, i. 92
David, the King, i«33, 44, 46 209, 267, 269, 291, 292, 422, 436, 453, 476 ;
ii. 217, 222

Daylam, a region of which Rayy was the seat of government, i. 455.
See Rayy

Death, i. 150,163,165, 166,224,461, 488 ; ii. 4, 8, 10, 13, 23, 34,180,185,
229, 252, 310
Deborah, Song of, i. 44
Decius, the Emperor, i. 414

Dedan, one a brother of Sheba, son of Raamah, and another a brother of
Sheba, grandson of Abraham, i. 426, 427
Denar and denars, i. 117, 119, 120, 141, 149, 158,160, 210, 229, 233, 298,
300, 310, 470, 499 ; ii. 82, 163, 212, 265
Derenbourg, who, with Mr. Reinard, wrote the preface to the second
edition of De Sacy’s Hariri, i. 3 note
Deskereh, a place between Holw&n and Bagdad, i. 257, 523
Deuteronomy, Book of, i. 44, 46, 516
Devil, The, i. 141, 378

Dictionary of Islam, by Hughes, ii. si, 202, 205, 244, 245, 250, 306
Dieterici, editor of some Arabic poems, i. 300, 462

Dimeshk, son of Nimrod, son of Canaan, or, as others say, Dimeshk, son
of Batir, son of M&lek, son of Arphaxad, son of Shem, son of Noah.
The Moslem legend is that Damascus received its name from its
founder, Dimeshk, i. 369
Dir&r [Ad], the angel of Paradise, i. 350

Dirhem and dirhems, i. 139, 142,149, 156, 298, 309, 408, 417, 470; ii. 14,
18, 65, 70, 144, 161, 212, 219, 230, 272, 294, 295
Diw&n, or collection of poems of any one author, i. 394,427, 446, 447,453,
479, 485, 491, 492, 525,- 539 ; ii. 304
Diy£r Rabi'ah, a country between Syria and Irak, i. 10, 139, 206, 215
Do'aymis of the Sands, a negro slave, i. 403


INDEX.


335


Dobays the Asadt, son of Sayf ad Dowleh Sadakah, the Arab prince of
Hilleh, i. 38; ii. 100, 242

Dowsar, tbe name of a squadron of cavalry alluded to in a proverb, i. 436
Dozy Eeinhardt, tbe eminent Dutch Orientalist, and author of several
works, i. 459

Duprat, Benjamin, Libraire de l’lnstitut, Paris, i. 459 .

Durayd, brother of H&shim, son of Harmalah: the story about him ,
i. 387, 388

Durayd ibn As Simm£h, a most celebrated hero and poet of his time, and
held by the Arabs to be eqpial to 'Antarah: the story about him and
Khans£, the poetess, i. 387, 390 ; ii. 282
‘Durrah,’ The, or ‘Durrat al Ghaww£s,’ a work by Hariri, i. 280, 283, 290,
296, 304, 318,331, 345, 347, 348, 400, 401, 409, 413, ^18, 419, 427, 497,
511, 513, 524, 525, 538; ii. 212, 220, 233

East, The, i. vi, 3, 5, 13, 27, 34, 59, 90, 98, 204, 206, 262, 277, 285, 317,
352, 370, 410, 473, 477 ; ii. 57,171, 179, 265, 278, 286, 308
Eastern, i. 1, 21, 32, 89, 112, 411, 451
Ecclesiastes, i. 86, 89
Ecclesiastical, i. 6
Eden, i. 30, 56

Edessa, a city in Northern Mesopotamia, i. 13, 21, 488, 489. See Koha

Educational, i. 6, 12, 36

Egypt, i. 341, 398, 466, 471; ii. 25, 291, 306

Egyptian, ii. 62, 108, 213

Egyptians, i. 286,341, 370,392; ii. 240

Eirenopolis, the Byzantine name of Bagdad, i. 391

Elam, i. 87

Elephant, The men of the, viz., the soldiers of Abraheh, the Abyssinian,

i. 381

Elephant, Year of the, i. 279

Elif, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, and prefixed to certain chapters of the
Koran, i.96
Elijah, i. 267

Emossa, or IIim§, i. 82, 337 ; ii. 146, 148, 284
Emperors of the East, i. 3
Endymion, i. 414
England, i. 534; ii. xi

English, i. viii, x, 1, 45, 281, 294, 377, 401, 412, 453, 462, 504, 505, 534,

ii. si 74,182,147,192, 218, 221, 225, 237, 251, 253, 254, 259, 263, 264,
266-268, 289

Englishman, i. 283, 400


336 INDEX.

Englishmen, i. 70 ; ii. 89
Enoch, i. 207
Ephesus, i. 414
Esau, i. 44

Euphrates, The, i. 9, 158, 168, 229, 374, 445; ii. 219
Euphuists, The, of the polished cities of Irak, i. 215
Europe, i. 47, 78, 92, 323,473, 531, 539; ii. 37

European, i. ix., x., 46, 58, 59, 66, 98, 101, 112, 176, 243, 2 73, 275, 285,
373, 459, 504, 534, 535; ii. viii, 279
Europeans, i. 1, 83, 132, 270; ii. 192
Eve, i. 342, 398, 415

Ewald, G. H. A., a German Orientalist and critic, and author of “ Dichter
des Alten Bipdes ” and “ Ausfuhrliches Lehrbuch des Hebraischen
Sprache,” i. 88 note, 514
Exodus, Book of, i. 44, 46, 87, 409, 425, 521
Ezekiel, the Prophet, i. 87, 88, 325, 446

Tables, i. 82, 33, 107, 277, 477, 478

Fadl [Al] al Kasbani, a Grammarian and teacher of Hariri, i. 10
Fajandihi [Al], or Fanjadihi, an author mentioned in Sherishi’s Com¬
mentary, ii. 163

Falak [Al], the name of the 113th Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 52,452
Farazdak [Al], the Poet, i. 157, 318, 349, 350, 406, 436, 458, 485, 523;
ii. 225, 248

Fard, an observance commanded by the Koran, or by the most weighty
Tradition, an obligatory duty, i. 329, 411, 412. See Nefl
Farghanah, name of a region and city of Transoxiana, now in the Khanate
of Kokan, i. 152, 344

Farhad, the Sculptor. His fatal love for Shirin is a favourite subject in
Persian poetry, ii. 245

“ Fariac, La vie et les aventures de,” written in Arabic by Ffiris ash
Shidy&k, which see, i. 458, 483
Farid ad Din 'Att£r, the Persian poet and mystic, i. 277
Faris ash Shidy&k, a Syrian author possessed of an extraordinary know¬
ledge of the Arab vocabulary, i. 367, 458, 459, 483
Farkad£n, The, two bright stars in the Little Bear, i. 143, 239, 336, 494
Fast and Fasting, ii. 37, 43-45, 206
Fate, the Father of Wonders, i. 129, 314
Father of various qualities and things, i. 218, 219, 274, 450, 451
Fatimeh, daughter of Mohammed, ii. 271

Fatimeh, daughter of Rabi'ah, sister of Mohalhil, and mother of Imr al
Kays, the poet, i. 60, 448


INDEX. 337

Fayd, a place in the Nejd, halfway between Mecca and Bagdad, i. 180,
816

Finance, Minister of, his qualities and his duties, i. 282
Find, a freedman of 'Ayishah bint Sa'd, ii. 156; the story about him, ii. 291
Firftseh, an Arab term for (1) skill in judging of a horse; (2) art of
physiognomy ; (8) discernment generally, i. 332
Firdousi, the great Persian poet, i. 5, 526, 539
Fire of war, and other traditional fires, i. 226, 463
Fire, People of the, i.e ., the inhabitants of Hell, i. 213, 441; ii. 202, 296
Firuz&b&di, the author of the “ Ramus,” ii. 219
Fliigel, the well-known German Orientalist, i. 266; ii. 208
Fohul ash Shu'ard, or “ the Heroes of the Poets,” a collection of poetical
pieces like the “ Ham&seh,” i. 57
Fokaym, a family belonging to the Temim tribe, i. 453
France, i. 534
Frankish, i. 100
Franklin, Dr., i. 316
Franks, i. 13, 21, 23, 489; ii. 163
French, i. 312, 458; ii. 196, 250

Freytag: his translation of Arab Proverbs into Latin in three volumes is
well known, a standard work often quoted in these two volumes,
i. 273, 277, 298, 324, 366, 367, 392, 397, 398, 403, 405, 430,500; ii. xi,
278

Friday, ii. 191, 299
Fukahft, or jurisconsults, i. 4

Funerals described in the “Kit&b al jan&’iz,” in the first volume of
Bokh&ri, i. 365

Furiit [Al], The sons of, i. 229 ; full details about them, i. 469-471. These
were four brothers, who became highly distinguished in the service of
several of the Abbaside Khalifs. The family generally were able
official administrators

Fuzail [Al], a colebrated devotee and ascetic, ii. 13, 194

Gabriel, the Angel, i. 31, 267, 268,233,416, 440,445,452, 474, 531; il. 254
Galon [Jfilinfis], the physician, i. 473 ; ii. 193

Garden, People of the, i.e., the inhabitants of Paradise, i. 213 ; ii. 296
Goncsis, Book of, i. 87, 312, 348, 380, 426
German, i. 2, 354; ii. 141, 147, 301
Gormany, ii. 146

Gesenius, Frederick H. W., a distinguished German Orientalist, i. 336,340,
854, 857, 368, 380

Ghabrfi, a mare, one of the causes of the war of D&his, i. 317

22


VOL. II.


338


INDEX .


Ghada, a wood proverbial for making a powerful and lasting fire, i. 321,
860; ii. 158

Gh&nah, a city of the Sftdan, i. 152, 344, 345
Ghassftn, a lake, i. 288, 425
Ghass&n ibn Wa'leh, a poet, i. 435

Ghass&n, Kings, princes, nobles, and race of, i. 113, 127, 130, 154, 286,
289, 295, 327, 362, 426, 519

Ghassan, Tharid of, a highly-esteemed Arab food, i. 383
Ghass&nide, i. 289 • >

Ghataf&n, an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 411, 427. See Benfi
Ghatafan

Ghaylan, or Ghail&n, the poet, ii. 3,189

Ghazal, or ode, oi^e of the four kinds of Persian poetry, i. 62 note
Ghazzali [Al], the lawyer, mystic, and philosopher. His works are very
numerous, and all very instructive, i. 392
Gholayy^n, a camel stallion, i. 528

Ghomd&n, The, a palace of San% the most magnificent edifice in ancient
Arabia, i. 279, 280

Ghul, and Ghfils, malignant demons, or goblins of a nature akin to the
Jinn, i. 4, 329, 330, 398; ii. 87

Ghutah, The. This is the fertile plain on which the city of Damascus is
situated. It means “ a well-watered plain,” i, 169, 368
Gibbon, i. 391

Glass, i. 206-208, 211, 229, 434
Godfrey, the Crusader, i. 20, 489

Gold, i. 117, 229, 233, 264, 434, 481; ii. 55, 72, 75, 78, 92, 97, 107, 110,
138, 163, 175, 207, 212, 216, 237, 253, 260
Gottingen, i. 373

Grammar, i. v, 7, 10, 12, etc. See Appendix A
Grammarian, i. 8, 65, 312, 377, 498; ii. 245, 248, 306
Grammarians, i. 39, 72, 90, 98, 251, 275, 300, 395, 438, 502-506, 508, 514,
583; ii. 197, 214, 218, 304

Grammatical, i. vi, ix, 7, 12, 15, etc. See Appendix A
Granada, The Yega of, i. 368; the cold of, i. 515 •

Greece, i. 46

Greek, i. 1, 34, 64, 66, 84, 88, 90, 92, 279, 313, 345, 357, 405, 415, 492;
ii. 94, 229, 275

Greeks, i. 5, 69, 73, 82, 90, 320, 355, 381, 443; ii. 48, 146, 163, 168, 192,
207, 219, 305
Guadalquivir, The, i. *27
Guebres, or fire-worshippers, i. 322
Gulistan of Sa'di, i. 5, 473 ; ii. 235


INDEX .


339


Habib ibn 'Ows, i. 57 ; commonly known as Abft Temm&m, which see
Habib, the carpenter, i. 531
Habil, i. 296. See Abel

IladcVik al Balagheh, or gardens of eloquence, a Persian treatise on rhetoric
and plagiarism, translated by Garcin de Tassy, Paris, 1844, i. 481
Hadi [Al], the fourth Abbaside Khalif, i. 493

Iladramowt, a province of Arabia, i. 438, 441, 445 ; ii. 119, 122, 123, 256,
263, 264

Hafiz [Al] al Bendehi, the Imam, i. 24
Hafiz, the Persian poet, i. 451; ii. 217

Ilajj, The, or Pilgrimage, i. 76, 391-393; ii. 31, 33, 34, 38, 46, 47, 117,
202, 204, 259, 280

Hajjaj [Al] ibn Yusftf, commonly called £< The Tyrant,” j. 65, 94,474, 520;
ii. 194, 247, 255

Hajji Khalfeh, a Turkish historian and geographer, but an Arabic encyclo¬
paedist and bibliographer, i. 269; ii. x
Ilakam [Al] ibn 'Abd Yaghflth, the Mankari, the best archer of his time :

the story about him, i. 404
Ilfikim Abft Sa'id, i. 270, 271. See Abft Sa'id
Hakim [Al], the ninth Spanish Khalif, i. 34
Halfeh, a nun, i. 350

Ham, one of the sons of Noah, i. 228, 466, 467 ; ii. 121, 260
Hamadiln, a town and country, i. 18,105, 364, 426, 514
Hamadani [Al], poet, reciter, and author, the first person who composed
an Assembly, i. 13; his birth and death, i. 18; his Assemblies, i. 19,
20, 25, 27 ; other references to him, i. 28, 30, 35, 37, 38, 62,105, 186,
207, 270, 272, 305. See Badi' az Zemfm
Ilamaseh, The, a collection of fragments from the warrior and other
poets of the pre-Islamitic period, compiled by Abft Temmcim, himself
a good poet of the third century of the Hijra [a.d. 816-913], i. 55, 57,
etc. See Appendix A
Hamazfm, an Arab tribe, ii. 197

Ilamm&d ibn Selcmeh, the Grammarian and instructor of Asma'i and
Sibawayh, i. 498

Hammfid, the great reciter, called Ar Bawiah, and famous for his great
knowledge of Arab poetry, etc., i. 17, 383, 384. See Abft 1 Kftsim
Ilammiid

Hammer Purgstall, Baron Joseph von, German Orientalist, i. 320, 390,
399, 430

Ilamzah al Isfahani, ii. 293

Ilamzah, ,the ninth son of Abd al Muttalib, the grandfather of Mohammed,
and killed at Ohud, i. 401, 473 ; ii. 245


22—2


340


■INDEX.


Hamzeh, The sign of, and its application, i. 533-586 ; ii. 158, 264
Haram ibn Kotbah, the Fez&ri, who was judge in the most celebrated
m%ndfa/rah of the Ignorance, i. 375, 488
Elaramiyeh [Al], the name of the forty-eighth Assembly of Hariri, but
said to be the first that was written, i. 21, 24, 37, 83, 108; ii. 163
Harb, an Arab tribe, ii. 38. See Benu Harb
Harb and Murrah, the most hateful names to God, i. 278
Harb, the grandfather of Mu'£wiyeh, the first Omayyide Khalif, i. 439
Harim ibn Sinan, a noble Arab of the Ignorance, i.e., before Islam, ii. 212
IJariri [Al], the author of these Assemblies (his biography, i. 3-13; further
biography, i. 20-30, 32-40; explanation about the connection between
Hariri and Hdrith, son of Hammam, i. 278 ; his full name described,

i. 315). For<the complete number of references to Hariri see Appen¬
dix A

Hariri, Arabic text of his Assemblies, ii. iii, ix
Haris [Al], ii. 224, read Al H&rith

HArith ibn 'Abbdd, the owner of the celebrated horse Ibnu ’n-na'foneh,

ii. 198

Harith [Al], a name for the Devil, i. 378
Harith [Al] ibn 'Amr al Kindi, the legend about him, i. 299
Harith [Al] ibn 'Amr, King of Kinda, connected with a proverb, i. 356
H&rith ibn Hillizeh, a poet, and author of one of the seven Mo'allakat,
i. 56, 61, 383

H&rith [Al] ibn Ka'b: the story about him, i. 474, 475
Harith [Al] ibn Sulayk, the Asadi, connected with a proverb, i. 408
Hdrith [Al], the son of Hammam, the R£wi or Reciter of Abft Zayd
throughout these Assemblies. Under the name of Al Harith, son of
Hammam, Hariri is supposed to have signified himself, i. 278. For
the complete number of references to H&rith, see Appendix A
H&rith, -the Ghassani prince: the story about him, i. 492
H&rfin ar Reshid, the fifth Abbaside Khalif, i. 18, 34, 72, 285, 319, 320,
351, 437, 455, 498, 499, 515; ii; 245, 279
H&rftt and Marfit, i. 434. For the story about them compare Koran, ii.

96; Mirkhond, Part I., vol. i., and Bayd&wi
Has&, a town, ii. 265

HAsan [Al], son of 'Ali, the fourth Khalif ah, ii. 229, 278,288
Hasan [Al], Abft Sa’id al Basri, proverbial for pulpit eloquence and a great
devotee, i. 81, 350, 467, 468; ii. 104, 165, 247, 298, 306
H&shim, son of Harmalah, i. 387, 388

H£shim, the ancestor of Mohammed, i. 269, 320, 332, 383, 520, 523
Hasson ibn Th&bit, a blind poet, and in favour of Mohammed, L 429-431,
518, 519


INDEX.


341


Hassan ibn Tobba', King of Yemen, i. 381
Ilati’eh [Al], a poet, i. 482

Hatim Tay, a man famous for his generosity, i. 300, 471, 472; ii. 140,278
Hayy ibn Yakzan, the Living, son of the Awakened, the hero in the philo¬
sophical romance of Abft Ja'far ibn Tofayl, i. 278, 467
Hebraists, i. 46

Hebrew, i. vi, 32, 43-48, etc. See Appendix A

Hell, i. 412, 439, 441, 460 ; ii. 192, 193, 253, 279

Heraclius, the Emperor, i. 289, 442

Herat, i. 18, 270, 272

Herodotus, i. 354, 404, 405

Heshbon, i. 87. See Jeremiah xlviii. 2

Hezej, an Arabic metre, i. 330, 349, 366 »

Hida'ah may be the name of a tribe or a hawk, ii. 104, 249, 250
Hrj&z, a district or province of Arabia, i. 9, 63, 288,295, 350, 376,406,432,
516; ii. 290

Hijr [Al], the country between Hijaz and Syria, i. 432
Hijra, or Mohammedan era, i. 3, 7, 17, etc. See Appendix A
Hikf, a strip of sand on the sea-coast of Ash Shihr in Yemen, i. 441
Hilleh, a place, i. 38

Hims, or Emessa, i. 82, 336; ii. 146, 148,155, 284, 285
Himsi, one born at Hims, ii. 284

Himyar, a place, and a tribe or race of early Arabs, i. 359, 382, 438, 448,
527

Himyar, son of Saba, or 'Abd Shems, i. 426
Himyarite, i. 381
Himyaritic, i. 426
Hind, a country, i. 467

Hind, mother of 'Amr, King of Hira, i. 360, 361
Hindustani, i. 84
Hira, city of, i. 495, 519

Hira, Kings of, i. 10, 42, 74, 286, 289, 358, 377, 385; ii. 199
Hirr, mistress of Imr al Kays, the poet, i. 337

Hishfim, the tenth 'Omayyide Khalif, i. 17, 320, 349, 350, 371, 383, 384
Hisham ibn al Kelbi relates the story about the man of Johayneh, i. 475',
476

History, i. 63, 71, 98

Hitopodesa, or Friendly Advice, a Sanscrit story-book, L 33
Hob£b [Al], the keeper of the idols at Thamftd, i. 433
Hobal, an Arab idol, i. 325

Hodaybiyeh [Al], a place where a treaty was made between Mohammed
and the Koraysh, i. 442


342


INDEX


Hojr, or Hajr, a place in Yem&meh, i. 397; ii. 156, 290, 291

Hojr, the father of Imr al Kays, the poet, i. 386, 491

Holwan,.a town in Irak, east of Bagdad, i. 106, 112, 113,274, 285,472, 523

Holwan ibn f Ali ibn Kod&'ah, the founder of the town of Holw&n, i. 285

Homaya, daughter of Bahman, i. 287

Homer, i. 8

Homeric, ii. 268

Honayf al Han&tim: story about him and the subject of a proverb, i. 403
Honayn, Shoes of, i. 162, 260, 363, 532
Horace, i. vii, 430

Horse race, Separate names for the positions of the different horses in a,

i. 487

Hosayn [Al] ibn * Abd Yaghftth: the story about him and his brother
Hakam, i. 404

Hosayn [Al], the son of 'Ali, the fourth Khalifah, i. 162, 350, 363, 406,
458; ii. 288 ■

Hosayn ibn 'Amr ibn Mo'&wiat ibn Kilab, or, as others say, Hosayn of
Ghatafim, a vagabond, i. 476
Hospitality, i. 193, 409

Hothayfeh, or Hothayfet ibn Bedr, owner of Ghabra, a mare, who was the
cause of the war of D£his, i. 317
Howra, First and second day of, i. 387, 388

Htid, the Prophet, i. 213, 267,268,428 ; his pedigree, i. 441, 442. About him
* compare the Koran, Tabari, and Mirkhond
Hughes, the author of the * Dictionary of Islam,’ ii. xi, 202, 244
Huhahib [Al or Abft], said to have been a miser, and the story about him,

ii. 241

Hulwan bin 'Imran, father of Khindaf, which see, ii. 246
Hunain, Battle of, ii. 157

Husheng, one of the Peshd&dian Persian kings, i. 455. See Mirkhond,
Part I., vol. ii., and Tabari
Huskisson, i. 71

Hutamah [Al], the crushing, a Koranic expression applied to Hell, ii. 11,
193

Huthali, or Huthaliyun, Div&n, i. 367, 539

Iblis, the Moslem name for the Devil, i, 175, 273, 296, 378, 379, 440;
ii. 57, 258, 280

Ibn 'Abb&s, cousin to Mohammed, and the greatest of the early expounders
of the Koran, i. 143, 332, 333, 379, 415, 483; ii. 222, 226. See
Abdallah ibn/Abb&s

Ibn Abi Tarafeh: his story about the Arab, i. 346


INDEX.


343


Ibn Adham, ii. 272. See Ibrahim, son of Adham

Ibn Ahmar, a poet, i. 518

Ibn 'Akil, a commentator, i. 99, 800, 508

Ibn al Anbari, a poet, i. 487

Ibn al Ghazz, the Ayadi, a very strong man: story about him and the
woman, i. 490

Ibn al Ilajjaj, a poet of the fourth century of the Hijra, a rival of Ibn
Sukkereh, i. 528

Ibn al 'Ishrin, or the youth of twenty years, a name applied to the poet
Tarafeh, i. 861
Ibn al Kalbi, ii. 278

Ibn al Mokaffa', or Muqaffa', the Persian translator and author, i. 38;

ii. 303. See Abdullah ibn al Mokaffa'

Ibn 'Arabshah, the historian and author of the history of Timur, or Tamer¬
lane, i. 50, 98

Ibn Ar Rumi, a poet, ii. 296

Ibn Batfttah, Geographer and Traveller, ii. 224

Ibn Dorayd, a composer of forty stories full of rare and strange phrases,
i. 271; ii. 45. See Abu Bekr Ibn al Hosayn
Ibn F£ris ar R&zi, the Poet and Grammarian, i. 270, 455
Ibn Hishlm, the Historian, and author of the Sirat ar Resul, i. 371, 502,
513, 514

Ibn Kanbar, a poet, ii. 267

IbnKhaldftn, the Historian, i. 64, 65, 289, 488, 497

Ibn KhalliMn, the Biographer, i. 7, 10, 25, etc. See Appendix A

Ibn Korayb, a reciter, and famed for his knowledge of Arab tradition,

i. 81; ii. 104

Ibn M&lik, the Grammarian, and author of the “ Alfiyeh,” i. 12, .55, 98,
99, 273, 290, 300, 442, 496, 503, 509

Ibn Mas'ftd, one of the ten most intimate Companions of the Prophet,

ii. 286

Ibn Morr, The dogs of, i. 355

Ibn Muklah, the Calligrapher, ii. 272

Ibn Muslimeh, a poet, i. 345

Ibn 'Omar handed down a tradition, ii. 191

Ibn Qitri, Kadi of Al Mazar, ii. 163

Ibn Rashik, the Poet, i. 801

Ibn Sam'ftn, a celebrated preacher, i. 224, 456-458

Ibn S&rah, a poverty-stricken poet of Spain, i. 515, 516. See. Abu
Mohammed ibn Sarat
Ibn Sinbis, The dogs of, i. 355
Ibn Sirin, a celebrated interpreter of dreams, ii. 286


344


• INDEX.


Ibn Sirin, a great lawyer of Basra, i. 350, 351

Ibn Sukkereh, an elegant poet of the fourth century of the Hijra, and rival
of Ibn al Hajj&j, i. 253, 257, 523

Ibn Surayj, a great doctor of the rite of Sh£fi'l, and Kadi of Shiraz, i. 161,
358, 399

Ibn Surayj, a musician, i. 437
Ibn Tofayl, an Arab writer, i. 467. See Abfr Ja'far
Ibnu ’n-Na’&meh, name of a celebrated horse, ii. 25, 198
Ibrahim, son of Adham, a magnate of Khorasan who renounced his wealth
and lived in poverty, ii. 18, 196,272

Ibrahim, the father of Isaac, or Ish&k, the musician, he himself being also
a celebrated musician of his time, i. 437
'Id and *ldi, name pf a celebrated camel, or of a breed of camels connected
with 'Id ibn Mahrah, ii. 140, 277
'Id, a feast which terminates the pilgrimage, ii. 259
Idris, or Ibn Idris, stands for Ash SMfa'i, whose full name is Abti Abdallah
Mohammed ibn Idris Ash Sh&fa'i, ii. 57. See Sh^fi'i
'Ifrit, or 'Afrit, i. 345, 379 ; ii. 118. See Afrit

Ignorance, Time of, or Arabs of the, i.e., before Mohammed's time, and
before Isl&m, i. ix, 8, 14, etc. See Appendix A
Ihr&m, the pilgrim’s cloak, i. 392, 393 ; ii. 280

Ij'ta, or system of diacritical pointing now in use in Arabic writing, i. 94
'Ijli [Al], a powerful Arab family, L 515
Ikhl&s, The, or 112th Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 52
Iktib&s, or quotations from the Koran or other works, i. vi, 281, 483
Ikhtiyar&t, or Selections, a compilation similar to the Ham&seh by Abft
Temm&m, i. 57

Tlliyfrn, a word used in the Koran, but about which there is a diversity of
opinion, i. 268

Tm&d ad Din, secretary to the Sultan Saladin, i. 11, 26
'Im&d ad Din, the Sultan, i. 489

Im&m, i. 24, 243, 358, 416, 490 ; ii. 20, 104, 165, 235, 256, 257
Imams, i. 5 ; ii. 43
Lnamship, ii. 48
Improviser, i. 19, 20, 62

Imr al Kays, the Poet, and author of one of the Mo'allak&t, i. 14, 16, 56,
60; son of Mohalhil’s sister F&timeh, i. 61, etc. See Appendix A
Index, i. x; ii. vii-x
India, i. 9
Indian, 1. vi

Indian Ocean, ii. 252, 306
Indus, The river, i. 4, 27-


INDEX.


345


Introduction [Chenery’s], i. x, 1-102, 469,496, 498, 526 ; ii. 81, 218
Invocation, i. 50

Irak, i. 3, 4, 10, etc. See Appendix A

Iran, i. vi, 539

Irem, son of Shem, i. 479

Irem that al 'Im&d, or Irem with the Columns, the city of Shedd&d, an
ancient legendary city in the deserts of Yemen, mentioned. in the
Koran, i. 368, 369, 441, 468; ii. 9
Irish, ii. 287

'Isa, Moslem name of Jesus, ii. 197

Isaac, or Ish&k ibn Ibrahim, commonly known as Ibn an Nadim al
Mowsili, a great and celebrated musician, i. 437, 438
Isaac, son of Abraham, i. 44, 87, 267, 464; ii. 206 #

'Isa ibn Hish&ru, the narrator in Hamadani’s Assemblies, i. 19, 105
'Isa ibn 'Omar, one of the instructors of Sibawayh, i. 498
Isaiah, i. 47, 60, 86-88, 406 ; ii. 240

'Isarn, son of Shahbar, a man who rose by his own merits to be chamber-
lain to No'man ibn al Munthir, King of Hira, known as No'man Abu
Kabus, i. 255, 518-520

'Isami, a person who rises by his own merits, i. 520

Isfendiyar, a Persian hero, i. 31, 287, 539

Ishak ibn Khalaf, a poet, i. 435

Ishmael, or Isma'Sl, son of Abraham, i. 267, 466

Iskandari [Al], ii. 162

Islam, i. 1, 4, 9, 10, etc. See Appendix A

Isiami, i.e ., one who was born after the rise of Islam, i. 67

Ispahan, i. 514, 515

Israel, i. 44, 87, 465, 530

Israelite, i. 373

Israelites, The, i. 354, 521

Italian, i. 59, 74 ; ii. 221

Italy, i. 92

Iyas, called “ al Muzani,” was Kadi of Basra, and celebrated for his
wonderful acuteness, i. 143, 196, 333 ; stories about him, i. 334, 335»
417. See Abft Wathilet Iyas

Iyas, one of the Companions of the Prophet, and grandfather of the above,

i. 334

Izdr, a waist-wrapper or loin-cloth, i. 33, 396, 397; ii. 33, 94, 139, 202
Jack the Giant-killer, i. 59 —

jabir, or Khalidibn 'Amr al-Mazani, a man skilled in reading footprints,

ii. 283


346


INDEX .


Jacob, the Patriarch, i. 44, 78, 161, 184, 267, 357, 398; ii. 5, 170, 185, 206,
216, 300, 310

Jafneh, a prince of the family of Ghass&n, i. 289, 426

Jahdar ibn Dobay'ah, a poet, i. 530

Jabr, i.e., constraint, or unlimited predestination, i. 467

Jair, the sons of, i. 86. See Judges s. 4

JalinuS, the physician, i. 473. See Galen

Jamrat (or Jamrah) of the Arabs, name applied to three tribes, two of
whom became extinct, i. 428
Japhet, one of the sons of Noah, i. 87, 228, 466

Jar Allah, or “ the neighbour of God,” a name given to Zamakshari, which
see, i. 39

Jathlmet al Abrash, or Jathimeh, King of Hira, i. 42, 73, 244, 277, 494,
495 ; ii. 190, 206

Jauhari, author of a celebrated dictionary called the “ Sihah,” ii. 224,
225, 236

Jayrun, The gate of; Jayrunis said to be the name of an ancient patriarch,
son of the builder of Damascus, i. 169, 173, 369, 370
Jebeleh, or Jebelet ibn al Ayham, the last prince of Ghassan, i. 289, 396,
397 ; ii. 18, 196
Jedid, a Persian metre, i. 57

Jedis, an Arab ancestor and primeval tribe, i. 381, 466
Jehovah, i. 44

Jehuda the Rabbin, son of Al Khariji. He wrote some Assemblies in
Hebrew, i. 97

Jel&l ad Din 'Amid ad Dowlat ibn Sadakah, the Wazir, i. 26
Jelal ad Din Mohammed, author of the “ Talkhis al Miftah,” a work on
rhetoric, i. 99

Jelileh and M&wiyeh, wives of Kolayb W&’il, and daughters of Morrat ibn
Thohl ibn Shayban ibn Tha'labeh, i. 527
Jeluleh, Battle of, 285

Jenub, the sister of 'Amr thu ’1 kelb, a poetess, i. 367
Jeremiah, i. 60, 87, 354, 377, 393, 434 ; ii. 240
Jeremiah, The Lamentations of, i. 88, 89

Jerir, the great poet of early Islam, i. 81, 349, 350, 45§, 523 ; ii. 104, 225,
242, 248
Jerome, i. 47

Jerusalem, i. 3, 325, 370, 489 ; ii. 253
Jesus, son of Mary, i. 267, 413, 469, 531; ii. 197, 304
Jessas, son of Morrat ibn Thohl, and brother to Jelileh and M&wiyeh
wives of Kolayb W& J il, who was killed by him, i. 527-529
Jew, i. 90, 334, 397, 452; ii. 50


INDEX.


347


Jewish, i. 46 ; ii. 300

Jews, i. 31, 46, 69, 88, 283, 393, 403, 409, 415, 416, 421, 434
Jez’ ibn Kolayb, a poet, i. 436
JiMd, or war against infidels, i. 454

Jinn, supposed by some to be men of a peculiar race, by others genii, or
evil spirits or demons. They are frequently mentioned in the Koran
and “ Arabian Nights,’ 5 i. 4, 256, 285, 307-309, 329, 330, 345, 372,373,
378, 379, 403, 423, 445, 478, 479, 494, 521; ii. 36, 108, 251, 270, 272.
See Ghul and Ifrit

Jinni, or Shaitan, with whom the Arabs compare an energetic man, i. 479
Jith', of the tribes of Ghassan and connected with a proverb, L 289,
295

Job, one of the Prophets, according to Moslem belief, \ 267, 368
Job, Book of, i. 45-47, 60, 86, 311, 336, 369, 393, 399, 445, 464
Joel, the Prophet, i. 60

Johayneh, or Jofayneh, a man and a place, i. 231, 475, 476, 517
Johfah [Al], place of burial of Zarifeh, which see, i. 372
John, an Apostle, i. 531
John the Baptist, i. 267

Jokhtan, an Arab ancestor, i. 426. See Kahtan
Jonah, a Prophet according to Moslem belief, i. 267, 415
Jondo', son of 'Amir, chief of a party in Thamud who believed in the
Prophet S&lih, i. 433

Jones, Sir William, the Orientalist, i. 46, 50, 221 note, 451, 453

Jonathan, son of Saul, i. 44, 453

Jorhom, an Arab ancestor, i. 425, 466

Jorj&ni, the author of the Ta’rif&t, which see, i. 266

Joscelin II., Prince of Edessa, i. 489

Joseph, son of Jacob, i. 78, 267, 357, 358, 398,417,499, 538; ii. 62, 65, 68,
70, 210, 213, 215, 216, 298, 303, 310
Josephus, i. 46, 47
Joshua, i. 26
Judas Iscariot, i. 439
Judges, Book of, i. 86, 348
Julifah, an assembling station of pilgrims, ii. 32
July, i. 146, 147 note
Justinian, the Emperor, i. 491, 492

Ka'b, or ankle, used in phrases connected with honour, fortune, or reputa¬
tion, i. 481

Ka’beh, or Ka’bah, The, at Mecca, i. 155, 222,279, 315, 316, 348, 370,405;
ii. 47, 177, 202, 204,‘253, 255, 266, 280, 305


348


INDEX .


Ka'b ibn Kurt, the Ansari, conqueror of Rayy, i. 455
Ka'b ibn Malik, a poet on the side of Mohammed, i. 430
Ka'b ibn Mameh, a man famed for his generosity, i. 471, 472
Ka'b ibn Zohayr, the Poet, and author of the “ Burdeh,” or Poem of the
Mantle, i. 62 note, 397, 501; ii. 305
K&bil, i. 296. See Cain

Kabus, brother of *Amr, King of Hira, i. 360, 361
Ka'dab, a maker of the points of lances, i. 446.

Kadar, or determining power, i. 467

Kadari doctrine which attributes free will and optional actions to man,
L 467

Kadi, a judge or magistrate, i. 88, 58, 79, 80, etc. See Appendix A
Kaf, a mountain bprier which surrounds the world, i. 469; ii. 101
Kafs of winter. This applies to seven things beginning with the letter K&f
requisite for comfort during winter, i. 253, 255, 257, 524
Kaffir, the clever and strong-minded negro eunuch, i. 471
Kahir [Al], the nineteenth Abbaside Khalif, i. 470
Kahlan, son of Saba or 'Abd Shems, an Arab ancestor, i. 428, 426
Kahtan, an Arab ancestor, i. 426
Kai-Khosru, the heroic Persian monarch, i. 539
Kaisi, i.e ., of the tribe Kais, ii. 87, 231

Ka'k& [Al], son of Showr, famous for his generosity, and alluded to in a
proverb, i. 229, 471, 472 ; ii. 153, 288-, 298
Kalansuweh, The, or high-crowned cap of a dervish or preacher, i.
459

Kalb, an Arab tribe, ii. 196, 270

Kalileh wa Dimneh, a Persian story-book of the same kind as the Sanscrit
“ Puncha Tantra” and “ Hitopadesa,” from which it is said to be derived,
i. 33, 277; ii. 303

K&mil, an Arabic metre, i. 55, 56, 306, 328, 417, 421, 451, 463, 479, 484,
488, 496, 537

Kamus, or Qamfts, a work by Firuzab&di, i. 313, 397, 500, 530; ii. 138,
188, 219

Kanbas, or Qanbas, daughter of Abft 'Anbas, fanciful names, ii. 29, 200
Karan, a place in Nejd, ii. 242
Karib, a Persian metre, i. 57

Karinet&n, two corresponding sentences rhyming with each other, i. 54
Karun, river, i. 525
Kashgar, i. 67,344

KAshir, either a celebrated camel stallion or a year of drought, ii. 104,
246

Kashshaf, or Keshshaf, a work by Zamakhshari, i. 97, 816


INDEX.


349


Kasideh, or regular poem, i. 41, 55, 58, 60, 61, 62 note, 76, 271, 287, 840,
366, 382, the first specimen of it 449, 482, 519, 520, 526, 529, 539;
ii. 247, 289

Kasidehs, i. 14,17, 57, 62; ii. 56, 282, 309

Kfl,sim [Al] ibn 'Isa the 'Ijli, i. £15. See Abu Dulaf al 'Ajili

Kasim, District of, i. 480

Kata, a bird, i. 147, 235, 339* 340, 431, 480; ii. 54, 189, 225

Kat&mi [Al], a poet, ii. 241

Kaylah, an Arab ancestress, i. 117, 118, 295

Kayls, The, or petty princess of Himyar, i. 438

Kayn [Al], an Arab ancestor. Kayn was a branch of the Benu Asad,

i. 148, 340

Kays ibn 'Asim, chief of Temim, a hero praised by Jlohammed as the
noblest of the Arabs of the desert, i. 435, 436
Kays, son of Ghayl&n, an Arab ancestor, i. 428

Kays, son of Zohayr, chief of the Benu 'Abs, and owner of the horse
D&his, i. 316, 317

Kays, Tribe of, i. 349, 476, 497, 512 ; ii. 231, 241, 246
Kfizimah, a town in the dependency of Basra, ii. 135
Kazwini, an Arab author, i. 279, 477

Kazzab [Al], The Liar, a name given to Musaylimeh or Abu Sum&meh,
which seo, ii. 245

Korej, a town, i. 76 noto, 106, 253, 256, 274, 514, 515
Khablsah, a moss of lchabis, or dates, and butter, i. 284
Khadijoh, the first wife of Mohammed, i. 367
Khafif, an Arabic metro, i. 56, 406, 408, 440, 537
Khalanj tree, ii. 21

Khalf al Ahmar, an Arab author, i. 453

Kh&lid, a friend of Munthir ibn Mfi’as Serna, King of Hira, and killed by
him, i. 885

Khftlid al Kasri, one of the officers of the Ivhalif Hisham, the tenth Omay-
yido Khalif, i. 371

Kh&lid ibn Al Wolld, the famous Arab general, i. 305, 318, 405, 495, 518 ;

ii. 245, 262, 263

Khalif, i. 3, 4, 17, etc. See Appendix A
Khalifato, i. 8, 5, 6, etc. Soo Appendix A
Khalifs, i. 3, 17, 34, 384, 437, 456, 515

KhalSl [Al], the foundor of Arabic grammar and prosody, i. 8, 54, 57, 58,
81, 94, 284, 297, 427, 498; ii. 104, 246, 306
Khami§ah, a black square garment with borders, i. 284
Kh&n, or inn, ii. 14, 16, 17, 19, 22, 24

Khans& [Al], the Pug-nosed, nickname of Tum&dir, which see. The most


350


INDEX.


celebrated Arab poetess, especially for her elegies on her brother
Sakhr, i. 30, 52, 80, 387-391; ii. 104, 148, 246, 281
Kharidat al Kasr, a work by 'Imad ad Din, containing many particulars of
Hariri's life, i. 11

Khariji [Al], a Jew, father of the Babbin Jehuda, i. 97
Khatt, a place celebrated for lances, i. 446
Khauwat ibn Jubair: the story .about him, ii, 291

Khawarij, the name given to those fanatical followers of 'Ali who seceded
from him after the battle of Siffin, i. 327
Khaybar, not far from Medina, i. 397, 415, 442. For an account of
. Mohammed’s victory at Khaybar over the Jews compare Tabari and
Mirkhond

Khayf, Mosque of r the, at Mina, i. 842
Khayf [Al], or slope of Mina, i. 182, 398; ii. 34

Khazim, the Nokmi, connected, with the capture of Shanfara, the vagabond
poet, i. 353

Khazraj, an Arab ancestor and tribe who settled at Yathrib, afterwards
called Medina, i. 295, 426
Khida’a, name of a tribe or of a bird, ii. 249, 250
Khil&f tree, ii. 41

Khindaf, the surname of Laila, daughter of Hulwan bin Imran, and wife
of Alyas, son of Modar, and surpassing all Arab women in glory as
ancestress of the Koraysh, i. 10, 80; ii. 104, 246
Khizr [Al], the Prophet, ii. 87, 231
Khof&f ibn Nedbeh, a mulatto, i. 352

Khorafeh, a man said to have been carried away by Jinn, i. 307, 308

Khorasan, i. 72, 258, 270, 499, 526: ii. 196, 235, 306

Khosru Nushirvan, i. 451. See Nushirvan

Khosru Perwez, a Persian King, i. 442, 451, 455 ; ii. 245, 246

Khotbah, or oratorical address, i. 48,337, 392, 538

Khowta'ah, connected with a proverb, i. 386

Khozaza, Day of, the day W&’il ibn Babi f ah, or Kolayb Wa’il, defeated an
army of Yemen,, i. 448, 527

Khoz&'ah, an Arab tribe, i. 64, 426, 434. See BenCi Khoz&'ah
Kiblah, The, i.e ., the direction towards Mecca to be observed by Moslems
when praying, ii. 56, 177, 305
Kinaneh, an Arab tribe, i. 64, 434. See Beni\ Kinaneh
Kings, Book of, in the Bible, i. 393
King’s College, London, i. 101

Kinyeh, or by-name, or nickname, i. 21, 215, 278, 314, 315, 327,408, 447 ;
ii. 255, 302

Kisa!i.[Al], the Kufian Grammarian, i. 72, 498, 499


. INDEX .


.351


Kisra, Arabic form of Chosroes, ii. 13, 64, 218. See Chosroes
“ Kitab al Aghani,” a very celebrated work, containing much information
about the early Arabs,-i. 885, 386, 436, 437, 491, 519, 530
“ Kit&b al Joman,” a book quoted and extracted from by De Sacy in the
“ M&noires de l’Acad&nie Eoyale,” i. 372
“ Kitab,” The, a celebrated work of Sibawayh, the Grammarian,- i. 498,
499. See Sibawayh
Kitmir, the dog of the Cave, i. 415
Kiyafeh, the art of divining, i. 332

Kodamah, a scribe of Bagdad, eminent for purity of composition, i. 106,
274

Kodar, the son of S&lif and Kodayrah. He was an opponent of the
prophet Salih, and killed the she-camel of Thamud* i. 208, 431, 433
Koda'ah, an Arab tribe, i. 64, 495. See Benu Koda'ah
Kohl, a dark pigment "or collyrium for the eyelids, i. 145, 147 note, 148,
296, 340, 341, 355; ii. 114, 116, 170, 261
Kokan, Khanate of, i. 344

Kolayb W&'il, a very famous person of Arab antiquity, i. 60, 74, 217 (his
pedigree, 448), 449, 480, 526-529
Komayt [Al] ibn Ma'ruf, a poet, i. 321
Komayt [Al] ibn Tha'labeh, a poet, i. 321

Komayt [Al] ibn Zayd, the last of three poets of the same name, i. 132,
320, 321, 340 ; ii. 242

Koran, Chapters of the. These and the references to each chapter from

i. to cxiv. will be found in Appendix A

Koran, Eeferences to the. As these are very numerous, they will be found
in Appendix A

Koranic, ii. 193, 196, 200, 213, 229, 242, 276, 277, 297
Koraysh, an Arab ancestor, i. 318; ii. 225

Koraysh, an Arab tribe, i. 8, 16, 30, etc.; ii. 246, 280, 293. See Benu
Koraysh and Appendix A »

Korayshi, i.e of the tribe of Koraysh, i. 518
Kosa f , a very mean man, i. 300
Kosa', Tribe of, in Yemen, i. 351

Kosa'i [Al], a poet, and subject of a proverb, i. 157, 349-351

Kosayr bin Sa'd, a man who cut off his nose for a set purpose, i. 73, 277 ;

ii. 5, 190, 206

Kosegarten, J. G. L., German Orientalist and historian: his edition of the
“ Kitab al Aghani,” i. 436, 437; of the “ Diwan of the Huthaliyun,”
i. 539

Koss, Christian Bishop of Najran, an eloquent preacher of the time of
Mohammed, i. 81, 263, 269, 309, 537, 538; ii. 104,113, 248, 256


352


INDEX.


Kossaiy, an ancestor of Mohammed the Apostle, ii. 298

Kotaybet ibn Muslim, a celebrated Arab General, i. 344, 474, 520

Kothayyir Sahib 'Azza, or the Lover of !Azza, a poet, i. 883

KrehTs edition of the Traditions of Bokhari, i. 268

Kufa, i. x, 3, 7, 66, 71, 126, 127, 266, 292, 308, 326, 406, 411, 497, 505;

ii. 242, 248, 292, 306
Kufian, i. 498,499„ 513
Kufians, i. 505, 506, 512, 513

Kurab, or Qurab, name of a celebrated horse, ii. 145, 282
Kurdistan, i. 489

Kurds, The, i. 287, 426, 515; ii. 169
Kush, a black race, i. 467

Laila, a woman, ii. 238, 290

Lakab, or Laqab, sobriquet of a person or place in praise or blame, i. 315,
522 ; ii. 199, 297

L&m, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, and prefixed to certain chapters of
the Koran, i. 96; ii. 35

Lamech, a descendant of Cain and father of Noah, i. 43, 44, 87
Lamiyet al 'Arab, a celebrated Kasideh by the poet Shanfara, i. 340, 353,
445; ii. 224

Lane, E. W., author of an Arabic English Lexicon, of “ Manners and
Customs of the Modern Egyptians,” and of other works, i. 65 note,
269, etc. See Appendix A
Laqit, a poet, ii. 293

Latin, i. ix, 84, 101, 357, 415, 501, 514; ii. 232, 251, 252
Latins, i. 443
Lebanon, The, L 98

Lebld, the pre-Islamite poet, and author of one of the Mo'allak&t, i. 56,
306, 316, 446, 501, 502
Legend, i. 86, 279, etc. See Appendix A
Legendary, i. 6, 41

Legends, i. ix, 42, 48, 300, 461, 477, 490, 517, 539; ii. ix
Legist, ii. 38, 39, 56, 205
Leipzic, i. 266

Lelewel, Joachim, a writer about mediaeval Geography, i. 467
Letters interchangeable, ii. 165, 297

Letters, pointed and unpointed, i. 133, 136, 258, 274; ii. 8, 146, 150,197,
285

Leviticus, Book of, i. 354, 373, 516

Lexicographers, i. 90, 456, 533; ii. 44, 187, 239, 248, 264, 273
Lexicography, i, 15, 63


INDEX .


353


Lexicon, i. 43, 65 note. See Appendix A
Libraries, i. 9
Library, i. 34

Lisam, or face-veil, ii. 62, 64, 69
Literae Bellerophontese, i. 358

Lokman al Hakim, son of Ba'ur&, of the children of Azar, said to be a
relation of Job, i. 422

Lokman, son of 'Ad, called Lokman of the Vultures, celebrated for his
longevity, i. 422, 423, 442, 476, 478, 516, 517; ii. 262
Lokm&n the Wise, said to have been a slave and Abyssinian negro, the
contemporary of David, and mentioned in the Koran, but rather a
mythical sage, i. 33, 231, 277, 476, 477; ii. 131, 175, 305
London, i. 101, 322 ; ii. 306 *

Lot, i. 267, 481; ii. 53

Lotus trees, ii. 262

Lubad, name of,a vulture, i. 423

Luzum, or peculiar verses explained, i. 461

Lycophron, a Greek poet, i. 91, 92, 540

Ma'add, the son of 'Adnan, an Arab ancestor, i. 9, 448, 527
Ma'arrah, or Ma'arrat an No'man, a town in the north of Syria, i. 145,
146, 336

Ma'bad ibn Wabb, or ibn Katan, the greatest musician and singer of the
early Khalifate, i. 209, 436-438
Ma'bad ibn Nadlah, author of a proverb, i. 375
Macbeth, i. 382

Madir the Befouler, nickname of Mokharik, a man of the tribe of Benti
Hilal ibn 'Amir, noted for his meanness of character and his
stinginess, and so connected with a proverb, i. 80, 300, 375, 376;
ii. 104, 246

Maghdad, i. 391. See Bagdad

Maghrib [Western Africa], i. 28; ii. 138, 306

Magian, i. 33

Mahdi [Al], the third Abbaside Khalif, i. 455, 493, 523
Mahrah, a place, i. 215; camels of, i. 445, 446
Mahrah, a tribe in Yemen, ii. 277

Mahrat ibn Hayd&n, chief of a tribe in Yemen, i. 445 ; ii. 238
Mahri camels, ii. 94, 238
MahrSyah, feminine of the above, ii. 238, 277
Maiden, Description of a, i. 209 ; ii. 71, 73, 115,120
Maiyah, or Mayyah, daughter of Kays, ii. 3, 189

Majma', The, or “ collection,” i,e. t of Arab proverbs, is the title under
VOL. II. 23


854


INDEX.


which Maydani’s great work on the subject appears in Hajji Khalfeh,
ii. 803

Makamah, i. 13, 20, 269, 270 ; ii. 89. See Assembly
Mak&mat, i. v, vii, 19, 270,271,455; ii. vii, 109,242,248. See Assemblies
M&lik and 'Okayl, the sons of Karij, men of Balkayn: their story, i. 494,
495

Malik, brother of Mutemmim, the poet, i. 495

Malik ibn 'Amr al A mill, and his brother Sim£k: the 3tory about them,

i. 362

M&lik ibn Jana, one of the Arab sages to whom a proverb is attributed, i. 406
Malik ibn Jobayr, an Arab General to whom a proverb is attributed, i. 406
M&lik ibn Nowayrah, treacherously put to death by Khalid ibn al Welid,
and connected with a proverb, i. 304, 305, 518
M&lik ibn Towk, Governor of Al Jezireh, i. 158, 351
M&lik ibn Zohayr, of the Benu Koda'ah, who had founded the city of
Hira, i. 495

M&lik, of the family of 'Amr Muzaykiy&, i. 426
Malik, son of Arphaxad, an ancestor, i. 369
Malik, the custodian angel of hell, ii. 11
Malik, the Imam, i. 392 ; ii. 235

Malatyah, a town on the western side of the Euphrates, ii. 74, 75, 219;
also called Malatiyah

Ma'mun [Al], the seventh Abbaside ELhalif, i. 18, 34, 76 note, 319, 437,
515; ii. 246

Ma'n ibn Ows, a poet, i. 482
Manna, i. 87 ; ii. 88, 232

Mansham, supposed to be the name of a woman who traded in perfumes,

ii. 150, 287

Mansur [Al], the second Abbaside Khalif, i. 33, 285, 391, 455, 467, 468,
493; ii. 25, 219, 245

Mansur ibn 'Ammar, ii. 254. About him see a note of De Slane in his
translation of Ibn Khallikan, vol. ii., p. 545
Mantik at Tayr, a mystical Persian work by Farid ad Din 'Att&r, i. 277
Mareb, or Marib, Dyke of, i. 41,48, 279,288, 372, 422-425
Markh tree, ii. 233
Marut, i. 434. See H&rut

Marw, or Merv, a town in Khorasan, i. 455 ; ii. 89, 90, 235
Marwazi, the derivative adjective formed from Marw, i. 455 ; ii. 235
Marwah, Mount, near Mecca, ii. 43, 280

Marwan ibn Mohammed, the fourteenth and last Khalif of the Omayyide
dynasty, ii. 248

Mary, i.e., the Virgin Mary, mother of Jesus, L 348; ii. 197, 271


INDEX.


355


Massoretic, i. 71

Mas'ud, the Seljuk Sultan, i. 25, 88

Mas'udi, the Historian, i. 42 note, 422, 428, 425, 426, 467 ; ii. x
Matrimony, ii. 120, 126, 271
Matron, ii. 120,127

Ma’u ’s-sam&, a beautiful woman, mother of Muhzir, King of Hira, ii. 27,
198

Ma’u ’s-sam&, son of, the sobriquet of 'Amir bin Harisah al-Azdi, see, ii. 199
Mawan, a place, i. 180

M&wiyeh and Jelileh, wives of Kolayb Wa’il, i. 527
Mawiyeh, a Queen of the family or tribe of Ghassan, i. 289
Maydani, celebrated for his collection of Arab proverbs, i. 69, 78, 74, 91,
278, 832, 885, 339, 474, 476, 490, 495, 520, 523 ; ii. 205,211,243, 261,,
273, 278, 286, 800, 301

Maymun ibn Khiz&m, the name of the hero in Nasif al Yazaji’s Assem¬
blies, which see, i. 99 •

Mayyafarildn, a town of Diyar Bekr, i. 220, 452
Mazar [Al], a town near Basra, ii. 163
Mecca, i. x, 39, etc. See Appendix A
Medid, an Arabic metre, i. 56

Medina, i. x, 93, 295, 307, 318, 370, 396, 397, 428, 429, 538; ii. xi, 37, 50,
57, 200,202, 214, 226, 292
Mediterranean, The, i. 91; h. 252

Mehren, a German Orientalist, translator and author, ii. 250
“ Mejma r al Bahrayn,” or “ the confluence of the two seas,” by Nasif al
Yazaji, a work resembling the Assemblies of Hariri, i. 99. See Nasif
and Assemblies of Nasif

Melek Shah, the son and successor of Alp Arslan, and the third Sultan of
the Seljukide dynasty, i. 5, 526
Mendicancy, i. 83 ; ii. 169
Mcraghah, a place in Azorbijan, i. 132, 133
Meraj, a sub-tribe of the sons of Kays, i. 476

Merdfts ibn 'Amir, second husband of Khansft, the Poetess, i. 389, 390
Moshfm, a place to the north of Basra, i. 10, 29, 38

Meslemct ibn 'Abd al Melik, brother of Welid and Sulayman, the sixth
and seventh Omayyide Khalifs, i. 320
Mesopotamia, ii. 219
Messiah, Tlxo, i. 267

Methluj, an Arab tribe in whom the art of divining was hereditary, i. 332,
428

Metonymy is the use of indirect expressions, i. 273
Metro, i. 47,57, etc. See Appendix A


23—2


356


INDEX,


Metres, i. 57, 275, 293, 297, 306,367

Metres, Names of Arabic. See Basit, Hezej, K&mil, Khafif, Medid,
Mujteth, Munsarih, Mutekarib, Rejez, Reml, Sari', Tawil, Wafir
Metres, Names of Persian. See Karib, Jedid, Mushakil
Metrical verse, i. 42
Midian, The inhabitants of, i. 431

Mim, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, and prefixed to certain chapters of
the Koran, L 53, 96

Mina, a place near Mecca, connected with the Pilgrimage, i. 148, 342, 393,
463; iL 40, 136, 279
Mirkhond, the Persian Historian, ii. x
Misr [Egypt and Cairo], ii. 25

Mite, a small unsUamped piece of metal used as a coin, i. 142, 331; ii. 35,
288

Moab, i. 44, 60, 87

• Modar, name of an Arab ancestor, and applied to his descendants and race,
i. 10, 64, 65, 352, 359, 387, 428, 438, 474
Mo'allakah, or prize poem, suspended at Mecca, i. 61

,, of 'Amr ibn Kulthum, i. 56, 351, 361, 501, 539

„ of 'Antarah, L 56, 295, 317, 331, 438

,, of Harith ibn Hillizeh, i. 56, 61, 383

„ of Imr al Kays, i. 56, 61, 376, 386, 394; ii. 267
„ of Lebid, i. 56, 306, 316, 446, 501

,, of Tarafeh, i. 56, 284, 293, 358, 380, 407, 411, 439, 448, 473,
487, 495; ii. 301

,, of Zohayr ibn Abi Sulm&, i. 56, 306, 400, 460
Mo'allakat, or prize poems, suspended at Mecca, i. 39, 56, 61, 64,332, 351,
358, 384

Moghayrat [Al] ibn Sho'beh, sent by Mohammed to destroy the idol-
goddess Allat, i. 405

Mohalhil ibn Rabi f ah, the Poet. His real name was Adi, but called
Mohalhil on account of the beauty of his poetry. The first kasideh,
composed about his brother Kolayb W&’il, is attributed to him, i. 60,
448, 449, 529, 530

Mohallib [Al], Governor of Mowsil, i. 326
Mohammed, the Apostle, i. 14-18, etc. See Appendix A
Mohammedan, i. v, 1, 3, 6; ii. 207, 275
Mohammedans, ii. 201, 231, 306
Mohammed ibn al Hasan al Ilanafi, an author, i. 358
Mohammed ibn al Mustanir, a pupil of Sibawayh, the Grammarian,
ii 286

Mohammed ibn Ka'b, one of the Companions of the Prophet, ii. 239


INDEX. ' 357

Moh&rib ibn Kays, one of the supposed names of Kosa'i [AI], which see,

i. 851

Mokh&rik, the real name of Madir the Befouler, which see, i. 875 ; ii. 246

Moloch, to whom human sacrifices were made, i. 893

Monk, ii. 120, 128, 270

Monkery, i. 370; ii. 128, 270

Monks, i. 370; ii. 253, 271

“ Monumenta Yetustiora Arabise,” by Schultens, i. 377, 384, 496, 522
Moon, The (its twenty-eight stations, or mansions, i. 313,314,443), i. 490;

ii. 20, 76, 90, 128, 221, 234, 252, 253
Moons, ii. 63, 114, 252, 253

Morocco, i. 67, 304, 410

Molt, sister of Tomim, and mother of Barrah, which se£, i. 318; ii. 225
Morrah, Family of, i. 527, 529

Morrat ibn Thohl ibn Shayban ibn Tha'labeh, father of the two wives of
Kolayb Wahl, i. 527
Mosaic, i. 89, 516

Mosos, i. 44, 46, otc. Soe Appondix A

Mosos, Hand of, i. 409

Moslem, i. 13, 17, 23, etc. See Appendix A

Moslems, i. 20, 30, 69, etc. Soe Appendix A

Mo'tadid [A!|, the sixteenth Abbaside Khalif, i. 470

Mo'tamid, the fifteenth Abbaside Khalif, i. 351

Motarrozi, Arabian Jurist, Philologist, and Grammarian, i. 76 note, 306,
312, 349, 351, 356; ii. 197, 284

Mo'tasim [Al], the eighth Abbaside Khalif, i. 76, 344, 437, 515
Mother of tho Koran, i.e ., its first chaper, i. 171, 373 ; ii. 175 ; sometimes
callod tho twice-road chapter,'at i. 120, 301; ii. 296, 297
Mother of various qualities, i. 218, 450, 451
Mo't*i ibn lyds, the Poet, i, 285
Mot/in [Al] ibn al Ilakam : the story about [him, i. 404
Moultan, i. 67

Mowtjil, or Mosul, i. 139, 826

Mu'/lth, son of .Tobol, a Traditionist, i. 267

MuMwiyoh, a warrior of tho tribe of Sulaym, and brother of Sakhr and
Khansd, tho Poetess, i. 387, 388

Mu'&wiyoh, tho first Omayyide Khalif, i. 309, 333, 369, 436,439,458, 482;
ii. 228, 229, 255

MuhUviyoh, tho son of Hisham, the tenth Omayyide Khalif, i. 320
Mubarrid [Al], tho Grammarian, ii. 293
Muezzins, or callors to prayer, ii. 178, 188, 191, 206
Muf&kharah, or poetical contest, i. 30,480


358


INDEX .


Mufti, or jurisconsult, i. 77 ; ii. 37

Muh&jir, a refugee exile from Mecca, who came to Medina with and after
Mohammed, i. 396

Muhajirun, plural of the above, i. 373

Muir, Sir William, his “ Life of Mohamet,” ii. 226

Muhallab [Al], and his sons, all distinguished for valour and virtue, ii. 255
“ Mujmil,” The, a work by Ibn Laris, i. 270
Mujteth, an Arabic metre, ii 282, 387, 395, 398
Mukaddimeh fi’t t&rikh, a work by Ibn Khaldun, i. 497
Mukhadram, i.e „ any poet who was contemporary with the preaching of
Isl&m, i. 67

Muktadir b’illah [Al], the eighteenth Abbaside Khalif, i. 469-471
Mukhtasar al Ma'£ni, a shorter commentary on Rhetoric and Plagiarism,
i. 99, 481-483^486, 500

Mulhatu T-i'rab, a grammatical treatise by Hariri, ii. 263
Munafarah, The, a contention before an umpire on the titles of a man or
tribe to nobility or honour, i. 375, 488, 537; ii. 281
Munakhkhal [Al], the lover of Mutejarradeh, Queen of Hira, i. 519
Munkar, the angel who visits the dead, ii. 192
Munsarih, an Arabic metre, i. 342, 347
Munshi, or official writer, i. 11, 28
' Muntasir [Al], the eleventh Abbaside Khalif, i. 469
Munthir ibn Ma as Sem&, King of Hira, i. 76, 385, 491
Munzir [Al], father of Sajahi, the Prophetess, ii. 245
Munzir bin Imr al Kais, King of Hira, ii. 198, 199
Murrah, an Arab tribe, i. 387, 388. See Benu Murrah
Murir, or Murin, an Arab of the tribe Kalb, who was taken captive by the
Jinn, ii. 270

Mus'ab ibn 'Omayr, a martyr, i. 401
Mus'ab ibn az Zobayr, G-ovemor of Irak, i. 326
Musammat&t, verses explained, i. 366, 367, 375

Musaylimeh, or Musaylamah, ’the Liar and false prophet, slain after
Mohammed’s death, i. 93; ii. 245, 290
Mushakil, a Persian metre, i. 57

Mustarshid billah [Al], the twenty-ninth Abbaside Khalif, i. 25, 26
Mutawwal, a longer commentary on Plagiarism, i. 481. See Mukhtasar
Mu'tazil, the name applied to the leader of the heretodox sect of the
Mu'tazilun, i. 467

Mu'tazilun, or Seceders,- i. 39, 464, 467, 468

Mutejarradeh, wife of No'man ibn al Munthir, King of Hira: the story
about her, i. 519

Mutek&rib, an Arabic metre, i. 328, 375, 418, 447


INDEX.


359


Mutekellimun, or scholastic divines, i. 5

Mutelemmis, the Poet. His real name was Jerir, son of 'Abd al Masih,
and uncle of the poet Tarafeh, i. 16, 162, 347, 358-361
Mutemmim ibn Nowayrah, a Poet to whom a proverb is attributed, i. 305,
495

Mutenebbi [Al], the Poet, i. 14, 57, 61,462,471, 482-484, 525, 526 ; ii. 193,
219, 238, 264

Muteweklril [Al], the tenth Abbaside Khalif, i. 469
Muti' l’illah [Al], the twenty-third Abbaside Khalif, i. 456
Muttaki [Al], the twenty-first Abbaside Khalif, i. 487
Muwatta, one of the oldest collections of the Hadis, compiled by Imam
Malik, ii. 235

Muwelledun, so the poets are called after the first century of Islam, i. 67
Muzaykiy&, a name given to a person because he tore up his clothes every
evening, i. 41, 86, 288, 423. See Amr ibn 'Amir Muzaykiy&, or. The
Tearer

Muzdalifeh, a general meeting-place of the pilgrims near Mecca, and
divided from Mina by the Wadi Mohassir, i. 342; ii. 32
Myths of modern origin, ii. 231

Na'ameh, a mare belonging to Abfi Na'ameh, i. 327
Naba' tree, ii. 234

Nabat, a collective noun for the Nabateans, said to be descendants of Seth,
ii. 170, 300

Nabighah [An], or Nabighat ath Tohby&ni, the Poet, i. 339, 382, 389,
518-520; ii. 5, 190, 289, 308

Nadr [An] ibn Al IIArith, the teller of Persian stories in the time of
Mohammed, and denunciated in the Koran, i. 31, 539
Nadr [An] ibn ShemlL: the story about him, i. 471
NAfi', oldest brother of the poet Imr al Kays, i. 386
NAfi' ibn al Azrak, a leader of the Azfirikah sect, i. 327
NajrAn, a celebrated town of Yemen, i. 269, 404 ; ii. 113,114, 255, 256
NajrAn ibn Zayd, founder of NajrAn, ii. 256
Namir [An] ibn Kfisit, Tribe of, i. 472; ii. 198
Nakir, the angel who visits the dead, ii. 192
Namirl, a man of Namir alluded to in a proverb, i. 472
Nasb, or the use of the nominative and accusative case in certain Arabic
phrases, i. 243, 245, 249, 538. See Raf'

Nasib, or mention of the beloved one in a Kasideh, i. 61
Nasibin, a city in the Diy&r Rabi f ah, i. 214, 215, 445, 447, 452
Nasif al Yazaji of Bey rout, a modern author of some Assemblies, i. 62,
98, etc. See Appendix A and Assemblies of Nasif


360


INDEX.


Nasr ibn 'Asim, a scribe connected with elucidating the pronunciation of
words in the Koran, i. 94

Nawar, wife of the poet Farazdak, i. 157, 349, 350.

Nazr bin Kananah, father of Koraysh, ii. 225
Needle, i. 145, 146 note, 148-150, 166, 337-839, 341; ii. 40, 41, 159
Nefl, an observance left to be performed by the believer spontaneously,
not absolutely commanded, i. 329. See Fard
Nehavend, a place, i. 526
Nehemiah, i. 87

Neighbours, Duty to, i. 121, 122,153, 171

Nejd, a province or district in Arabia, i. 63, 64, 283, 316, 376, 426, 428,
449, 480, 516, 527 ; ii. 119,136,178, 234, 242, 280
Nejm ad Dowleh, the Poet who celebrated in verse Hariri’s merits, i. 38
Neo-Hebrew, or Babbinical literature, i. 88
Nile, The, ii. 108, 252, 253
Nimrod, i. 369, 489
Nisabur, a town, i. 271

Niz&rn al Mulk, the Wazir of Alp Arslan, and his son Melek Shah, i. 5,
6, 526

Nizamiyeh, The, a celebrated school at Bagdad, i. 6
Nizar, an Arab ancestor, i. 9

Noah, i. 44, 87, 267, 279, 369, 407, 431, 432, 466; ii. 96, 196, 260, 304
Noah, the name of the seventy-first Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 404
Noldeke, Theodor, author of the “ Beitrage zur Kenntness der Poesie der
< alten Araber,” and other works, i. 388, 389

No'm&n ibn Beshir, one of the Companions of the Prophet, and Governor
of Hints [Emessa], i. 336

No'm&n, son of Munthir, King of Hira, known as No'm&n Abh K&bus,
i. 385, 435, 501, 518, 519

No'm&n, son of Zowr&, his use of a proverb, i. 455
Nonnosus, a Byzantine author, i. 491
Notes to the Assemblies of Hariri, i. 265-540; ii. 187-310
Nowayri, an Arab author, i. 324

Nowfal, a man connected with a woman and a proverb i. 346

Numbers, Book of, i. 44, 406

Nun, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, i. 53

Nushirvan, or Khosru Nushirvan, the Persian Sasanian monarch of great
fame, i. 344, 451

HDbayd, a horse, i. 52

*Obayd allah ibn Ziyad, a supporter of the Omayyides, i. 458
^Obayd allah, son of Hariri, became chief Kadi of Basra, i. 38


INDEX.


361


'Obayd ibn al Abras, a poet killed by one of the Kings of Hira, and con¬
nected with a proverb, i. 74, 385
Ockley, Simon, Orientalist and Historian, i. 333
Ohud, Battle of, ii. 226, 245

f Okaz, The fair of, i. 16, 387, 389, 475, 492, 538 ; ii. 291
'Okbari, an Arab writer, i. 345, 346

'Omfin, a district of Arabia, i. 426, 441, 445, 446; ii. 93, 100, 238
'Omar ibn 'Abd al 'Aziz, the Orthodox and the Saint, i. 334, 337, 358, 364,
458

’Omar ibn al Khattab, the second Ivhalifah, i. 3, 14, 16, 60, 93, 285, 288,
289, 307, 324, 364, 377, 390, 396, 406, 445, 455, 479; ii. 163, 226, 253,
255, 275, 306

Omayet ibn Abi 'A’ith, a poet, i. 539

Omaymoh, a woman, the subject of some verses of Ishak ibn Khalaf,
i. 435

Omayyeh, House of, or the Omayyides, i. 17, 326, 364, 384, 458; ii. 247,
248

'Onaynah, a person mentioned in a verse addressed to the Prophet by
'Abbils, son of Merdas and Khansa, the Poetess, about some booty,
i. 52

Orfa, the ancient Edessa and Kolia, a very old and important town, so
called by the Turks, i. 489

'Orkub, a man proverbial among the Arabs for breaking his promises,

i. 184, 397

Oriental, f. v, vii, 453 ; ii. 209, 217, 309
Orientals, i. 1, 132, 145, 473; ii. 279
Orientalist, i. 46, 98,453
Oriontalists, i. 2

Oriental Translation Fund, Old and New Series, ii. vii, viii, x
Osmanlis, The modern, i. vi

'Othmiin bin 'Offiln, the third Khalifah, i. 93, 94, 280, 288, 326, 327, 364,
481, 498

'Othrah, a tribo, i. 307

Owarah, Second day of, on which a great crime was committed by 'Ainr
ibn Hind, i. 861

Owe, an Arab ancestor and tribo, who, with his brother Khazraj, fixed
themsolvos at Yathrib, afterwards called Medina, i. 295, 397, 426
'Ozza [Al], a goddess, one of tho Arab idols, i. 404, 405

Palmor, E. H.: his translation of the Koran, ii. xi; his Arabic Grammar,

ii. 280

Palgrave, the traveller and author, i. 64, 321, 441, 504


362


INDEX.


Pandarus, of Trojan war renown, distinguished as an archer, i. 351
Paradise, 138, etc. See Appendix A
Paris, i. 459

Paris, of Trojan war renown, i. 91
Paronomasia, or a play upon words, i. 83-85, 87, 229, 234
Peace, City of, i.e., Bagdad, i. 207, 243, 391
Pearl, i. 151, 153, 208, 211; ii. 63,101, 112, 143, 267
“ Pearl, The, of the Diver,” a grammatical work by Hariri, i. 12, 72, 73,
539

Pearls, i. 151, 154, 197, 204, 209, 216 ; ii. 246
Pehlvi, i. 33

Peiper, C. B. S., a translator, in 1832, into Latin of the greater part of
Hariri’s Assemblies, i. 101; ii. 252
Pencil, i. 145, 147 note, 148-150, 340, 341; ii. 114, 116, 170
Pentateuch, The, i. 86, 312

Perceval, Caussin de, author of “Essai sur l’Histoire des Arabes,” and
other works, i. 279, etc. See Appendix A
Persia, i. 223, 332, 326, 358, 361; ii. 217
Persia, Western, i. 287; ii. 169
Persian, i. vi, 5, 33, etc. See Appendix A
Persian Grulf, i. 4, 441; ii. 93, 238, 241
Persians, i. vi, 31, etc. See Appendix A
Pharaoh, i. 211, 305, 314, 394, 409, 431, 438, 466, 499
Philologers, or Philologists, i. 7, 90; ii. 232
Philological, i. 68 ; ii. 1, 217
Phrases, i. 68-71, 74, 76, 243 ; ii. 89
Pilgrim, ii. 10, 31-33, 46, 47, 85,161, 202, 278, 280

Pilgrimage, one of the five things on which Isl&m is founded, i. 36, 39, 77,
130, 181, 316, 348, 392, 460, 492; ii. 31, 33-35, 37, 46, 142, 202, 204,
206, 245, 250, 279 -

Pilgrims, i. 77; ii. 31-33, 35, 125, 177, 184, 266, 306, 308, 310
Plagiarism, i. 30, 481-483
Pliny, i. 425

Pocock, Edward, a learned English Orientalist of the seventeenth century,
i. 325, 392, 404, 405, 436, 468
Poem, i. 41, 55, etc. See Appendix A
Poems, i. 14,17, etc. See Appendix A
Poet, i. 8,16, 28, etc. See Appendix A
Poetry, i. 7, 8, 13, etc. See Appendix A
Poets, i. 8,13, etc. See Appendix A

Prayer, one of the five things on which Isl&m is founded, i. 392, 410, 411,


INDEX .


363


462, 468; ii. 37, 42-44, 113,165, 180,188, 191, 199, 212, 236, 244, 251,
271, 275, 276, 280, 295,297, 298, 305
Prayers, ii. 179-182, 191, 298, 299
Preface in nearly all Arabic works, i. 50
Preface of Chenery, i. v-x

Preface of Hariri, i. 25,29, 32, 37,50,75,77,103-107; and the notes thereon,
265-278,329, 343, 348, 383, 475, 524; ii. 256, 274
Preserved Table, The, supposed to be a divine record on which all the
actions of mankind are written down, ii. 257
Preston, Beverend Theodore, Professor of Arabic at Cambridge, translated
into English, in 1850, twenty of Hariri’s Assemblies, i. 101; ii. 89,
109, 226, 227, 251, 252
Priam, the famous King of Troy, i. 91
Procopius, the Byzantine author, i. 491

Prophet, The, i.e ., Mohammed, i. 4, 5,16, etc. See Appendix A
Prophets, The, i. 104, 267, 268, 466,469; ii. 96, 231
Prosody, i. 8, 45, 47, 48, 54, 55, 57, 100, 275 ; ii. 248
Proverb, i. 27, 29, etc. See Appendix A
Proverbial, i. 281, 285, etc. See Appendix A
Proverbs, i. 69, 70, etc. See Appendix A

Proverbs, Arab. These are quoted from Freytag’s Latin Edition in three
volumes, as follows:

Volume I. 281, 289, etc. See Appendix A
Volume II. 273, 277, etc. See Appendix A
Volume III. See Appendix A
Proverbs, Book of, i. 88
Psalms, Book of, i. 44-46, 59, 85, 86, 88, 89

Purslane, or the plant Bijlali, a kind of bitter herb, ii. 103, 104, 245
Pyrenees, The, i. 67

Pythias, or Phintias, the Pythagorean, celebrated for his friendship with
Damon, i. 385

Quaraqir, a watering station, ii. 262, 263

Qutrub, a little animal always on the move, ii. 172, 286, 302

Bftbi'ah, daughter of Ishmael of the tribe Kays, a woman of Basra, cele¬
brated for her piety, i. 80; ii. 104, 246
llabi'ab, or Babi'at al Faras, an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 9,10, 29, 64,
448, 497, 527, 530. See Benu Babi'ah
Babi'ah, or Babi'at ibn Nasr, a Jewish King of Yemen, to whom two
Diviners predicted the advent of Mohammed, i. 372, 373
Babi' [Ar], a suburb of Bagdad, i. 244, 493


364


INDEX.


Babi' [Ar], the chamberlain to A1 Mansur, the second Abbaside Khalif,
i. 498. See Abu ’1 FadL ar Babi' ibn Yunus
Babi' ibn Ziyad, a boon companion of No'man ibn al Munthir, King of
Hira, i. 501, 502
Babbins, The, i. 85

B&di [Ar], the twentieth Abbaside Khalif, i. 470

Baf', or the use of the nominative and accusative case in certain Arabic
phrases, i. 248, 245, 249, 251. See Nasb
B&fi' at-Ta’i, the Guide, ii. 262, 268

Rahbah, a town on the Euphrates, the city of Ma'lik, the son of Towk,
* i. 158, 351

Rakash, sister of Jathimet al Abrash, King of Hira, i. 42; the story about
her, i. 494

Rakim [Ar], The men of, alluded to in the Koran, i. 414, 415
Rakkah, a town, i. 351

Ramadan, The, or fasting month. Fasting is one of the five things on
which Islam is founded, i. 139, 392; ii. 44, 206, 307
Barnlah, a town, ii. 31,141,142
Bass, Men of, i. 431

Rawahat ibn 'Abd al 'Aziz, of the tribe of Sulayrn, and first husband of
Khansa, the Poetess, i. 389

Rawi, or reciter, i. 15-21, 62, 99, 178, 383, 384; ii. 24, 233

Bayy al Mahdiyeh, a place in Persia, i. 223, 224, 228, 364, 455, 459

Razi [Ar], the Commentator, i. 24

Razi, the derivative adjective of Bayy, i. 455

Bazwa, name of a mountain near Medina, ii. 87, 232

Rebekah, i. 44

Beinaud, who, with Derenbourg, wrote the preface to the second edition
of De Sacy’s Hariri, i. 3 note; his introduction to “G^ographie
d’Abulfeda,” ii. 310
Rejeb, sacred month of, i. 387, 388
Bejez, an Arabic metre, i. 12, 18, etc. See Appendix A
Beml, an Arabic metre, i. 349, 366

Benan, Ernest, author of the “Histoire des langues Semitiques” and
many other works, i. 311
Bhetoric, i. 63, 83, 99, 485, 486 ; ii. 72, 89, 217
Bhyme, or Bhythm, i. 48-54, etc. See Appendix A
Bhymed prose, i. 42, 48, 49, 51, 54, 55, 76, 163, 281, 309, 538; ii. 31, 58,
108

Bibab, an Arab tribe, i. 428

Rib&b, son of Saghr, and Diviner at Tharnud, i. 433

Rib&h ibn Murrah, the solitary survivor of the tribe of Tasm, i. 381


INDEX .


365


Riddle, i. 504, 514; ii. 14, 79, 114, 115, 119, 259

Riddles, i. 81, 106, 200, 248, 247, 248, 250, 274; ii. 74, 76-81, 118,
115,140

Risfileh, a kind of ornate letter or address, i. 28, 271

Rodayneh, supposed wife of Samhar, a maker of lances, and both sold them,

i. 446

Rodwell, J. M., translator of the Koran, ii. xi, 208, 228, 282, 240, 256, 257,
276, 292, 296, 297, 801, 805, 807

Roha [Ar], name given by the Arab conquerors to Edessa, in Northern
Mesopotamia, a very ancient town, formerly known under various
names, i. 242, 488, 489

Roha ibn al Bclendi ibn Malik, who is said to have given the name of
Roha to the above town, i. 489 7

Roman, i. 1, 74, 289
Romans, i. 5, 286,289; ii. 8
Rome, i. 46, 92; ii. 8

Rnba'i, or quatrain, one of the four kinds of Persian poetry, viz., the
Ghazal or ode, the Kasideh or elegy, and the Mesnevi, i. 57
Rubeh, the Philologist, i. 856

RUckcrt, Frederick, the German Poet and Orientalist, translator of Hariri’s
Assemblies, a very free translation, i. 2,158, 169, 828, 842, 848, 354;

ii. 141, 147, 230

Rum, People of, so the Arabs call the Byzantines, i, 22, 24, 442, 466
Rustem, a Persian hero, i. 31, 539
lluth, Book of, i. 425

Saba, Tho bands of, an allusion to the bursting of the dyke of Marib, i. 204,
288, 422

Saba, Tho country of, or Sheba, i. 291, 422, 424, 442; ii. 245
Saba, the son of Yashjob, tho son of Ya'rob (the first person who spoke
Arabic), the son or descendant of Kahtan, i. 422, 423,426
Sftbilt, a place where lived a cupper, ii. 159, 294
Sabtcans, Tho, i. 426
Sabbftn [As], a commentator, i, 315

Sacy, Sylvostro de, tho second edition of his Hariri, edited by MM.
ltoinaud and Dorenbourg, i. 3 note; ii. 196, 203, 223, 230, 232, 250,
252, 260, 267, 290, 309

Sacy, Sylvostro de, translator of some of Hariri’s Assemblies, with Com¬
mentaries on them, and author of “ M&noires sur l’Histoire des
Arabes avant Mahomet,” “ Chrestomathie Arabe,” and other works,
i. 8 note, 12, 24, etc* See Appendix A
Sftd, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, and how used, ii. 147, 152


366


INDEX.


Sa'dah, a town in Yemen, i. 79; ii. 83, 88, 224

Sa'd&n, a plant, i. 305

Sa'd at Taftazani, a commentator, i. 99

Sa'd ibn Abi Wakkas, an early convert to Islam, and Arab General, l. 285,
472

Sa f d ibn al Hashraji, grandfather of Ilatim Tay, ii. 278

Sa'd, son of Dabbah, connected with a proverb, i. 474

Sa'd, son of Shems, of the tribe of Jarm: the story about him, i. 528

Sa'di, the Persian Poet, i. 5, 316 ; ii. 235

Safa, Mount, near Mecca, ii. 34, 280

Safir, or whistler, a word with several disputed meanings, ii. 104, 246
Safwan ibn al Mo'attal, the person who found 'Ayisheh asleep in the
desert, i. 430.* For the whole story of the slander about her, set*
Mirkhond, Part II., vol. ii., pp. 435-442
Sahban Wahl, the most celebrated preacher and orator of the early dayH
of Islam, i. 197, 200, 309, 310, 322, 417, 527; ii. 272
Sahib al Khabar, the oflicial title of Hariri, i. 11

Sahib ibn 'Abbftd, a prince to whose court lhuli' az Zomiin, or Hamadani,
went, i. 271

Sahl, or Sahil ibn Harun, a poet who wrote an address in praise of glass,
i. 229, 434

Sa'id ibn al-As: when a boy Mahommcd gave him a robe, ii. 140, 277, 278
Sa'id ibn Salm, a very stingy man, ii. 293

Sajah, or Sajalii, the Prophetess, i. 495 ; ii. 103, 245. For her story, see
Mirkhond, Part II., vol. hi., pp. 23-28
Sakftbi, the name of a horse, ii. 66, 214
Sakdlib, or Slaves, i. 466

Sakhr, a warrior, and brother of Khansii, the Poetess, of the tribe of
Sulaym, i. 80, 180, 387-391; ii. 104, 246
Sakhrah, the wife or sister of Ilosayn, who was killed by Al Aklmas : the
story about it, i. 476

Sakhr ibn Nahshal: the story about him, i. 299
Sale, Goorgo, translator of the Koran, ii. xi
Sal&h ad din, or Saladin, the Sultan, i. 11

Sftlili, the Prophet, sent to warn the people of Thamud, i. 267, 208, 415,
482 ; his pedigree, i. 432,433

Salman, the Persian, an early convert to Islam and intimate associate of
Mohammed’s, ii. 84, 225, 226
Salsabil, a fountain in Paradise, ii. 30
Salutations, or salam, i. 195, 413
Samarcand, i. 844; tho Sughd of, i. 868; H. 8, 194, 310
Samaritans, i. 88


INDEX .


367


Samhar, a maker of lances, or perhaps a place in Abyssinia where they
are made, i. 215, 446

Samsftmah, the name of a sword, ii. 157, 292
Samson, i. 86
Samuel, Book of, i. 878

Samuel ibn 'Adiyd, a Jew, and an exemplar of good faith among the
Arabs, i. 243, 490-492

San'&, a town in Yemen, i. 108, 278, 280, 466; ii. 211, 224, 256
Sanscrit, i. 33

Sar&b, a she-camel: the story about her, i. 528, 530
Sar&b, or resemblance of water in the desert, ii. 191
Sarah, wife of Abraham, i. 87

Sarhah tree, ii. 3 #

Sari', an Arabic metre, i. 292, 384, 448, 469

Sa'sa'ah, or Sa'sa'at ibn Najiyeh, grandfather of the Poet Earazdak, i. 349,
436

S&s&n al Akbar, son of Bahman, son of Isfendiyar, son of Kushtasif, a
Prince of Western Persia, and the reputed chief of all the beggars,
i. 83 ; the story about him, i. 287; ii. 27, 169, 171,172
Sasftn, or Sassanids, one of the royal dynasties of Persia, i. 288
Sfisftn, The race and people of, also applied generally to the race of beggars,
i. 118, 215; ii. 169,170,175
Sasfmi, a beggar, i. 288

Sasani phrases, i.e., the cant of beggars, mountebanks, prestigiators, and
the like, i. 76

Satan, i. 325, 355, 398, 450; ii. 242, 271-273, 282, 284, 296, 309
Satans, ii. 297

Satih, the Diviner, is said to have foretold the advent of Mohammed,
i. 210, 371, 372, 423, 438
Saul, King of Israel, i. 453

Saweh, a town between Rayy and Hamadan, i. 163, 164, 364, 499
Sayf ad Dowleh, the Arab Prince of Hilleh, i. 462
Sayl al 'Arim, or the flood of the mounds or dams, i. 41, 424
Schildburg, a town in Germany, ii. 146
Schmolder’s “iftcoles philosophiques chez les Arabes,” i. 468
Schultens, Albert, a German Pastor, Orientalist, and Critic, i. viii, 101,294,
314, 377, 384,496, 522

Scirtus, an ancient river on which Edessa was situated, now called Daysan,
i. 489

Scotch, ii. 147
Scripture, i. 490
Scriptures, i. 82


368


INDEX.


Seasons of rain, wind, or heat: their names, etc,, i. 443, 444
Sejelmaseh, a place to the south of Mount Atlas, i. 344
Sejestan, i. 309
Seleucidae, The, i. 489

Seljuk, the name of a powerful Tartar chief, whose descendants founded
the three dynasties called after him that reigned in Persia, Kirman,
and Anatolia, i. 3, 455

Sem&weh, the desert which lies between Syria and the Euphrates, called
the Syrian Desert, i. 168, 170, 373
Semites, The, i. 434

Semitic, i. 43, 45, etc. See Appendix A

Seruj, a city in the neighbourhood of Edessa, i. 13, 21, etc. See Ap¬
pendix A r

Seruji, The, i.e. f Abu Zayd, i. 24,150,196, 215, 222, 344; ii. 14,15,17, 81,
89, 90, 96, 102, 112, 141,144, 163, 176, 195
Seth, son of Adam, i. 387 ; ii. 170, 300
Sha'b, a tribe in Yemen, ii. 247

Sha'bi [Ash], or Amir ibn Abdallah, of the tribe Sha f b in Yemen, a great
scholar and lawyer, knowing the Koran by heart, i. 81; ii. 104, 247
Shafi'i [Ash], the Im£m, i. 78, 269, 329, 358, 391; ii. 57, 192, 212, 250
Sh&fi'i, one of the four Mohammedan rituals, i. 34, 358
Shah Nameh, the Persian epic, by Firdousi, the Persian Poet, i. 451
Shahrestani [Ash], a writer on religions, i. 327, 468
Slaaibah, an Arab ancestor, described, ii. 204
Shakespear, ii. 102

Shamar, one of the Tobba' Kings of Yemen, ii. 310
Sham [Ash], a region of the earth settled by Shem, son of Noah, i. 466 ;
ii. 31

Shanfara [Ash], the Poet, and celebrated for his speed of foot, i. 340, 353,
357

Shann: the story about him, ii. 104, 248, 249

Sha'ub, a name of death, meaning the “ Severer ” or ct Separator,” ii. 3,189
Shaw&hid, or proofs of lexicography and grammar, i. 67, 275
Shaykh, The, i. 29, 116, 130, 167, 176, 187, 188, 216, 222, 242, 315, 405;
h. 4, 12, 29, 61, 63, 106,108, 111, 112,120, 124, 130, 132,141, 143-146,
148-151, 154, 156-162, 176, 250, 272
Shaykh Abu H&mid al Isfarayni, a jurisconsult, i. 358
Sheba, grandson of Abraham, i. 427. See Genesis xxv. 3
Sheba, or Saba, Queen of, i. 379, 415 ; ii. 245. See Bilkis
Sheba, son of Raamah, grandson of Cush, i. 426, 427. See Genesis x. 7
Sheba, son of Joktan, whom the Arabs identify with Kaht&n, i. 426. See
Genesis x. 28


INDEX .


369


Shebam, Vines of, a place celebrated for its wines, i. 374
Sheddad, a poet and writer of an address in praise of gold, i. 229, 434
Sheddad, father of 'Antarah, the warrior poet, i. 317
Sheddad, son of Ad, and builder of Irena with the columns, i. 368, 441,
468

Shem, one of the sons of Noah, i. 228, 279, 369, 432, 466, 479
Sheref ad Din Abrt Nasr Anushirwfm al Isfahani, the Wazir, and the
traditional patron of Hariri, i. 24, 26
Sheref ad Din, an author, i. 530

Sherishi, the Andalusian Commentator, whose full name is Abu 'Abbas
Alnned ibn 'Abd al Mu’min al Kay si ash Sherishi, so called from
having been born at Xeres, i. 38, 69, 146, etc. See Appendix A
Shihr [Ash], a place in Yemen, i. 441, 445, 517

Shikk, the Diviner, one of the most famous personages of ancient Arabia,
i. 371, 372, 423
Shiraz, i. 358, 498; ii. 71, 217

Sliirin, a famous beauty, wife of the Khosru Perwez, and often alluded to
by the poets and romancists, i. 80, 451 ; ii. 104, 245
Sho'ayb or Jethro, a Prophet according to Moslem belief, i. 267, 268
Shylock, ii. 102

Sibawayh or Sibawayhi, a Persian, but great Arab scholar and gram¬
marian, author of the Ivitab, i. 65, 72, 245, 249, 301, 497-499, 503,
509; ii. 245, 286

Sidney, Sir Philip, at Zutplien, i. 471
Siffin, Battle of, i. 7, 327, 458; ii. 242
Sikbaj, a kind of food, i. 450, 451
Simon, an Apostle, i. 531

Sin, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, and how used, ii. 146, 151, 152
Sinan, the subject of a proverb, i. 330
Sind, i. 467

Sin j fir, a city of the Diyar Rabi'ah, i. 206, 207

Sinn and Sinnabar, the name of the first two days of a week in the early
spring, which brings back the winter’s cold before the warm weather
sets in, i. 254, 518

Sirah, the same as Mina in the Ncjd, i. 426

Sirat, the narrow path or bridge between heaven and hell according to
Moslem belief, i. 166, 367; ii. 11, 192
Sirat ar Itcsul, the title of Ibn Hishftm’s Biography of Mohammed, and
means literally the conduct or way of living of the Prophet, i. 371,
378, 430, 440, 539
Sirius, the star, i. 128, 318, 443

VOL. II. 24


370


INDEX.


Slane, McGuckin de, the translator of Ibn Khallikan, i. 94 note, 271, 293,
491, 492

Sleepers, The seven, i.* 31, 399, 414, 450

Sofyan ibn al Abrad al Kelbi, an Arab General, i. 327

Soha, a star, i. 242, 489, 490; ii. 56, 76, 221

Sohayl ibn 'Abbad the Rawi, or reciter in Nasif’s Assemblies, i. 99

Sohayl, the star Canopus, i. 242, 489 ; ii. 221

Sokman, a Turkish chief, i. 21

Solomon, i. 267, 291, 348, 373, 379, 415 ; ii. 77, 222

South, The, ii. 265

Spain, i. 5, 34, 352, 370, 410

Spanish, i. 357

Spider, The, name, of the 29th Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 407
Spotted, The, a composition or address giving the name to IIami’s
26th Assembly, i. 258, 261, 264, 524, 532
Star, i. 313; ii. 137, 141, 279

Stars and constellations, i. 313, 314, 443-445 ; ii. 5, 19, 21, 30, 32, 44, 75,
80, 126, 133, 138, 159, 196, 232, 296, 297, 304
Steiner’s ‘ Die Mu'taziliten oder die Freidenker in Islam,’ i. 468
Steingass, Dr. F., the translator of the last 24 Assemblies of IIariri, ii.
vii-x

St. John, Church of, in Damascus, i. 369
Style of the Assemblies, i. 83, 105, 106 ; ii. 90

SuTid, a name used by the Arabs to signify a cruel and capricious mistress,
i. 62 note, 245, 496

Sua'yd, son of Dabbah, connected with a proverb, and the story about him,
i. 474, 475

Su f da, a woman, i. 106
Sudan, The, i. 344

Sufi, i.e ., an ascetic and mystic, ii. 309
Sufi metonymies, i. 450

Suhar, a town in the district of 'Oman, ii. 95, 238
Suidas, the supposed compiler of a Greek Lexicon, i. 91
Sulayk, a vagrant robber and very fast runner, i. 159; the story about him,
i. 352, 353

Sulaym, Tribe of, i. 387-389. See Bonn Sulaym
Sulayma, wife of Sakhr, the warrior, i. 388, 389
Sulayinan, the seventh Omayyide Klialif, i. 344, 400
Sulekah, a black slave, mother of Sulayk, i. 352

Sulhln, Battle of, in which, under Rabi'ah, the sons of Ma’add defeated the
people of Yemen, i. 488


INDEX ..


371


Summary by Chenery of the last 24 Assemblies of Hariri, i. 75-83 ;
ii. 113, 146

Sunneh, i.e., the ordinances and precepts of Tradition only, i. 411, 412,
490. See Eard

Sunni, or orthodox sect of Mahommedanism, i. 39
Sur [Tyre], ii. 24

Surahbil, an ancient Arabian monarch, and the builder of the Ghomdan,
which see, i. 279

Sura, or chapter of the Koran, i. 31, 52, 53, etc. See Appendix A
Suras, or chapters of the Koran, i. 16, 51-53, 95, 96, 301, 464
Surr-durr, a poet, ii. 201
Sus, the ancient Susa, i. 258, 260, 525

Suwa', an Arab idol of the people of Noah, mentioned m the Koran, ii. 20,
196

Suwa, a watering station, ii. 262, 263
Suyuti, the Egyptian author, i. 62 note
Syria, i. 3, 4, 13, etc. See Appendix A
Syriac, i. vi, 66, 90, 97, 340, 489, 514
Syrian, i. 34, 90, 289, 338
Syrians, i. 88, 90, 283

Ta’abbata Sherran, an Arab poet of the early age, and a great runner,

i. 317, 353, 398, 453, 537
Tab&bi'ah, the descendants of Tobba', i. 279
Tabaqah, ii. 104; the story about her, ii. 248, 249
Tabari, the Arab Historian, i. 316, etc. See Appendix A

Tabi', or one who had conversed with the Companions of Mohammed,

ii. 247

Tabrizi, a Commentator, ii. 212, 241
Tabuk, Expedition to, ii. 57

Taghlib, an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 10, 376, 448. See Benu Taghlib
Ta’if, a place near Mecca, ii. 289

Ta’i' l’illah [At], the twenty-fourth Abbaside Khalif, i. 456, 457
Taim Allah ibn Sa'labah, an Arab tribe, and the story connected with it,
ii. 291, 292

Tajanni, a woman, ii. 149

Tales of pleasure after pain, i. 260, 532

Talhah bin Abdallah, an early convert to Islam, but fought later on with
Zobayr and Ayisheli against 'Ali, i. 327, 472
Talhah, The family of, at Basra, noted for its generosity, i. 309
Talhat at Talhat, Governor of Sejestan, i. 309
Talhat ibn Tahir, a prince of Khorasan, i. 449


94_2


372


INDEX,


alkhis al Miftah, a work on rhetoric by Jelal ad din Mohammed, i. 99
Tamir, the Jumper, ii. 104, 247
Tanis, a town, ii. 108, 109, 112, 252, 253
Tantarani [At], author of a poem, i. 488
Tanfrkhiyeh, The, an old Arab tribe, i. 494

Tarafeh, a pre-Islamite Poet, and author of one of the Mo'allakat, i. 14,16,
56, etc. See Appendix A

“ Ta'rifat,” a work by Jorjani, i. 266, 273, etc. See Appendix A
Tartary, i. 520

Tasm, an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 381, 466
Tassy, Garcin de, the French Orientalist, i. 277, 481, 486
Tawil, an Arabic metre, i. 55, 56, 278, 386, 439, 460, 485, 487
Tay, Tribe of, i. 292, 348, 426. See Benu Tay

Taybeh was the name which the city of Yathrib received from
Mohammed, but afterwards called Medinet an Nabi, i. 257, 522;
ii. 37, 38

Taylasan, The, or cloak of a dervish or preacher, i. 459
Tebriz, a town, i. 80; ii. 101, 102,106, 108, 141
Te Deurn, The, i. 442

Tejnis, i,e. } paronomasia, or alliteration, or homogeneity in sound or in
letters between each two successive words, i. 82, 238, 485, 486, 500,
532; ii. 146

Tekoah, i. 87. See Jeremiah vi. 1

Tekwir [At], or “ The Folded-up,” the name of the eighty-first Sura, or
chapter, of the Koran, i. 53

Tem&’im, i,e., amulets or beads or necklaces, i. 113, 285
Ternium an Arab ancestor and tribe, i. 10, 94, 318; ii. 83, 214, 215, 231.
See Benu Temim

Temimi, i.e ., of the tribe of Temim, ii. 83, 87, 225, 231

Tesnim, a fountain in Paradise, i. 208, 430

Testament, Old, i. 43, 89, 279

Teutonic, i. 85

Thagham tree, ii. 27

Thakif, a tribe, i. 64, 405

Tha'labeh, son of Amr ibn Amir Muzaykiya: the story of his migration,
i. 288, 289, 425, 426
Tha'labi [Ath], the Author, i. 270-272
Thames, The, ii 306

Thamud, People of, destroyed by God for their wickedness, i. 31, 208, 373,
431-433, 441. Compare the Koran, Tabari, and Mirkhond
Thamud, son of 'Abar, son of Aram, son of Shem, son of Noah, an Arab
ancestor and tribe, i. 432, 466


INDEX. 373

Tharid, an Arab dish made of meat, milk, and bread, highly esteemed,
i. 382, 383, 429, 430

That al Athl, The Day of, i.e., the day on which a celebrated fight between
certain Arab tribes occurred, i. 388

That al Kosur, the old name of the town Ma'arrat an No'man, in the
north of Syria, i. 336

Thawwab, son of 'Amr, the opponent of Salih, the Prophet at Thamud,
i. 433

Theocritus, the celebrated Greek Poet, i. 91
Theology, i. 63

Thobyan, an Arab tribe, i. 316, 317, 382

“ Thousand and One Nights,” i. 329, 440. See “ Arabian Nights ”

Thu’l Karnayn, a supposed prophet, and mentioned m the Koran, xviii.,
i. 85, 93, but who he was is doubtful. There was another of the same
name, the one called “The Greater,” the other “The Lesser,” two-
horned, i. 31

Thu’l Kefi, the prophet mentioned in the Koran, i. xxi, 85, but who he
really was is doubtful, i. 267, 268

Thunder, the name of the thirteenth Sura, or chapter, of the Koran, i. 409
Tib, a town, ii. 15, 24

Tiiiis, the well-known town in the Caucasus, ii. 50, 58, 208
Tigris, The, i. 9, 380, 391, 399, 445; ii. 104, 194, 245
Tihameh, a district of Arabia, i. 372, 428, 527 ; ii. 70, 125, 178
Timur, or Tamerlane, History of, by Ibn Arabshah, i. 50, 98, 489
Tobbab name of the Himyaritic Kings of Yemen, i. 279, 372, 381; ii. 184,
310

Tobbab People of, i. 431

Tofayl ibn Dallfil, the Darimi, supposed to be a celebrated dinner-hunter,
and father of all intrusive guests, also connected with a proverb,
“ More intrusive than Tofayl,” i. 195, 215, 407, 411, 495 ; ii. 221
Tofayli, a jargon, or kind of language, applied to various kinds of food,
also an intruder uninvited while people are eating or drinking, i. 214,
407, 408, 411, 450

Toghril Beg, the grandson of Seljuk, i. 3
Tom Thumb, i. 59
Tophct, i. 393

Tow’am the Yeshkari, a poet, i. 484, 485 J
Toways, a musician and singer, i. 437

Toothpick, i. 140; its qualities described, i. 144, 153 ; ii. 182, 244
Tradition, i. 20, 24-27, etc. See Appendix A
Traditional, i. 100, 267, 371, 421, 463; ii. 271, 298
Traditionary, i. 41, 99


374


INDEX .


Traditions, i. 6, 14, 29, etc. See Appendix A
Translation, i. 45, 49, 70, etc. See Appendix A
Translations, i. 45, 90, 340

Translations of Hariri into Latin, English, German, French, etc., i. 101,
102

Translator, i. 1, 101, 275; ii. 89, 132, 147, 258

Translators, i. 90 ; ii. x

Transliteration, i. x; ii. ix, x

Transoxiana, or Mawarannahr, i. 344; ii. 306

Trojan, i. 92

Troy, i. 91

Tumadir, daughter of 'Amr, son of Ilarith, son of Shcrid . . . son of
Sulaym, and s*ster of the warriors Sakhr and Mu'uwiyeli, i. 387, 390;
ii. 147, 246. See Khansa [Al], which was her bye-name, or nickname
Tunis, i. 410
Tur, Mount, ii. 19
Turkish, i. vi, 4, 84 ; ii. 252
Turkoman, i. 4
Turkomans, i. 21
Turks, The, i. 3, 4, 466, 4S9
Tus, a town in Ivhorasan, i. 258, 260, 261, 526
Tyre [Sur], a city, ii. 24

Tzetzes, The Byzantines, two brothers, Isaac and lolm, i. 92 and note,
539

'Ufar tree, ii. 238

Umaiyah bin As Salt, a poet, ii. 215

'Umaran [Al], a term applied to the two immediate successors of Moham¬
med, viz., Abu Bekr and f Omar, ii. 253
'Umay, a famous depredator, ii. 189
Umm Jemil, wife of Abu Lahab, i. 439
Umm Salamah, the sixth wife of Mohammed, ii. 20
Ur of the Chaldees, i. 488

Uwais, or Uways al Iiarani, the most eminent ascetic and devotee of
Kufa, ii. 100, 242

'Uzrah, an Arab tribe, ii. 143, 280. Sec Bonn 'Uzrah
'Uzri, £<?., of the tribe of 'Uzrah, ii. 255

Venetian, i. 341
u Venice, Merchant of,” ii. 102

Verses indited or recited by Abu Zayd, i. 110-112, 115-117, etc. Seo
Appendix A


INDEX .


3


Verses by his pupils, ii. 148-154

„ by his son, i. 148, 184, 239, 240 ; ii. 65, 66, 68, 158

,, by his young wife, ii. 106, 142

,, by the father of Akhzam, ii. 278

,, of Ilarith, son of Hammam, i. 114

,, of the Generous Entertainer, ii. 133

,, of the Kadi, ii. 125

,, of the Kadi Ibn Qitri, ii. 167

„ of the Poet Abu Nuwas, ii. 299

„ „ Abu 'Obadeh, i. 114, 115

,, ,, Abu ’1 Atahiyali, ii. 228, 253, 254

,, ,, Abu ’1 Kasim as Salimi, ii. 238

,, „ Abu ’t Taiyib, ii. 238 m

,, ,, Abii ’sh Shamaqmaq, ii. 293

„ ,, Afwah al Awadi, ii. 230

,, ,, Akhtal, ii. 227

,, ,, Farazdak, i. 318, 350; ii. 225

,, ,, Surr-Durr, ii. 201

„ ,, Ibn Ar Kuini, ii. 297

,, ,, Ibn Kanbar, ii. 267

,, ,, Imr al Kays, i. 374; ii. 267

,, ,, Ishak ibn Khalaf, i. 435 ; ii, 209

,, ,, Jcrir, ii. 225

,, ,, Ka'b ibn Zohayr, ii. 305

„ ,, Katami, ii. 241

„ ,, Komayt [Al] ibn Zayd, ii. 242

„ ,, Laqlt, ii. 293

„ Mutencbbi, ii. 193, 238

„ „ Kabighah, ii. 190, 289, 308

„ „ Tarafeh, i. 284, 359, 360, 380 ; ii. 304

„ ,, Zohayr, ii. 212

„ „ Zohayr bin Jinab al Kalbi, ii. 237

„ „ Zu’l llummah, ii. 284

„ of various Poets, i. 273, 280, 309, etc. See Appendix A

Vcrsicle, i. 47, 48

Versicles, i. 40, 41, 43, 45, 47, 51-53, 297

Versification, i. 52-54, 57, 126, 366; ii. 156, 289

Victory, the name of the forty-eighth Sura, or chapter, of tho Koran, i. S

Wabfir, a region between Yabrin and Yemen, said to be inhabited
Jinn, i. 403, 479

Wahar, son of Trcm, son of Shem, i. 479


376


INDEX.


Wadi Mohassir, near Mina, i. 342
Wadi'ah, son of 'Amr Muzaykiya, i. 426

Wadd, an idol of the people of Noah, and alluded to in the Koran, ii. 20,
96, 197

Wafir, an Arabic metre, i. 55, 56, 496

Wahidi [Al], an Arab Author, according to whom there are four gardens,
or paradises of the earth, as named, i. 868
Wahshi, the negro slave who killed Hamzah at the battle of Ohud, and
Musaylimeh, in Yemameh, ii. 245
Wakwak, The island or country of, i. 467
Wa’il, an Arab ancestor, i. 448, 528

Wa’il, son of Hojr, a Kayl, or prince, who made his submission to
Mohammed, ^438

Wasil ibn f Ata, the founder of the sect of the Mu'tazilun, or Seceders, and
a lisper, i. 464, 467, 468

Wasit, a town between Kufa and Basra, ii. 14, 15, 194
W&siti, i.e., of Wasit, proverb and story about it, ii. 194
Wathik [Al], the ninth Abbaside Ivhalif, i. 497
Wazir, i. 5, 24-26, 28, 29, 469-471, 493, 526; ii. 155, 188, 201
Weil, Dr. Gustav, German Orientalist and Historian, i. 5 note, 327, 471,
493; ii. 255, 283

Welid [Al] ibn 'Abd el’Melik, the sixth Omayyide Khalif, i. 17, 65, 344,
369, 383, 458, 520

Welid ibn Moghayrah, a man much respected by the Koraysh, and an
opponent of Mohammed’s, i. 415; ii. 292
Welid ibn 'Okbah, connected with a proverb, i. 324
Welid [Al] ibn Yezid, the eleventh Omayyide Khalif, i. 437
Wellington, Duke of, i. 71

West, The, i. 1, 3, 164, 194, 204, 262, 304, 410 ; ii. 57, 138, 171, 179, 265,
286, 308
Western, i. 23

Wine, i. 173, 174, 180, 188, 244, 248, 485, 495; ii. 8, 13, 14, 21, 47, 50,
56, 71, 72, 75-77, *12, 133, 136, 163, 166, 219, 220, 222, 223, 259, 276
Wolf’s Tail, The, i.e ., the false or lying dawn, i. 162, 358
Wiistenfeld, Henry Frederick, German Orientalist and Historian, i. 373

Xeres, the town in Spain, i. 265
Xerxes, i. 92

Yabrin, a town, and a desolate region in Southern Arabia, said to be
inhabited by Jinn, i. 446, 479 ; ii. 123, 265
Yaghuth, one of the false gods, or idols, mentioned in the Koran, i. 404


INDEX.


377


Taliya ibn Khfilid, the Bermeld, Wazir to Harun ar Beshid, the fifth
Abbaside Khalif, i. 72
Tajuj, or Gog, i. 466
YarbiY, Tribe of, i. 495, 518

YVrob, said to be the first man who spoke Arabic, i. 86, 426, 466
Yashjob, son of Ya'rob, i. 426

Ya Sin, the name of the thirty-sixth Sura, or chapter, of the Ivoran, ii. 256

Yathrib, or Medina, i. 295, 397, 428, 522; ii. 57

Yathrib, or Yatrib, a place near Hojr, in Yamameh, i. 397

Yemameh, a town and district of Arabia to the East of Mecca, i. 397,479 ;

ii. 156, 262,265, 290, 291, 297
Yemen, i. 10, 64, etc. See Appendix A
Yezid I., the second Omayyide Khalif, i. 458 *

Yezid II., the ninth Omayyide Khalif, i. 485
Yorkshire, ii. 308

Y r unus ibn Habib, the instructor of Sibawayh, the Grammarian, i. 498

Zti, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, use of which is explained with Zad,
ii. 147, 153, 154, 289
Zabid, a city in Yemen, ii. 62, 63, 211

Zacharias, a prophet according to the Moslem belief, i. 267; -u. 223
Zad, a letter of the Arabic alphabet, use of which is explained, ii. 147,153,
154, 289

Zaffir, a place, i. 279

Zakfit, or legal alms, ii. 46, 48, 91, 199

Zalim ibn Sarraq, or Sariq, whose bye-name was Abu Sufrah, ii. 255
Zamakhshari, or Jar Allah, the Commentator, on the Koran, i. 39, 65,
97, 316, 500, 513, 521, 532; ii. 307
Zamzam AVell, ii. 34

Zarkfi’ A1 Y’emfimeh, a woman celebrated for her powers of eyesight, and
said to be tho first who used kohl, or collyrium, for the eyelids, i. 296,
381, 382; ii. 181, 297, 309

Zarifeh, or Zarifet al Khayr, a Divineress, the wife of Amr ibn Amir
Muzayldya. She had a dream about the breaking of the dyke of
March, i. 41, 42, 48, 372, 373, 423
Zayd, a name used in a grammatical example, ii. 272
Zayd, a youth, and supposed son of Abu Zayd, i. 130
Zayd ibn Arkam, tho Traditionist, ii. 298
Zayd ibn Thabit, said to be tho first Editor of the Koran, i. 93
Zayd, tho adopted son of Mohammed, i. 307; ii. 299
Zayd to 'Amr, a phrase meaning from one person to another, i. 257,
522


378


INDEX.


Zaynab, wife of Zayd above mentioned, divorced by him, and afterwards
married to Mohammed, his seventh wife, i. 307
Zaynab, a woman, ii. 150

Zayn al 'Abidin, son of A1 Ilosayn, son of 'Ali, i. 850
Zebba [Az], a Queen, wife of Jathimet al Abrash, i. 73, 80, 277, 382 ;
ii. 104, 190, 246

Zebba, wife of Al Harith ibn Sulayk, the Asadi, i. 408

Zenj, The, a black race, i. 467

Zerenj, Castle of, i. 309

Zillah, wife of Lamech, i. 43

Zindik, or Freethinker, i. 498

Ziyad, a scamp, ii. 196

Zobaydeh, wife of Harun ar Reshid, i. 80 ; ii. 104, 245
Zobayr [Az] bin Al-Awam, an early convert to Islam, joined 'Ayisholi
and Talhah bin Abd allah in the rebellion against 'Ali, i. 327, 472
Zodiac, Signs of the, i. 313, 314; ii. 234
Zoharah, the woman who seduced Harut and Marut, i. 484
Zohayr bin Janab al Kalbi, the warrior poet, ii. 237
Zohayr ibn Abi Sulme, the pro-Islamite poet, and author of one of the
Mo'allakat, i. 56, 306, 400, 460 ; ii. 212
Zonam, a flute-player, i. 209, 438

Zowra, a name applied to the Tigris in the neighbourhood of Bagdad, and
to the eastern part of the city itself, i. 176, 380
Zu’l Rummah, a poet, ii. 284

Zull, son of Zull, i.e ., Nobody, son of Nobody, ii. 18, 195


APPENDIX A.


I’lii! undermentioned names are included in the Index, but as the references
diem throughout, the work are very numerous, it has been eensidored best to
w them separately, so as to lighten the Index itself.] *

ft /jiyyd, tlui name of the improvisor in l.Iariri’s Assemblies, i. 21-28,35,
37, 38, 42, 58, 71, 75-83, 106, 108, 112, 113, 117, 120, 121, 125-130,
133,140,142, 151, 152, 15G, 158,101,164,167, 168, 175, 176, 180,181,
185-187, 190-192, 104, 198, 204, 206-208, 213-215, 217, 218, 220, 223,
228, 229, 232, 234, 241-243, 253, 256-259, 264, 272, 274, 278, 281, 286,
287, 289, 294-296, 298, 299, 301, 302, 306, 307, 310,311,313, 318, 320,
321, 325, 331, 336, 347, 348, 365,368, 376, 378, 382, 383, 391, 399,402,
417, 421, 433, 434,441, 442, 447, 452, 453, 466, 489, 521; ii. 1, 2, 6-8,
14, 15, 17, 25, 30, 31, 35, 37, 39, 45, 48, 55, 58, 62, 63, 69, 71, 72, 74,
81, 83, 80, 90, 92-94, 97-103, 105, 108, 109, 119, 120, 122, 123, 127,
130-132, 141, 147, 155, 150, 103, 167, 109,175, 181, 190,195-197, 207,
215, 218-220, 222, 225, 233, 245, 247, 261, 262, 266, 277, 282, 283
fiyoh, The, by Ibn Malik, i. 12, 55, 98, 273, 290, 300-302, 304, 312, 315,
331, 363, 442,496, 501-503, 508, 509, 512, 513
li, tlm fourth Khalifab, i. 7, 14, 81, 60, 281, 290, 327, 333, 350, 364,401,
415, 416, 452, 457, 458, 472; ii. 239, 283, 293
tnthologio Gramma tiealo Arabe,” by He Sacy, i. 12,296, 384,400,401,409,
413,418,419,427, 488, 498-500,002, 508, 513, 524, 525,532, 538; ii. 270
•ab, i. 3, 5, 10, 12, 15, 19, 27, 34, 40, 41, 44, 47, 48, 51, 55, 62, 64, 66,

07, 73, 90, 95, 98, 99, 106, 275, 277, 279, 283, 286, 288, 297, 300,

309, 312-314, 320, 327, 332, 888, 340, 346, 356-358, 360, 861, 368,

383, 384, 400, 420, 422, 448, 455, 456, 459, 478, 488, 491, 497, 003,

506, 514, 515, 525, 527; ii. 2, 37, 125, 132, 1.37, 139, 163, 199, 219,
220, 229, 233, 244, 246, 248, 205, 270, 276, 286, 304
rabbi, i. 0, 10, 41, 43, 164, 279, 288, 371, 374, 422, 426, 438, 441, 504,
527 ; ii. 93, 202, 288

rabic, i. v-vii, ix, x, 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12 16, 18, 20, 33, 36, 40, 41, 43, 47,
48, 50, 51, 54, 55, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 73, 88-87, 89,


380


APPENDIX A.


90, 92, 94-101, 145, 163, 215, 243, 248, 265, 270, 275, 282, 283, 289,

290, 297, 304, 305, 311, 319, 322, 331, 384, 340, 348, 377, 380, 384,
395, 407, 422, 426, 437, 438, 453, 458, 459, 466, 481, 498, 502, 504,
507, 508, 511, 514, 517, 524, 534, 535, 537,; ii. viii, ix, 27, 37, 88,
51, 74, 102, 119, 136, 147, 187-202, 204, 205, 208, 212-221, 223, 224,
226-229, 232, 234-243, 245-248, 250-259, 261, 263-275, 277, 279-288,

291, 294-299, 301, 304, 305, 307, 308, 310

Arab manners and customs, i. 6, 13, 15, 18, 22, 54, 60, 62, 63, 73, 99,
100, 181, 215, 269, 274, 278, 283, 285, 295, 299, 300, 302, 303, 317,
325, 328, 332, 335, 344, 346, 350, 359,360, 365, 382, 383, 386,392-397,
412, 420, 427, 434-436, 438, 459, 460, 462, 463, 477, 480, 483, 484,
494, 516, 524-526, 530-532, 537 ; ii. ix, 51, 55, 208, 234, 270, 300, 307
Arabs, i. ix, 4-8, X>, 13 16, 18, 22, 25, 26, 40, 42, 44, 48-50, 54-56, 58, 60,
63-65, 70, 72, 73, 77, 81-84, 90, 92, 97, 98, 100, 174, 176, 181, 215,
229, 236, 251, 269, 271, 274, 275, 278, 279, 282, 283, 285, 289, 295,
299, 301-304, 313, 317-320, 322, 323, 325, 328, 333, 335, 338, 340,
344, 348-350, 352, 354-356, 359, 365, 368, 369, 372, 376, 381, 382,
386-390, 393-397, 406, 412, 417, 426-428, 431, 434-436, 438, 442-446,
449, 451, 453, 460, 462, 463, 466, 471, 477, 479, 480, 483, 484, 486,
487,489, 490, 492, 494-496, 500, 512, 516-520, 522, 526, 529, 530, 532,
537, 539; ii. 1, 2, 38-40, 44, 51, 55, 104, 135, 139, 147, 169, 189, 192,
209, 211, 214, 232, 244, 264, 276, 278, 281, 285, 292-294, 302, 310
Assemblies of Hariri, i. viii-x, 2, 8, 12, 13, 19, 20, 25-29, 32, 33, 35-37, 39,
42, 48, 49, 58, 62, 63 , 68-71, 74, 75, 79, 84, 89-91, 9.7-99, 101, 105,
107, 269, 273-275, 280, 286, 303, 383, 461, 489 ; ii. vii-ix, xi, 1, 12, 31,
37, 89, 147, 182, 187, 198, 248, 252

Bagdad, i. 5, 6, 18, 26-29, 34, 38, 112, 176, 206, 234, 242, 243, 275, 285,
316, 319, 380, 391, 456, 480, 493, 499, 523 ; ii. 25, 242, 279, 284
Basra, i. x, 1, 3, 6-11, 13, 18, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 32, 34, 38, 64, 66, 71, 83,

91, 103, 106, 112, 266, 278, 291, 308, 309, 319, 322, 326, 333, 334, 351
(the TJbulleh of Basra, 368), 431, 467, 497-499, 505, 513, 525; ii. 135,
163, 175, 176, 178, 180, 218, 246, 305-308

BaydiUvi the Commentator on the Koran, i. 31, 39, 96, 97, 267-269, 291,

292, 298, 301, 312, 314, 316, 325, 331, 337, 342, 345, 356, 367, 368,

374, 379, 381, 393, 404, 407, 413, 415, 418, 420, 422, 424, 425, 480-
433, 438, 439, 441, 442, 452, 459, 473, 474, 478, 511, 513, 518, 521-
523, 531, 538, 539; ii. 206, 216, 270

Benu Koraysh, i. 8, 16, 30, 31, 51, 64, 65, 74, 93, 94, 279, 324, 332, 368,

375, 376, 396, 401, 405, 416, 428, 439, 485, 517, 518 ; ii. 246, 280, 293
“ Chrestomathie Arabe,” by De Sacy, i. 101, 139,151, 270, 271, 322, 330,

331, 335, 340, 345, 347, 351, 353, 368, 382, 397, 459, 477, 488, 520


APPENDIX A. 381

Grammar, i. v, 7, 10, 12, 14, 15, 22, 63, 90, 98, 99, 243, 247, 333, 498, 499,
501, 502, 504, 507, 508, 514; ii. 165, 177, 233, 248, 306

Grammatical, i. vi, ix, 7, 12, 15, 55, 65, 67, 71, 72, 96, 106, 243, 248, 269,
273, 274, 399, 446, 522, 539; ii. 15, 37, 214, 218, 221, 232, 233, 268,
281, 285

I.Iamuseh, The, i. 55, 57, 292, 299, 305, 317, 320, 326, 327, 332, 353, 355,

357, 3G6, 375, 387, 391, 394, 403, 405, 409, 429, 430, 435, 436, 444-

446, 449, 453, 462, 472, 479, 485, 487, 492, 495, 529, 530, 537 ; ii.
209, 212, 217, 233, 241, 265, 278, 284, 288

Hariri [Al], tlie Author of these Assemblies, i. v, viii-x, 1-13, 20, 21, 23-30,
32-40, 42, 48, 55-57, 62, 64, 67-74, 76 note, 79, 89-92, 95, 97-103, 108,
145, 151, 163, 164, 168, 186, 207, 214, 244, 265,-266, 268-270, 272-
283, 285, 287-291, 293, 296, 300, 301, 303-305, 312, 313 , 315, 318,
321-323, 325, 328-331, 334, 336, 339, 345-348, 358, 365, 375, 377, 382,
384, 385, 389, 391, 398-402, 405, 407, 409, 413, 414, 418-420, 427,

434, 438, 450, 452-456, 461, 465, 469, 475, 481, 483, 484, 486, 488,

495-497, 504, 508-511, 513, 522-525, 533, 534, 536, 537, 539 ; ii. vii-ix,
1, 24, 37, 44, 75, 89, 90, 101, 136, 141, 147, 156, 163, 175, 187-189,
191, 192, 197, 198, 212, 214, 217, 218, 220, 233, 235, 240, 242, 243
250, 263, 204, 273-278, 291

Harith [Al], son of Hammam, the Rawi or Reciter in Ilariri’s Assemblies,

i. 21, 23, 37, 58, 76-78, 80, 82, 83, 106, 108, 111-113, 115, 117, 118,
120, 121,.124, 126-128, 132, 133, 139-141, 143, 144,146,151, 152, 157,
158, 161-164, 168-170, 176, 178, 180, 181, 184-187, 193, 194, 197, 198,
200, 201, 206, 207, 211, 213, 215, 217, 219, 220, 222, 223, 226-229,
232, 234, 238, 243-245, 24S, 258, 258, 264 (explanation about Harith
and Hariri, 278), 279, 285, 335, 368,383, 399, 421, 434, 447, 466, 521;

ii. 1,2, 7, 8, 12,14, 15, 18, 25, 29, 31,37, 38, 56, 58, 62, 63, 67, 69, 71,
75, 80, 83, 90, 93, 94, 96, 100, 102, 108, 109, 113, 114, 120, 125, 129,
132, 139, 142, 146, 147, 154, 156, 161, 163, 168, 169, 175, 176, 185,
190, 191, 194-196, 215, 233, 261, 262, 269, 307

Hebrow, i. vi, 32, 43-48, 59, 83, 85-88, 90, 97, 268, 311, 340, 857, 380, 406,
425, 445, 466, 514, 516, 534, 535 ; ii. 147

Hijra, or Mohammedan Era, i. 3, 7, 17, 19, 65, 94, 326, 332-334, 349, 358,
367, 383, 388, 389, 896, 448, 456, 523

Il>n Khullikan, the Biographer, i. 7, 10, 25, 26, 28, 29, 39, 65, 94 and
note, 270-272, 278, 819, 326, 327, 334, 358, 371, 383, 384, 399,437,455,
458, 461, 467, 468, 470, 493, 497, 498, 515, 520, 526; ii. x, 194, 201,
246-248, 254, 286

Ignorance, Time of, i.c., before Mohammed’s time, i. ix, 8, 14, 16, 17, 49,


382


APPENDIX A.


56, 61, 67, 271, 285, 297, 302, 316, 323. 325, 374, 375, 404, 409 , 438,
445, 480, 490, 519; ii. 51, 209, 236, 239, 262, 291, 300

Imr al Kays, the Poet, i. 14,16, 56, 60, 61, 293, 295,304,310, 357, 355, 374,
376, 886, 394, 400, 427, 446-448,453,479, 484, 485, 491, 492, 525, 582:
ii. 267

Irak, i. 3, 4, 10, 14, 33; 34, 65, 69, 70, 94, 112, 114, 108, 109, 174,200, 215,
304, 308, 320, 338, 384, 406, 422, 426, 469, 494, 514 ; ii. 57., 190,194,
262,300

Islam, i. 1, 4, 9, 10, 14-16, 27, 34, 49, 50, 01, 05, 07, 09, 92, 99, 163, 104,
181, 279, 289, 309, 318, 320, 325,832, 348, 349, 352, 305, 370,375,390-
392, 396, 401, 403, 410, 434, 436, 438, 458, 483, 520, 538; ii. 10,12,20,
37, 48, 128, 136, 188, 192, 200,205, 207, 226, 239, 240, 270

Q

Kadi, i.r.., a judge or magistrate, i. 38, 58, 79, 80, 145, 140, 148-152, 154-
157, 261, 333-335, 343, 349, 358, 437 ; ii. 53, 02, 08, 09, 83-85, 87, 88,
101, 108, 125,141-140, 163, 226, 230, 232, 233, 244, 260

Khalif, i. 3, 4, 17, 18, 84, 05, 72, 93, 309, 320, 333, 309-371, 38-1, 39(5, 400,
445,455,457,467-470,482, 487,490, 493,497, 515 ; ii. 228,2-18, 257,275

Ivhalifate, i. 3, 5, 6, 15, 34,235, 320, 349, 351, 436, 445, 455, 409, 472, 480,
489; ii. 253, 255, 290

Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work :

Chapter I., i. 171, 301, 367, 373, 539

„ II., i. 312, 310, 325, 342, 347, 378, 379, 391, 407, 408, 412, 415,
419, 434, 442, 459, 405, 509, 511, 520,521, 538; ii. 112, 203,
205, 206, 224, 227, 232, 254, 250, 200, 267, 280, 290, 298,
300, 301, 302

,. III., i. 260, 312, 310, 380, 391, 408, 51-1; ii. 218, 240, 2-13, 250,
310

,, IV., i. 310, 348, 355, 405, 412, 452, 401, 402, 500, 518, 519,523;
ii. 203, 236, 251, 280, 285

., V., i. 207, 323, 325, 349, 393, 412, 414, 419, 409, 515, 520, 531,

538; ii. 205, 200. 209, 230

„ VI., i. 207, 310, 407, 500, 51.5 ; ii. 134, 137, 202, 205, 239, 270,
275

VII., i. 72, 208, 329, 398, 412, 420, 432, 433, 440, 411, 405;
ii. 201, 208, 231, 232, 244, 282, 309

„ VIII., i. 499; ii. 203, 215

„ IX., i. 300, 431; ii. 57, 190, 200, 204, 253, 257

„ X., i. 420, 438, 403, 495 ; ii. 224

„ XI., i. 208, 310, 379,385, 400,432, 438, 441, 400, 477,478, 512;
ii. 45, 201, 200, 210, 240, 281, 290, 308


APPENDIX A.


383


Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work —continued
Chapter XII., i. 78, 358, 398, 417, 478, 499, 532, 538; ii. 210, 213, 298,
303, 310

,, XIII., i. 409 ; ih 304

„ XIV., i. 396

„ XV., i. 301, 371, 374, 898, 432, 467; ii. 284

„ XVI., i. 95, 434,465, 515, 523 ; ii. 196, 209, 241, 291

„ XVII., i. 273, 329, 373, 435, 440, 518, 522, 523; ii. 197, 200,
230, 238, 240, 242, 247, 256, 258, 297, 304
,. XVIII., i. 31, 99, 277, 378, 399, 414, 416, 450, 512, 516, 522;
ii. 197, 231, 236, 243

,. XIX., i. 322, 478; ii. 194, 197, 210, 223, 308
„ XX., i. 309, 381, 398, 407 ; ii. 209, 212 , '

„ XXI., i. 268, 348, 414, 440, 515; ii. 202, 222, 275

,. XXII., i. 310, 316, 374, 391, 393, 464, 474; ii. 136, 199, 241,

266, 275

„ XXIII., i. 513 ; ii. 279
,. XXIV., i. 302, 430; ii. 240, 244, 286
„ XXV., i. 374, 431; ii. 110, 252

„ XXVI., i. 95, 268, 309, 327, 394,432, 438, 441 ; ii. 243,272,276,
299

,. XXVII., i.'283, 291, 345, 373, 379, 415, 432, 433, 464, 473, 486,
588 ; ii. 220, 245, 255

„ XXVIII., i. 314, 438; ii. 236, 241, 255, 296
„ XXIX., ii. 223
„ XXX., i. 408, 442, 486
„ XXXI., i. 31, 368, 422, 477 ; ii. 305
,, XXXII. No reference to this chapter
„ XXXIII., i. 307, 401, 407, 467, 473 ; ii. 299
„ XXXIV., i. 424,436 ; ii. 191
„ XXXV., ii. 252, 290, 307
„ XXXVI., i. 52, 420, 454, 531; ii. 256, 287, 309
„ XXXVII., i. 365, 371, 430 ; ii. 192, 196, 263, 267
„ XXXVIII., i. 268, 269, 291, 379, 436, 438, 478; ii. 217
„ XXXIX., i. 301, 464, 500 ; ii. 251
„ XL., i. 518
„ XLI., i. 502; ii. 195, 258
„ XLII., ii. 308

„ XLIII., ii. 54, 208, 213, 273

„ XLIV., i. 431, 522 ; ii. 240, 243
,, XLV. No reference to this chapter
„ XLVI., i. 208, 379,441; ii. 216, 229, 304


384


APPENDIX A.


Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work —continued
Chapter XLVII., i. 357, 474; ii. 212
„ XLVIII., i. 442; ii. 51, 208, 309

„ XLIX., i. 293 ; ii. 200
„ L.,i. 398, 431; ii. 200

,, LI., ii. 300

,, LI I. No reference to this chapter

„ LIII., i. 460

„ LIV., i. 441, 467

„ LV., i. 386, 472 ; ii. 252
„ LVI., ii. 139, 213, 304

„ LVII., i. 421

„ LViH No reference to this chapter

„ LIX., i. 441, 518; ii. 137, 201, 254
„ LX., i. 440
„ LXI., i. 454; ii. 95, 239
„ LXII., ii. 194

,, LXIII. No reference to this chapter

„ LXIV., i. 477

„ LXV., i. 420, 488, 518

„ LXVI., i. 348 ; ii. 308
„ LXVIL, ii. 136, 200, 276, 284
„ LXV III., ii. 257

„ LXIX., i. 442; ii. 203

„ LXX., ii. 199, 204

„ LXXI., i. 374, 404, 445 ; ii. 197

„ LXXII., i. 330, 379, 463
„ LXXIII., ii. 265

„ LXXIV., i. 414

,, LXXV., i. 400, 405 ; ii. 205
„ LXXVL, i. 308, 522
,, LXXVII. No reference to tins chapter
„ LXXVIII., i. 374 ; ii. 190, 205
„ LXXIX., i. 400; ii. 193, 299
„ LXXX., ii. 257, 292
„ LXXXI., i. 53, 208, 434 ;

„ LXXXII., ii. 257
„ LXXXIIL, i. 208, 430 ; ii. 200
„ LXXXIV., h. 291,294
„ LXXXV., i. 337, 373, 374
„ LXXXVI., ii. 247

,, LXXXVII. No reference to this chapter


APPENDIX A.


385


Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work —continued
Chapter LXXXVIIL, ii. 196, 199
„ LXXXIX., i. 369, 441, 468
,, XC. No reference to this chapter
,, XCI. No reference to this chapter
,, XCII. No reference to this chapter
„ XCIII., i. 349 ; ii. 199, 270
,, XCIV. No reference to this chapter
„ XCV., i. 513

„ XCVL, i. 52

,, XCVII. No reference to this chapter
,, XCVIII. No reference to this chapter
,, XCIX. No reference to this chapter
,, C., i. 486

„ CI„ i. 367, 373

„ CIL, i. 366

,, CIII. No reference to this chapter
„ CIV., i. 486 ; ii. 193
„ CV., i. 331

„ CVI. No reference to this chapter
„ CVII. No reference to this chapter
„ CVIII. No reference to this chapter
„ CIX. No reference to this chapter
„ CX., ii. 191

>, CXI., i. 52, 439

„ CXII. No reference to this chapter

„ CXIII., i. 52, 266, 452

„ CXIV., i. 52, 266, 398, 521

Koran, Other references to the, i. 2, 4, 8, 14, 16, 27, 30, 31, 33, 34, 36, 39,
51, 52, 64-69, 73, 74,76, (its construction and reconstruction, 92-97),
105, 110, 115, 121, 126, 171, 209, 268, 273, 281, 285, 286, 291, 307,
324, 329, 333, 379, 384, 393, 399, 405-407, 414-417, 436, 440, 441, 451,
464, 471, 483,486, 490, 495, 497, 499, 513, 517, 531; ii. tfii, ix, xi, 42,
50, 96, 104, 175,182, 185, 192,197, 204, 207, 215, 233, 240, 247, 248,
257, 292, 296, 297, 306, 307

Lane, E. W., i.^5 note, 269, 280, 281, 284, 286, 289, 295, 296, 298, 301,
305, 314, 318, 323, 337, 338, 341, 343, 357, 363, 365, 369, 376, 378,
381, 392, 397, 400, 410, 431, 436, 441, 445, 460, 463, 478, 480, 481,
490, 516, 524, 526, 531, 537

Legend, i. 86, 279, 285, 287, 288, 296, 299, 315, 353, 363, 369, 381, 382,
385, 390, 404, 411, 414, 424, 441, 449, 492, 499, 517, 527 ; ii. 231

25


VOL. IT.


384


APPENDIX A.


Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work —continued
Chapter XLVII., i. 857, 474; ii. 212
„ XLVIII., i. 442; ii. 51, 208, 809
„ XLIX.,i. 298; ii. 200
,, L.,i. 898, 481; ii. 200

,, LI., ii. 300

,, LII. No reference to this chapter

„ LIIL, i. 460

„ LIV., i. 441, 467

„ LV., i. 386, 472; ii. 252
„ LVI., ii. 139, 213, 304

„ LVII., i. 421

,, LVLII> No reference to this chapter

„ LIX., i. 441, 518; ii. 137, 201, 254
„ LX., i. 440

„ LXI., i. 454; ii. 95, 239
„ LXII., ii. 194

,, LXIII. No reference to this chapter

„ LXIV., i. 477

„ LXV., i. 420, 488, 518
„ LXVI., i. 348; ii. 308
„ LXVI I., ii. 136, 200, 276, 284

„ LXVIII., ii. 257

„ LXIX., i. 442; ii, 203

„ LXX., ii. 199, 204

„ LXXI., i. 374, 401, 445 ; ii. 197
„ LXXIL, i. 330, 379, 463
„ LXXIII., ii. 265

„ LXXIV., i. 414

„ LXXV., i. 460, 465 ; ii. 205
„ LXXVL, i. 368, 522

,, LXXVII. No reference to this chapter
„ LXXVIII., i. 374 ; ii. 196, 205
„ LXXIX., i. 460; ii. 193, 299
„ LXXX., ii. 257, 292

„ LXXXL, i. 53, 268, 434;

„ LXXXII., ii. 257

„ LXXXIII., i. 268, 480 ; ii. 206
„ LXXXIV., ii. 291,294
„ LXXXV., i. 337, 873, 374
„ LXXXVI., ii. 247

,, LXXXVII. No reference to this chapter


APPENDIX A.


385


Koran, Chapters of the, quoted in this work —continued
Chapter LXXXVIII., ii. 196, 199
„ LXXXIX., i. 369, 441, 468
,, XC. No reference to this chapter
„ XCI. No reference to this chapter
„ XCII. No reference to this chapter
» XCIII., i. 349 ; ii. 199, 270
„ XCIV. No reference to this chapter
„ XCV., i. 513

„ XCVI., i. 52

„ XCYII. No reference to this chapter
,, XCVIII. No reference to this chapter
,j XCIX. No reference to this chapter '

„ C., i. 486

„ CL, i. 367, 373

,, CII., i. 366

,, CIII. No reference to this chapter
„ CIV., i. 486 ; ii. 193
„ CV„ i. 331

„ CVI. No reference to this chapter
,, CVII. No reference to this chapter
,, CVIII. No reference to this chapter
,, CIX. No reference to this chapter
„ CX., ii. 191

„ CXI., i. 52, 439

„ CXII. No reference to this chapter

„ CXIII., i. 52, 266, 452

„ CXIV., i. 52, 266, 398, 521

Koran, Other references to the, i. 2, 4, 8, 14, 16, 27, 30, 31, 33, 34, 36, 39,
51, 52, 64-69, 73, 74,76, (its construction and reconstruction, 92-97),.
105, 110, 115, 121, 126, 171, 209, 268, 273, 281, 285, 286, 291, 307,
324, 329, 333, 379, 384, 393, 399, 405-407, 414-417, 436, 440, 441, 451,
464, 471, 483,486, 490, 495, 497, 499, 513,517, 531; ii. viii, ix, xi, 42,
50, 96,104,175,182, 185, 192,197, 204, 207, 215, 233, 240, 247, 248,
257, 292, 296, 297, 306, 307

Lane, E. W., i. *65 note, 269, 280, 281, 284, 286, 289, 295, 296, 298, 301,
305, 314, 318, 323, 337, 338, 341, 343, 357, 363, 365, 369, 376, 378,
381, 392, 397, 400, 410, 431, 436, 441, 445, 460, 463, 478, 480, 481,
490, 516, 524, 526, 531, 537

Legend, i. 86, 279, 285, 287, 288, 296, 299, 315, 353, 363, 369, 381, 382,
885, 390, 404, 411, 414, 424, 441, 449,492, 499, 517, 527 ; ii. 231

25


VOL. II.


386


APPENDIX A.


Lexicon, i. 43, 65 note, 269, 295, 357, 363, 397, 403, 430, 445, 478, 480,
516, 524, 526, 531, 537

Mecca, i. x, 39, 67, 77, 181, 268, 279, 288, 315, 316, 318, 325, 346, 348,
370, 372, 384, 391, 392, 396, 425, 426, 437, 440, 442, 475,-527 ; ii. xi,
31, 32, 37, 40, 46, 135, 141, 161, 201, 202, 204, 248, 250,258, 266, 289,
290, 306-308

Metre, i. 47, 57, 67, 271, 274-276, 282, 284, 290, 292-294, 297, 298, 802 •
306, 310, 315, 319, 327, 328, 330,336,342, 344, 347, 349,362, 366,367,
374, 384, 387, 895, 398, 406, 408, 417, 418, 421, 424, 439-441, 447,448,
451, 460, 463, 466, 469, 479, 484, 485, 487, 488, 496, 516, 524,537 ; ii.
132, 133 -

Mohammed, the Apostle and Prophet, i. 14-18, 30, 31, 51-53, 55, 60, 62
note, 67, 95, 96, 104, 171, 255, 267-269, 273, 278, 279, 296, 297, 302,
307-309, 325, 330, 333, 334, 338, 356, 367, 369,372, 383, 388, 389, 392,
393, 399, 405, 415 , 421, 425 , 430, 434, 435 , 438-440, 442, 460, 469,
483, 515, 519, 521, 522, 538; ii. 10, 20,21, 28, 37, 38, 52,90,113, 135,
136, 191, 192,196, 198, 200, 204, 205, 214, 216, 225, 226,232, 239,242,
245, 253, 254, 265, 267, 270, 271, 278, 280,286, 288, 289, 292-295, 298,

301, 307, 308

Moses, i. 44, 46, 129, 190, 267, 268, 305, 309, 314, 365, 407, 409, 415, 425,
461; ii. 57, 87, 231, 240, 255, 304 .

Moslem, i. 13, 17, 23, 34, 36, 37, 58, 63, 67, 77, 84, 90, 139, 163, 164, 189,
265, 273, 308, 329, 338, 344, 345, 350, 369, 378, 391, 405, 412, 432,
451, 472, 495, 522; ii. viii, 48, 130, 207, 291, 293, 307
Moslems, i. 20, 30, 69, 93, 94, 159, 162, 266, 267, 269, 280, 286, 289, 291,

302, 307, 315, 316, 325, 327, 331, 333, 334, 338, 358, 379,409,414, 429,
430, 439, 441, 445, 454, 458, 461, 481, 497 ; ii. 300, 306

Nasifal Yazaji of Bey rout, i. 62, 98-101, 281, 314, 363, 365, 374, 382, 393,.
396, 443, 464 (his treatise called 'Akd al Juman on rhetoric, i. 486),
487, 502, 508, 513, 514, 518, 525, 533; ii. 203, 250

j. Paradise, i. 138, 164, 256, 329, 384, 342, 350, 378, 398, 412, 415, 430, 431,
460, 471, 514, 521, 522; ii. 64, 202, 226, 267, 290
Perceval Caussin de, i. 279,289, 296, 317, 351, 375, 385, 390, 425, 428, 430,
436, 455, 491, 519, 530; ii. 237, 310

Persian, i. vi. 5, 38, 44, 62 note, 64, 66,132, 290, 322, 350, 377, 391, 451,
459, 469, 481, 497, 514; ii. 169, 198, 217, 229, 241, 245, 273, 288
'Persians, i. vi, 31, 57, 69, 84, 285, 286, 288, 289, 344, 420, 442, 466, 539 ;
ii. 192

Poem, i. 41, 55, 62, 83, 88, 91, 142, 184, 234, 271, 297, 310, 319, 320, 359,


APPENDIX A.


387


366, 367, 385, 398, 486, 525 ; ii. 131, 146, 147, 156,168, 209,212,215,
251, 267, 292

Poems, i. 14, 17, 38, 57, 61, 62 note, 66, 151, 350, 374, 383, 462, 482-484;
ii. 130, 264

Poet, i. 16, 28, 41, 44, 60-62, 67, 229, 273, 280, 320, 323,333, 340, 350,358,

361, 365, 383, 408, 434, 437, 448, 484, 485, 492, 525, 526, 537 ; ii. 94,
189, 190, 200, 217, 237, 254, 255, 274, 277, 284, 288, 293, 294, 297,801,
308, 309

Poetry, i. 7, 8, 13, 16, 19, 30, 35, 40, 41, 43-45, 47-49, 52, 54, 55, 58, 61,63,
67, 85, 106, 113, 129, 155, 163, 180, 194, 236, 269, 277, 297, 303, 320,
333, 350, 359, 383, 387-389, 430, 447, 483-485; ii. 15, 27, 65, 94, 131,
163, 177, 189, 198, 220, 233, 248, 272, 276, 306, 309
Poets, i. 8, 13, 14, 16, 26, 30, 31, 52, 56, 57, 61, 65, §7, B9, 91, 112, 176,

236, 282, 294, 295, 297, 300, 310, 320, 321, 350-352, 356, 359, 361,

374, 410, 430, 437, 448, 458, 463, 483, 484, 488, 525, 530; ii. 215,232,

237, 253, 255, 272, 299

Prophet, The, i.e., Mohammed, i. 4, 5, 16, 31, 52, 53, 67, 93, 265,267-269,
277, 280, 281, 285, 291, 295, 296, 303, 306-308, 318, 329, 332, 333,

336, 353, 355, 364, 370-372, 389, 392, 395, 396, 401, 402, 405, 413,

415, 416, 418, 419, 421, 430, 434, 436, 438-440, 442, 445, 447, 450,
452, 458, 472, 474, 479, 480, 483, 498, 500, 515, 517, 520, 522, 531,
538; ii. 14, 18, 20, 28, 38, 57, 128, 178, 192, 206, 226, 245, 271, 286,
290, 292

Proverb, i. 27, 29, 297, 299, 304, 305, 308, 323, 330, 343, 346, 356, 357,
361-363, 376, 377, 382, 384, 386, 390, 404, 408, 410, 421, 434, 435, 453,
455, 460, 465, 472, 488, 490, 516, 517, 520, 522, 529, 580; ii. 90, 194,
205, 210, 212, 218, 221, 223, 226, 227 , 229, 230, 233, 234, 238, 241,
243, 249, 250, 256, 261, 262, 264, 265, 268, 269, 271, 272, 274, 275,
277, 278, 281-284, 286, 290-295, 301, 305, 310
Proverbial, i. 281, 285, 293, 304-306, 309, 321, 324, 334, 335, 849, 352, 359,

362, 363, 375, 377, 385, 390, 391, 395, 397, 401, 402, 404, 406, 408,

417, 431, 433, 443, 449, 454, 459, 464, 465, 469, 472, 474, 475, 488,
490, 494, 495, 516, 519, 528, 529 ; ii. 156, 188, 190, 195,196, 211, 220,
222, 223, 227, 231-234, 242, 243, 250, 256, 262, 279, 282, 286, 289,
293, 294, 297, 299, 302, 304, 305, 308, 310 ,

Proverbs, i. 69, 70, 73, 74, 85, 91, 99, 106, 273, 300, 320, 323, 435, 464,
471, 472; ii. 187, 222, 248, 273, 281, 282, 292, 303
Proverbs, Arab, referred to in this work, from Freytag’s:

Volume I. i. 281, 289, 296, 299,300,301, 310, 312, 317, 318, 324, 339, 343,
361-363, 376, 377, 381, 382, 384-386, 391, 394, 397, 403,
408, 410, 418, 421, 431, 435, 436, 458, 464, 466, 472, 474,
475, 478, 485, 488, 490, 516, 517, 522, 527-530, 532, 538;

25—2 .


388


APPENDIX A.


ii. 196, 197, 204, 212, 214, 216, 218, 221-223, 225,226, 230,
232, 237, 240, 241, 245, 246, 248-250, 256, 261, 262, 268,
270, 275, 277-279, 282, 284, 286-289, 291-295, 301-304,
309, 310

Volume II. of Freytag, i. 273, 277, 281,285, 293, 295, 299, 303, 305,308,
330, 332, 346, 347, 350-352, 356, 359, 361, 373, 375, 380-

382, 387, 391, 395, 402, 406, 411, 412, 417, 419, 428, 434,

435, 443, 448, 449, 454, 455, 460, 465, 469, 471, 472, 475,

478, 488, 490, 492, 495, 500, 516-520, 523, 526, 532; ii. 198,

203, 206, 210-212, 215, 217, 218-220, 222, 223, 227-231, 233,
234, 241-244, 246-248, 250, 250, 261, 262, 268, 271, 272,
275, 277, 278, 281, 283, 294, 295, 298, 300, 302-305, 308,
30?

„ III. of Freytag, Part I., ii. 199, 234, 241, 268, 272

,, III. of Freytag, Part II., ii. 211, 243

Rejez metre, i. 12, 18, 48, 54-58, 98, 297, 300, 315, 320, 344, 349, 366, 382,
395, 417, 424, 441, 449, 466, 485, 516, 527, 537; ii. 133, 251

Rhyme, or rhythm, i. 48-54, 58, 83, 85, 101, 118, 168, 271, 297, 319, 330,
366, 367, 382, 484, 486; ii. 108, 132, 156, 235, 266, 287

Sacy, Sylvestrc de, i. 3 note, 12, 24, 39, 42 note, 62 note, 74 note, 76 note,
97, 98, 101, 139, 151, 269-272, 274, 280, 281, 284, 292, 294, 300, 304,
306, 312,-314, 318, 322, 329-331, 335, 337-340, 345-347, 350, 351, 353,
863, 365, 368, 370, 372, 375, 381, 382, 385, 389, 397-400, 406, 409, 413,
414, 416, 418, 420, 422, 425, 429, 434, 436, 438, 441, 444, 451, 454,
456, 459-462, 469, 473, 477, 479, 482, 483, 487,488, 495, 499, 500, 502,
509, 518, 520, 525, 533, 537 ; ii. 196,197, 203,208, 219, 224, 226, 230
236, 241, 250, 252, 260, 263, 265, 266, 270, 276, 280, 282, 285, 290,
295

Semitic, i. 43, 45, 47, 48, 59, 64, 83, 85, 87, 89, 283, 311, 312, 514, 534 ;
ii. 147

Seruj, i. 13, 21, 22, 106, 108, 112, 113, 116, 180, 133, 138, 140, 142, 145,
154, 161, 181, 185, 207, 248,286, 398; ii. 4, 5, 25, 30, 61, 81, 105, 110,
141, 163, 167, 178, 181

-Shcrislii, the Andalusian Commentator, i. 38, 69, 146, 186, 265-2(57, 2(59,
270, 277, 278, 288, 292, 301, 304, 305, 308, 314, 318, 322, 327, 320,
330, 333, 335, 337, 338, 344-346, 350-353, 355, 356, 362, 363, 368, 391,
395, 400, 402, 400, 408, 409, 411, 413, 415, 417-419, 427, 429,438,430,
445, 447, 401, 455, 457, 459, 461, 465, 467, 471, 473, 476, 479, 4H1,
483, 487, 489, 490, 498, 499, 500, 515, 518, 520, 523, 524,537 ; ii. 101,
195, 198, 199, 204, 211, 212, 216, 221, 230, 234, 244,251-253,256,264,
268, 276, 284, 285, 288, 292, 295, 299, 303


APPENDIX A.


389


Sura, or Chapter of the Koran, i. 31, 52, 53, 96, 268, 298, 801, 330, 367,
373, 379, 404, 407, 409, 414, 415, 417, 484, 439, 440, 442, 452, 454,
521; ii. 68, 157, 170, 193, 196, 210, 213, 215, 231, 256, 257, 292, 294,
305

Syria, i. 3, 4, 13, 14, 20, 38, 65, 168, 286, 206, 288, 289, 336, 361, 369, 384,
422, 432, 470; ii. 31, 32, 57, 119, 178, 199, 304, 306

Tabari, the Historian, i. 316, 372, 373, 378, 416, 423, 432, 440, 442, 455,
474, 493, 518; ii. x

Tarafcli, the Poet, i. 14, 16, 56, 284, 293, 346, 358-361, 380, 407, 411, 439,
448, 473, 487, 495, 527; ii. 804

Ta'rifat, i. 266, 273, 291, 298, 329, 332, 343, 403, 406, 421,.473

Tradition, i. 20, 24-27, 34, 41, 44, 52, 67, 73, 86, 164, 267, 269, 278, 296,
307, 308, 316, 329, 334, 364, 367, 369, 370, 385, 387, 391, 396, 397,
399, 401, 402, 409, 410, 413, 414, 418,419, 422,425, 432, 433, 440, 442,
445, 451, 457, 466, 479, 488, 498, 509, 515, 517, 522, 531 ; ii. 9, 136,
178, 191, 204, 206, 214-216, 221, 235, 239, 265, 267,270, 271, 279,286,
288, 289, 294, 295, 299, 301, 308, 310

Traditions, i. 6,14, 29, 31, 34, 63, 74, 89, 101, 218, 268, 316,383,884, 393,
896, 401, 405, 406, 447, 450, 458, 460, 474, 483, 487, 498, 538; ii. ix,
26, 37, 95, 179, 192, 292, 306

Translation, i. 45, 49, 70, 101, 102, 146, 345, 355, 481, 516: ii. vii, ix, xi,
74, 113, 114, 132, 194, 195, 204, 205, 207, 211, 218, 219, 226,230, 247,
253, 256, 260, 263, 265, 268, 269, 281, 282, 284, 290,294,295,297, 299,
301, 308, 309

Versos indited or recited by Abu Zayd, i. 110-112,115-117, 119-121,124,
126-130, 132, 138,139, 141, 142, 144, 148-150, 154, 155,157,162, 163,
165-167, 173-175, 178-180, 183, 185, 192, 193, 197-199, 204, 211-213,
217, 219-221, 225-228, 233, 234, 236, 237, 239, 240, 245, 248, 254-258,
262, 263; ii. 4, 7, 13, 23, 30, 34-36, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 64, 67, 70, 73,
74, 77-81, 85-88, 92, 93, 99-101, 105, 106, 110-112, 115-119, 124, 125,
129, 134-139, 141, 143, 145, 146, 155, 159-162, 164, 167-169, 174, 180

Verses of various Poets, i. 273, 280, 309, 323, 333, 359, 382, 389, 390, 398,
411, 449, 468, 476, 494, 519, 528; ii. 190, 205, 213, 215, 217, 225, 228r
233,254, 254, 255, 265,274, 277, 294, 298, 301, 302, 310

Yemen, i. 10, 64, 108, 131, 263, 279, 280, 288, 299, 320, 351, 352, 369, 372,
381,387, 390, 404, 417, 422,425, 426, 441, 444, 445, 448,466, 479,527,
530, 537 ; ii. 62, 83, 113, 119, 178, 199, 211, 224, 238, 247, 256 306,
310


APPENDIX B (see Preface, p. x).


Tins appendix shows the names of people, places, and things as
spelt by Mr. Ghenery in 1867, compared with the transliteration of
the present day by Dr. Steingass, who prefaces the subjoined list
with the following explanatory remarks :

u The system of transliteration observed by me is based on two
distinctive principles: Firstly, to represent, to the exclusion of
every clement of doubt, the written Arabic character, which,
excepting some slight variations in the shape of the letters, has not
altered ever since the Koran was first committed to writing;
secondly, to select the representative symbols so as to make them
lit in with the transliteration of other Oriental languages in England,
particularly with that of the diverse idioms of India, partly derived
from Sanscrit.

u Tlm former of these principles applies especially to the vowels,
and aims at the uniform rendering of the three unvariable signs for
the elementary vowels Fathah ( £ a’), Kasrah ( £ i’), and Zammah (Ti J ),
taken by themselves and in connection with the weak consonants Ya
(*y ’) and \V;uv (‘w’), irrespectively of their sounds , or the way in
which they are pronounced. Fronunciation has changed, and probably
will go on changing, in different times and places, and is therefore
in all languages, as English illustrates in the most striking manner,
only it) bo acquired by oral instruction. When it is made the basis '
of transliteration, it leads unavoidably to inconsistencies. To begin,
for instance, with the beginning : The name of the first letter ‘ Alif,’
winch, with the original sound of its initial, has, thanks to Greek,
Hurvivod until this day in the first syllable of the English word
< alphabet,’ is spelt by Mr. Ghenery £ Elif,’ because it is thus pro¬
nounced by the modern Arabs. But for the same reason he should


392


APPENDIX B.


write ‘ El Harith’ instead of £ A1 Harith,’ for £ El ’ is the pronuncia¬
tion now given by most Arabs to the article, and adopted, in
Professor Wright’s Arabic Grammar. Again, if Mr. Chenery spells
‘ Moslem ’ instead of £ Muslim,’ he may with equal right transliterate
£ Hareth ’ instead of c Harith,’ the last syllable of either word having
Kasrah for its vowel. Another point of divergence between the two
systems refers to Fathah, followed by a quiescent W&w or Ya,
in which case the Sukun over the weak consonants indicates that
their consonantal character submerges in their cognate vowel
element, which forms with the preceding Fathah the diphthongs
corresponding to the Greek av and ai , in Roman letters c au 5 and
£ ai.’ I therefore would have written ‘ Zaura ’ for Chenery’s ‘Zowra,’
and * Zaid ’ for his £ Zayd ’ (why not 1 Zeyd ’ in analogy with
£ Zowra ’?).

“ With regard to the second principle concerning the consonants,

I substitute the symbols £ Z,’ £ T,’ and £ Z’ respectively, for Mr.
Chenery’s £ D,’ £ T,’ and £ Z,’ or in other words, I would spell
£ Tumazir’ for his £ Tumadir,’ £ Tur ’ for his £ Tur,’ £ Zahir ’ for his
£ Zahir,’ etc. Thus the first two of his letters with a single dot
underneath, £ D 5 and £ T,’ remain available for the transliteration of
cognate letters in some of the Indian languages. £ Z ’ for his £ Z ’
recommends itself as a correlative of £ T,’ both consonants repre¬
sented thereby having in Arabic similar outlines and a strong
organic affinity, and £ Z ’ for C D’ is justified by the relation of the
transcribed letter to that designated by Chenery and myself by £ S,’
the Arabic character of which has the same shape, and from whose
peculiar sibilant sound it inclines towards £ Z.’

££ Chenery’s £ Th ’ corresponds to my ‘ S,’ and when underlined, as
in ‘Jathimeh,’ to my £ Z,’ the object of which substitutions is to
avoid as much as possible the use of compound letters in the trans¬
literation. If in this respect the time-honoured £ Gh ’ and * Kh ’ are
preserved, they should be underlined, in order to indicate that they
are not to be pronounced separately, but as a single sound—the
‘Kh,’ for instance, somewhat like the Scotch £ ch’ in £ loch.’ This
is of prosodic importance when the letters occur in the middle of a
word; for if in the transliteration of the Arabic £ lu gh ah,’ for
instance, the constituent parts of the compound character were kept
separate in pronunciation as in the English word £ loghouse,’ it would,


APPENDIX R


393


according to the laws of Arabic prosody, form a spondee, while in
reality it is an iambus.

“ There is one point more to consider in every system of trans¬
literation, namely, the avoidance of diacritical signs altogether as
far as feasible. This applies to the letters K&f and Kaf (Qaf).
Their distinction by means of a dot below the second one has much
in its favour, but, on the other hand, both occur so frequently in
Arabic, that the accidental breaking off of the dot in type or its
omission by oversight may cause numerous mistakes. In France
and England, therefore, the second letter was represented by f C,’ of
which the English dictionary word ‘ cadi 7 is a rempant; but the
different pronunciation of ‘ C 7 before ‘ E 7 and * 1 7# from that before
other vowels led to its abandonment. The same objection, however,
does not exist against my transcribing the guttural in question by
c Q, 7 and this practice gains more and more in extension.

“After an attentive perusal of the above remarks, and by aid of
the annexed alphabetical list, the student of Arabic will have no
difficulty to re transliterate, according to my- system, any of the
names of persons, places, and objects which the" editor has taken
great pains in altering from the original spelling of vol. ii. into that
of vol. i.:


Chenery.

Steingass.

Abu Zayd.

Abu Zaid.

'Ayisheh.

'Ayishah.

Bakil.

Baqil.

Bayd&wi.

Baizawi.

Dabbah*

Zabbah.

Elif.

Alif.

Fard.

Farz.

F&timeh.

Fatimah.

G-hada.

Ghaza.

Harith.

Haris.

Ibn A1 Mokaffa'.

Ibn al-Muqaffa


* This and the last name in the list do not occur in the second volume,
but they have been inserted to show at a glance, in the natural order of
the alphabet, how the initial letters of both are transliterated by Mr.
Chenery and Dr. Steingass respectively.


394


APPENDIX B.


Chenery.

Jathimeh.

Kadi.

Kaka.

Khalil.

Kamus.

Kata.

Lakab.

Mo'allakah.

MokhUrik.

Nabigheh.

e Okaz. %

e 0 thrall.

Eamadan.

Shaykh.

Taybeh.

Tharid.

Thu ’1 Hijjah.
Welid.
Yemameh.
Zarifeh.


Steingass.

Jazimah.

Qazi.

Qa'qak

Khalil.

Qamus.

Qata’.

Laqab.

JVIu'allaqah.

Mukhariq.

Kabighah.

'Ukaz.

Uzrah.

Eamaz&n.

Shaikh.

Taibah.

Sarid.

Zu T-hijjah.
Walid.

Yam am ah.
Zarifah.
