The Assemblies of Al-Hariri, Vol. 1 (Al-Hariri (trans. Thomas Chenery), 1867)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1867 Williams and Norgate edition (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.111059). First English translation of the Maqamat — the virtuoso rhymed-prose masterpiece of classical Arabic literature.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

WNUUUL(UUUL M0


00050645


x" BX AKABA EA OBARAAARADAERSDRE IRBSEREABAMARMEREO
NOT TO BE ISSUED OUT E
WITHOUT PERMISSION. E


E-GA-G3-G3-G3-GaB-Gd-Gd-Gd-Ga-Goe
\ BOMBAY BRANCH \
OF THE


ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.
TOWN HALL, BOMBAY.
YOST OFCFCSES REF CSES OSES


Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Vaidehi Thakar


on 06 November, 2019


THE


_ ASSEMBLIES OF AL HARIRI


ANUNUUUVUUUL IRL AU TN
00050645


PREFACE. vil


The difficulty of the- Arabic language -has, however,
confined the thorough study of it to very few, to the
detriment of. all ‘Oriental learning. . It is with the
desire to smooth the path of the student that.I have
undertaken’ to translate and ‘annotate the work of the
snost learned and eloquent of ‘the Arabic authors. A
translation may have two objects; it may be either
intended to display the translator's felicity of diction,
as when scholars produce English versions of Anacreon
or Horace’ for the amusement of those who .are ‘well
acquainted with the originals, a pursuit for which I
cannot say -that I. have any high esteem; or it may
be intended to facilitate the study of a difficult original, |
while it gives the, translator’s countrymen ‘generally
some acquaintance with a foreign author who deserves
to be known by them, though they cannot hope to learn
his language. The latter has been the object proposed
in: the present translation. It is a literal prose render-
ing of the Makamiat, intended’ primarily to help the
student in Arabic, and ‘with this view I have always
guarded myself from being seduced into paraphrase by
the desire of elegance. The text of the author has been
rendered throughout as closely as is consistent with
intelligibility ; but the translation will, I believe, have
lost nothing thereby, for readers of true taste will prefer


that the idiom of the original, strange and uncouth as


90648


Vili PREFACE.


~ it sometimes may be, should pierce through the version,

rather than that Hariri’s diction should be, as it were,
melted down and remoulded into the current English of
the nineteenth century.

In this version there is no attempt to imitate the
plays on words, or the rhyme of the original. Such a
resemblance in form could only be ‘attained by the
abandonment of all accuracy, and the sacrifice of the
chief object for which the translation has been under-
taken. But the parallelistio rhythm of the original has
been sufficiently preserved, and on the whole the reader
will be able to gain from this version a fair idea of the
form in which Hariri cast his thoughts. If I have
adopted. at times a somewhat antiquated diction it has
been naturally suggested by the work itself. One of
the earliest students of the Assemblies, the learned and
critical Albert Schultens, perceived the essential cha-
racter of Hariri’s style. He says, “Hee faces quicquid
tenebrarum stilus Haririi grandisonus ac mille floribus
figurisque variegatus offundebat discussere, laborem
quem in eo, a capite ad calcem, describendo impen-
debam compensante summ4 animi voluptate; eo quod
héc in scriptore reperirem id quod spe atque cogitatione
preeceperam, eminentem et expressam imaginem priscee
illius grandiloquentice Orientalis, qua liber J obi exaratus


est, queeque in Psalmis, in Proverbiis, in reliquo cor-


PREFACE. ix


pore Bibliorum, poetico presertim, ac prophetico, tam
magnificé tamque insignité se exerit.”

‘The notes have been primarily designed for the
student, but care has been taken that the allusions in
the text shall be sufficiently explained for the general
reader. (The legends of the heroic warriors of the Ig-
norance, Apaflas dpeov dvOos, their proverbial utterances,
their genealogies, their feuds, their Days or battles,
their usages and habits of life, are illustrated from
many sources, and references are given which will
further aid the student. As this pagan antiquity was
one of the chief studies of the learned, and its influence
‘largely pervades the Assemblies, some knowledge of it
is necessary to a reader of Hariri.) In the grammatical
notes I have throughout followed the system of the
Arabs, being convinced of the futility of the efforts
’ which have been made by European scholars to remould
the Arabic grammar on the principles of the Latin; to
say nothing of the necessity that the student should
- understand the grammatical and rhetorical terms of the
_ native writers, without a knowledge of which their
commentaries and explanations are unintelligible. In
some of the notes, as those to the Twenty-fourth Assem-
bly, rather abstruse questions are discussed, but they
will have no exceeding difficulty to any one who has
taken the right road in learning the language.


x PREFACE.


In writing Arabic names and words with European
letters. I have desired to combine sufficient accuracy
with such a representation of the word as shall not be
pedantic or uncouth. The Arabic scholar will soon
perceive the system that has been adopted. Fethah is
represented: by @ or e, and dammah by o or 4, kesreh
being represented by «% The long syllables are indi-
cated by 4, 4, i. In non-Arabic names I have generally
followed the popular spelling, as. it is to be found in
European books; some well-known names also, as Basra,
Kufa, Medina, Mecca, are written in the same manner.
Following high authority I have paid no attention to
the ‘s‘rdb in composite Arabic names. Notwithstanding
all the care that has been bestowed on the proofs, it
will be found that the subscribed points and other signs
by which the Arabic letters are indicated in English type
have been occasionally omitted or misplaced. These in-
accuracies are, however, few and trifling.

The present volume contains a long Introduction,
which dispenses with the necessity of saying more in
this place ; it contains also the opening Address of
Hariri, and the first twenty-six Assemblies. With the
second volume there will be published an Index to the


entire work.


ERRATA.


Page 12, line 12, for mezdéj read muzdawitj,

Page 41, line 28, and page 86, line 15, for Muzaykiah read Muzayktya.
Page 101, line 26, for Laudian read Lord Almoner's.

Page 472, line 22, after any other read than a.


INTRODUCTION.


Brrween the civilizations of Christendom and Islam
there is a gulf which no human genius, no concourse
of events, can entirely bridge over. The most celebrated
Orientals, whether in war or policy, in literature or
learning, are little more than names for Europeans. A
student here and there, weary of the beaten track of
Greek and Roman antiquity, may wander into the paths
of Eastern knowledge, but to the great number of
educated men they appear but an impassable jungle,
into which it is wearisome and useless to penetrate.
The transcendant difficulty of the chief language of
the Mohammedan world, and the belief that it repre-
sents only an arrested civilization and a decaying re-
ligion, are sufficient to turn the intelligence of the
West to what appear to be more open and more profit-
able fields. For these reasons it is necessary that
even the most esteemed and famous of Arabic writers
should be introduced by an English translator as if
they were almost unknown to his countrymen. I
may assume without danger that this is the case with
Al Hariri, of Basra, This eminent man of letters

1


2 INTRODUCTION.


has been rewarded with a fame such as few have ever
obtained. For more than seven centuries his work
has been esteemed as, next to the Koran,. the chief
treasure of the Arabic tongue. Contemporaries and
posterity have vied in their praises of him. His “ As-
semblies ” have been commented with infinite learning
and labour in Andalusia, and on the banks of the
Oxus. His poetry has been sung at the- feasts of
the great, and by the camel-drivers in the desert.
To appreciate his marvellous eloquence, to fathom his
profound learping, to understand his varied and end-
less allusions, have always been the highest object of
the literary, not only among the Arabic-speaking peo-
ples, but wherever the Arabic language has been scien-
tifically studied. But the very qualities which have
procured him this extraordinary reputation among hig
countrymen and co-religionists, have hindered the exten-
sion of it elsewhere. His genius is, by its nature, so
bound up with the structure and traditions of the Arabic
language, of which his chief work may be said to be a
compendium, that the Orientalists of Europe have
shrunk from the difficulties of translation, and have
even been unwilling to dwell upon merits which it is
impossible that those whom they addressed should
ever understand. One important exception is, however,
to be noticed. German literature has been enriched with
a brilliant imitation of the Assemblies, by the gifted
Rickert. But in spite of this great service to Hariri’s
reputation, he may be said to be almost unknown to the
Western world. I propose, therefore, to devote a few
pages to his life and times, to the character of the work
which I have undertaken to translate, and annotate, and


INTRODUCTION. 3


to the class of literature of ait is the most eminent
example.’

Abi Mohammed al Kasim ibn ‘Ali ibn Mohammed
ibn ‘Othman al Hariri was born at Basra, in the year
446 of the Hijra (a.p. 1054 or 1055), and he died in
515 (1121-2), or 516 (1122-3), in his native city. His
life was, therefore, contemporary with the first Crusade,
and the irruptions of the Christian hosts added much to
the political troubles amid which his lot was cast.. The
whole aspect of the Mohammedan world had changed
since the days when Basra, with its sister and rival
city Kufa, had been founded by the victorious Arabs of
*Omar’s Khalifate. Power had passed away from the Arab
race in Syria and Irak; military enterprise had decayed,
or existed only in the primitive form of the ghazw or
foray. The intellectual vigour, as well as the political su-
premacy, of the Arabs was waning in those regions. The
Abbasside Khalifs of the eleventh century were almost
as much the shadows of former power as the Emperors
of the East ; they retained little more than. their reli-
gious supremacy. In the boyhood of Hariri, Toghril
Beg, the grandson of Seljuk, had been confirmed by the
powerless Khalif Al Ka ’im bi-amr allah, in all. his. con-
quests, loaded with honours, saluted as King of the
East and West, and endowed with the hand of the

_Khalif’s daughter. In the next reign, that of Al
Muktadi, the Seljuk Turks captured Jerusalem, and by
their outrages against the Christian pilgrims, excited the
Western nations to the Crusade. At the time when the

1 In treating of the life of Hariri, I have, availed myself largely


of the facts brought together by M.M. Reinaud and Derenbourg,
in their preface to the second edition of De Sacy’s Hariri.


4 INTRODUCTION.


young Hariri was imbuing his mind with the learning of
his forefathers, his race had in Irak and Syria been
subjected to a foreign domination, and the power of the
Turks had been extended from the Bosphorus to the
Persian Gulf and the Indus.

The lot of the Arabs subjected to Turkish domination
does not, however, seem to have been a hard one. The
rulers felt their own barbarism, and had some reverence
for the genius and learning of those they governed.
These had not been: conquered, in the military sense of
the term. Their government had fallen to Turkoman ad-
ministrators, through the weakness of the successors of
the Prophet; but the sanctity of the Khalif was still felt,
and his supremacy nominally acknowledged. The influ-
ence of religion maintained for the Arab-speaking in-
habitants of Irak a sufficient, and even an excessive,
respect. The Koran, the revealed word of God himself,
had existed from eternity in the Arabic language, and to
understand and explain it was the privilege of those only
who were versed in the mysteries of Arabic’grammar and -
divinity. While,to the Voldest soldier of the dominant
race the sacred book was unintelligible, and served only
as an amulet to keep off Jinn and Ghils, and the like
supernatural enemies, the poorest Bedouin who wan-
dered in from the desert could appreciate its doctrine
and precepts, its lofty diction, its refined and learned
grammar, its entrancing rhythm, and feel the full assur-
ance .that such a masterpiece of language could only
have been communicated from on high. In accepting
Islam, the Turks had also accepted the authority of the
Koran, in religious and civil matters, and that authority
could be expounded only by Fukahd, or jurisconsults,


INTRODUCTION. 5


who had studied the Arabic text, by Mutekellimin, or
scholastie divines, or by the followers of the great
Imams, who had fixed the rites of public worship. Nor
was the influence of the learned Arabs merely religious.
Their literature and science were dominant in the East,
and their vocabulary leavencd the languages of the
races with whom they came in contact. The extent of
this influence may be perceived by comparing the Per-
sian of Firdousi with that of Sadi. The language of the
former, who flourished in the early part of our eleventh
century, is tolerably pure, while the Gulistan, which was
produced some two hundred and fifty years later, is in
some places little more than a piecing together of Arabic
words with a cement of the original tongue. It is to be
noticed, also, that the latter author introduces continually
Arabic verses, as the highest ornaments of his work, and


" assumes that his readers are acquainted with this classic


and sacred tongue. In the time of Hariri this influence
was in full power: nor was the political supremacy of the
Arabs at an end. Though the Khalifate of Bagdad had
fallen on evil days, yet the Arab rule was still
vigorous in Spain, and the wide-spread race still
asserted a high place in arms and government, as well
as In letters. In Asia the Arabs were to the northern
invaders all, and more than all, that the Greeks were to
the Romans. Melek Shah, the son and successor of
Alp Arslan, was, under the guidance of his Wazir, Nizam
al Mulk, a patriotic prince, The finances were restored,
oppressive taxes were taken off, commerce was facili-
tated by the construction of roads, canals, and market-
places ; person and property were made secure’;
Weil, Geschicte der Chalifen, vol. I1., p. 122.


6 INTRODUCTION.


palaces, mosques, hospitals, and observatories were built
or maintained. But his greatest work was the establish-
ment of a new system of education. Formerly the in-
struction under the Khalifate had been mainly ecclesias-
tical. After the boy quitted the schoolmaster, a per-
sonage ridiculous from his poverty and ignorance, and
the ‘butt of every satirist, he was taken to the mosque,
where a higher class of teachers were supposed to in-
struct him. The teaching was, we may assume, pretty
much what it has again became in Mohammedan coun-
tries. The master sat leaning against a column, and his
pupils were indoctrinated orally with orthodox views on
religion. They were taught the names, the periods, and,
to some extent, the productions of the multitudinous
poets, the traditions of the Prophet and his Companions,
the deformed and contradictory annals of the Khalifate,
and, perhaps, some legendary lore concerning the Pagan
Arabs—their genealogies, their “days,” or battles, their
proverbs, and their extempore recitations. Nizam al
Mulk superseded these institutions by colleges, built and
endowed by the State, in which the instruction was of a
higher order, though the chief object of the scholar was
still to comprehend and to maintain the doctrines of the
faith. One of these schools was celebrated for ages as
the Nizdmtyeh, at Bagdad; another was founded at
Basra.

There was, therefore, nothing in the state of society
in Hariri’s native city, to hinder the employnient of such
talents as he possessed. After the foundation of Bag-
dad, it had partially decayed, and Hariri, in his last
Assembly says, in exaggerated phrase, that there
remains but a border of it. But it was still a rich and


INTRODUCTION. 7


populous, and, compared with many others in those trou-
bled times, asecure place. Political revolutions, and the
incursions of the wandering Arabs from the neighbour-
hood, sometimes harassed it; but the inhabitants, who
considered themselves the most cultivated of the Arabs,
were not debarred from their accustomed pursuits,—one
of the chief of which was the indulgence of a kind of

Athenian disputatiousness on all matters of literature
and criticism. (The grammatical school of Basra was,
from early times, the most famous in the Arabic world..
In its disputes with the rival school of Kufa, the verdict
of succeeding philologers has generally proclaimed that
it was in the right.. The elaborate science of Arabic
grammar was, indeed, founded within the walls of
Basra, and was there developed into the most original
and philosophical product of the mind of the race. In
his last Assembly, Hariri, celebrating the praises of
his native city, says: “Of your number was he who
originated grammar (or syntax’), and fixed it; and he
who devised the measure of poetry, and invented it.”
The former of these was Abi ’1 Aswad ad Du’li, who lived
in the first century of the Hijra, was a partisan of ‘Ah,
and is said to have been present at the battle of Siffin.
This person was, according to the biographer Ibn Khal-
likén, led to undertake the grammatical fixing of the
language, by observing the errors and solecisms into
which the new generation had fallen, through its inter-
mixture with foreigners. Moreover, he was shocked at


? = is defined as the knowledge of the rules which teach the
composition of discourse in the Arabic language, such as the lel
or desinential syntax, the indeclinability, and the like. Tarifat of
Jorjani.


8 INTRODUCTION.


the mistaken enunciation of the Koran, by those who
were ignorant of the Arab desinences, and who conse-
quently perverted its meaning. He applied himself,
therefore, to study scientifically the idiom of Koraysh,

and reduced to a system the rules which the most
eloquent of the Arabs had habitually and unconsciously
observed. The other of these worthies was Al Khalil ibn
Ahmed, the founder of the elaborate and artificial system
of Arabic prosody. Al Khalil was not only a grammarian,
but a poet of eminence, an eloquent preacher, and well
versed in what then was the only history, the genealo-
gies and “Days” of the Arabs. Without doubt he was
a man of powerful and original‘mind. Before him no
one had thought of subjecting the versification of the old
poets of the Ignorance to rules. Poetry had existed for
generations before prosody, as we may conceive that
Homer knew not the difference between a dactyl and a
spondee. Khalil discovered the relations between the
various metres, and by a masterly analysis, fixed the
primitive and secondary fect, dissected them into their
constituent parts, and arranged the whole of the known
metres into the five Circles which have ever since been
taken as the basis of versification. The influence of these
men, and others of similar intelligence and originality,
gave the educated class of Basra an inclination to liter-
ary pursuits, which in course of time was largely mixed
with pedantry. Nowhere were there so many commen-
tators, rhetoricians, grammarians,—each seeking to sur-
pass the other in subtlety of analysis ; poets, poetasters,
anagrammatists, enigmatists, and all the race of those
who set learning above genius, and take difficulty of
execution for merit. The Assemblies of Hariri are,


INTRODUCTION. 9


themselves, the best pieture of the society of the city.
Wherever he may place the scene of the adventure, it is
always Basra that he has in his mind, and the dilettanti
of Basra whose taste he shares or reproves. Though
the city had no longer the political importance which it
possessed in the early days of Islam, when it was the
chief focus of intrigue and revolution, it was yet, from its
geographical position, a place of wealth and refinement.
In the above-mentioned Assembly, the author lauds it
as the spot where the ship and the camel meet, the sea
fish and the lizard, the camel-leader and the sailor, the
fisher and the tiller. In other words it was the port and
emporium for all the lands of the Euphrates and Tigris,
and its trade with the coasts of Arabia, with India, and
even with Africa, enriched it in the worst of times.
Ample provision seems to have been made for literary
pursuits. Several libraries had been founded, and were
open to the public. One of these, established in the
previous century, is said to have been the first that had
been placed in wak/, or .mortmain, since Islam. Into
these libraries the learned and the tasteful flocked, to
read or to discuss the merits of this or that writer.
Hariri, in the second Assembly, gives us a picture of
one of these meetings, in which the poorest conceits of a
poet meet with high admiration. The habits and tastes
of the Basrians had, therefore, doubtless, a great share
in directing the genius of their townsman.

Hariri was of good Arab blood. He is said to have
descended from Rabi‘at al Faras, the son of Nizar, the
son of Ma‘add, the son of “Adnan, and to have boasted of
this lofty ancestry. The sons of Rabi‘ah inhabited
Hijéz for some generations, paying tribute to the


10 INTRODUCTION.


sovereigns of Yemen. But in course of time they rose
against their lords, and in their various tribes carried on
a long and bloody war. At last they passed under the
authority of the kings of Hira. At a later period Bekr
and Taghlib, two of the chief branches of the race of
Rabi ah, quitted their homes in central Arabia, and
migrated to Irak and Bahrayn. After Islam they
settled in the country known still as Diyar Rabi‘ah. In
some verses, addressed to. Hariri by an admiring young
poet, he is described as a descendant of Khindaf, and the
glory of the tribe of Temim. The name of Khindaf, the
wife of Alyas, son of Modar, is applied to all the de-
scendants of Modar, through Alyas, and the mention of
Temim, who undoubtedly descended from Alyas, would
seem to make some discrepancy in the author’s pedigree.
It seems, however, reasonable to conclude that Hariri
was a descendant of one of the races issuing from Rabf‘ah,
and that he represented the old Arab settlers in Irak.
He was born, according to Ibn Khallikan, in the street
of the Beni Haram, so called from a tribe of Arabs who
‘had established themselves there., His name of Al
Hariri was derived, according to the same biographer,
from his having traded in silk (hartr). It is more pro-
bable that it was given him on account of his father being
engaged in this commerce, for our author does not appear
to have had at any time other than official and literary
pursuits. He was possessed of a competence, and his
family owned several thousand palm trees at Meshan,
some distance to the north of Basra. He received a
good education, according to the fashion of his age and
city, and was well versed in grammar, receiving in this
’ science the teaching of Al Fadl al Kasbani, one of the


INTRODUCTION. 11


most celebrated men of the time. The young Hariri
chose the profession which was then most in favour with
those who combined literary tastes with political ambi-
tion. He became a Munshi, or official writer, and
according to ‘Imad ad din, secretary to the Sultan
Salah ad din (Saladin), whose book, the Kharidat al
Kasr, furnishes many particulars of his life, he was
early employed in public duties, and had the official title
of Sahib al Khabar. From this it would seem that his
- office was to inquire into and report upon the affairs of
the province for the information of the central govern-
ment. The high position to which official persons might
rise, and the estimation in which they were held may be
learnt from the author’s twenty-second Assembly, in
which he compares secretaries of correspondence with
secretaries of: finance ; and after praising both highly,
refrains from placing either above the other. Hariri’s
official position not only gave him the acquaintance of
the great, but also, probably, served him in the troubles
of which Basra was for some time the scene. Several
specimens of his correspondence have been preserved,
and they display the qualities which are remarkable in
the Assemblies,—great power over the language, and
felicity of expression, but a fondness for far-fetched
images, metaphorical phraseology, and those plays on
words, which were looked upon‘as among the chief
ornaments of style. He must, however, have devoted
himself steadfastly to general literature, and have laid,
at an early period, the foundation of the extensive and
minute knowledge which is to be found in the Agsem-
blies.

The great object of his literary life became to explore


12 INTRODUCTION.


and expound the niceties of the Arab language and
history. His mind, though it united poetical with cri-
tical power, was narrow; his intellectual vision had
little range. He spied out defects with the microscopic
eye of an insect, but the merits which he prized were
nice and contracted also. His chief works, after the
Assemblies, are two treatises on Grammar, one called
“The Beauties of the I'rab (or desinential syntax),” the
other “The Pearl of the Diver.’ A portion of these
has been published by De Sacy in his “ Anthologie
Grammaticale Arabe.” The former is in verse of the
metre called rejez, and is also mezdty, or methnawi ; that
is, the second .hemistich of each verse rhymes with the
' first. This metre was also adopted by Ibn Malik for
his “ Alfiyeh,” the most complete and celebrated of the
Arabic grammatical poems. THariri in this work com-
ments on his own lines, and treats questions of syntax
with extraordinary subtlety. But a still more charac-
teristic work is “The Pearl of the Diver,” in which the
author points out the faults made by people of education
’ in the use of words and phrases. The observation, judg-
ment, and taste displayed in this book are remarkable,
and the extract in the “ Anthologie” will be frequently
referred to in my notes. . Every sentence is like a drop
of grammatical gold ; moreover the authority of the author
is so high, that his dicta have never been disputed, and
all subsequent writers have avoided the faults which he
points out. But neither in these books, nor in the
Assemblies themselves, is there any sign of original
conceptions, or of the strength to break loose from the
traditions of learning which the author had received.
His works are in some respects the more valuable for


INTRODUCTION, _ ‘13


this, since he represents in its most exquisite and refined
form the culture of his age. He was content to do best
what others were also doing, and to gain the admiration
of his countrymen by excellence in forms of composition
with which they were well acquainted.

As I have not space for a full biography of Hariri, I
shall not dwell on those political troubles which un-
settled the tenor of his life. He was already of middle
age when the Crusaders marched through Asia Minor
into Syria. Basra had suffered like the whole East from .
the convulsions of the Moslem world, but it was at least
spared an incursion of the Christian Franks. Yet it is
to the campaign of Baldwin in Syria that the compo-
sition of the Assemblies is possibly due. The hero of
them is represented as an inhabitant of Serdj, a place in
the neighbourhood of Edessa, and as having been driven
into exile by the infidels who had destroyed the city
and killed or despoiled all the Unifiers of God. But
before I relate the anecdotes, which have been handed
down concerning the origin of our author’s great work,
it will be well to describe what the Makamah or Assembly
really is, and how such a form of composition took its
place in literature.

The first person who composed an Assembly is allowed
to have been Abé 71 Fadl Ahmad ibn al Hasan al Hama-
dani, commonly known as Badi* az Zeman, or ‘The
Wonder of the Time.” A short sketch of his life is
given in a note to Hariri’s preface. It is only necessary
‘to state here that he was one of those literary prodigies
whom it was the fashion of his age and people to admire.
The Arabs had long ceased to appreciate the fresh and pure
spirit of true poetry. The simple grandeur of the poets


14 INTRODUCTION.


of the Ignorance no longer satisfied their tastes. They
did, indeed, place these poets above any that had suc-
ceeded them, but it was principally as authorities on
words, phrases, and grammar, that they valued them,
since such ancient poets were held to have possessed the
true and. chaste language of the Arabs, which had been
lost in succeeding ages by literary corruptions and by
_ admixture with foreign peoples. But in their hearts the
educated class in Irak and Syria preferred the conceits
of Al Bohtori, Al Mutenebbi, and Abd ’1 ‘Ala, to the
noble strains of Imr al Kays and Tarafeh. He was the
most successful man of letters, the most likely to receive
rich presents from princes and governors, and to be en-
circled by admiring listeners, who could show his wit by
some far-fetched comparison, or his learning by the reci-
tation of an enormous number of lines. Some men could
repeat hundreds of kasidehs or poems, others could quote
verses descriptive of every part of the camel or horse, or
in praise or dispraise of the multitudinous tribes. Others
professed to tell the origin of all the innumerable pro-
verbs and sayings which had been handed down, what
hero of the Ignorance had uttered each, and on what
oceasion, and the issue of the adventure. A complete
acquaintance with the Koran was, of course, highly ho-
noured, and a felicity in applying passages of it in a
new and surprising manner to the ordinary concerns
of life was looked upon as legitimate wit. The tradi-
tions of the founder of Islam, his Companions, and im-
mediate followers, formed a department of knowledge,
without which the education of the polite was not com-
plete. Alleged sayings of Mohammed, ‘Ayeshah, Aba
Bekr, ‘Omar, “Ali, ‘Abd allah ibn ‘Abbas, and others, in-


INTRODUCTION. 15


creased in number yearly, and the learned in these things
pretended to test their authenticity, to examine the tes-
timony in favour of each, and even to decide on the very
words and grammatical forms in which each had been
uttered. Lexicography was studied with an intentness
which probably no other people has devoted to its own
language, and the consequence was a sort of literary
consciousness in everything that was written, a looking’
to the form, rather than the substance, which gave an
artificial and pedantic character to the productions of
the time.

This tendency began soon after the establishment of
the Khalifate. In the earlier periods of Islam, before
divinity and grammar had been developed so much as
to form a large part of the most learned man’s stores,
the prodigious memories of the Arabs were exercised on
the productions of the poets, which, though individually
short, formed, as a whole, a mass of literature of incon-
ceivable magnitude. In the century preceding Moham-
med almost every eminent Arab had been a declaimer of
verse, and of these compositions many had merit, while
all were thought worthy of being retained as the utter-
ances of remarkable persons, and as monuments of a
chaste diction which men feared was irrecoverably lost.
Hence the .s|, (rawi), or reciter, was in high favour,
and his accomplishments were looked upon as almost
equal in value to the genius of the poets whom he
handed down. The Rawi was indeed the primitive type
of the Arab man of learning, and it was to the impres-
sion which he made on the people that the tendency
of the educated to the accumulation of vast stores of
curious learning is for the most part to be attributed.


16 INTRODUCTION.


Writing was almost unknown among the Arabs of the
Ignorance at the time when their*poetical vigour was at_
its height. Thé story of the death of Tarafeh, the
author of one of the Mo‘allakat, the most highly prized
of the early poems, shows that neither he nor his uncle
Mutelemmis, also a poef, could read. It is doubtful
whether Imr al Kays could read, though he is placed by
unanimous-consent at the head of all the early poets,—
though the Prophet declared, in a complimentary maledic-
tion, that he would be the leader of the poets to hell,’and
though the Khalif ‘Omar, speaking of poets, said, “ Imr
al Kays is he who has precedence of them ; he has made .
the fountain of poetry to well forth to them.” The
general opinion is that Mohammed could not read, al-
though the diction of the Koran was held even by the
unbelieving Koraysh to be the work, of magic, and
though a modern critic must allow that the author of
the earlier and more impassioned Suras ‘was a great lyric
poet.

Much more, then, were the multitude unable to dis-
pense with the services of the R4wi, who was their
living library, their only means of communicating with
the great spirits of their own time or of the past. The
Rawi devoted his life to learning poetry by heart, and to
informing himself of the lives of the poets and the in-
cidents to which their compositions referred. Sometimes
a Rawi attached himself to a single poet and travelled
about reciting his verses and spreading his fame among
the tribes, But, after Islam, when a great monarchy took
the place of the little autonomies of the desért, and the
Court of Damascus supplanted the fair of ‘Okaz; when also,
in the opinion of many, the canon of pure Arabic poetry


»


INTRODUCTION. 17
’


was closed, the Rawi was transformed into the student
of a capital, and often undertook to master the whole
body of ancient literature. One of these marvels of me-
mory was Abi ’]1 Kasim Hammad, who flourished about
a century after the Hijra, and enjoyed the favour of the
Khalifs Welid ibn ‘Abd el Melik and Hisham. The
house of Omayyeh has seldom a good word from Moslem
writers, but it is impossible to doubt the services to liter-
ature of these great Khalifs, particularly in preserving
the compositions of the past, which were in danger of
being lost through the fall of so many of the reciters
in the ceaseless wars. Much did indeed perish, and had
_ it not been for men like Hammad, and his patrons, we
should now probably be without a single specimen of the
pre-islamic poetry. Welid asked Hammad on one oc-
casion how much poetry he knew: Hammad replied
that for each letter of the alphabet he could recite one
hundred long poems rhyming with that letter, all com-
posed by poets of the Ignorance. Welid resolved to try
whether or no this was an idle boast, and bade him begin
his recitation. Hammad began and went on until the
' Khalif was worn out with listening, and withdrew, leav-
ing a trusty person to hear Hammad to the last. At
that sitting he recited two thousand nine hundred kasi-
dehs, being one hundred for' every letter of the alphabet,
all of which had been composed by poets who flourished
before Mohammed.

It was not only by repeating great quantities of verse
that the Rawi must seek for reputation: he was bound
to remember apposite verses in every conceivable circum-
stance. Many of these feats are recorded, and, though
we may doubt whether they were performed impromptu,

2


18 INTRODUCTION.


it is certain that the Rawi would on occasions deliver
himself of an immense number of passages illustrative of
a single idea. There is a composition extant in which a
stranger is represented as knocking at a door, which is
opened by a girl. The stranger demands hospitality,
and the girl asks him the name of his tribe. He gives it,
and the girl at once replies with some satirical verses
from a poet on that tribe. The man abashed exclaims,
‘“‘No, I spoke falsely,” and mentions another tribe, on
which the girl repeats satirical verses on that tribe also.
The man then mentions another, and another, until the
girl has satirized all the tribes of the Arabs by quota-
tions from the poets. This composition is, of course, an
exercitation by some Rawi, or some man of letters formed
after the same type. The celebrated Asma‘t, who sprung,
like so many Jearned man, from Basra, but lived at Bag-
dad in the time of Harin ar Reshid, not only knew
sixteen thousand pieces of verse in the metre called
rejez, but performed astonishing feats of quotation, so
that there was scarcely an object in nature that he could
‘not illustrate by verses from the ancients. So profound
was his learning that, when in old age he returned to
Basra, the Khalif Al Ma’min used to draw up questions
on doubtful ‘pomts of literature and send them to him
to be solved. | ee

Al Hamadani was a sage of this school, but he had in
laddition originality and wit approaching to genius. Like
many of the most illustrious of the Arabic writers, he
lived far from the Arabic peninsula, and may even have
been of foreign origin. He was born at Hamadan, hence
his name, but his life appears to have been passed and
to have closed at Herat. He-died in the 398th year of


INTRODUCTION. 19


the Hijra, 4.p. 1008. Al Hamadani was celebrated for
his wonderful memory and for his powers of improvisa-
tion. He eould repeat, says one biographer, a lengthy
production which he had heard but once, compose poems
impromptu, turn prose into verse or verse into prose|
with equal facility, he could make verses to any given
rhymes and extemporize in any given metre. Had he
done only this he would not have been superior to num-
bers of others, who were admired in their own circle but
failed to attain a wide reputation. But Hamadani de-
vised a new form of composition eminently fitted to dis-
play the powers that he possessed. It was an advance
to the dramatic style which had always been wanting to
Arab literature. He imagined a witty, unscrupulous im-
proviser, wandering from place to place and living on the.
presents which the display of his gifts produced from the
generous and tasteful, and a kind of Rawi or narrator,
who should be continually meeting with the other, should
relate his adventures and repeat his excellent composi-
tions. To these he gave the name of Makamat, or ‘“ As-
semblies,” because the Improviser was always introduced
as making his appearance in some company of strangers
among whom the narrator happened to be, and as aston-
ishing them by his rhetoric and poetry. To the nar- ~
rator he gave the name of ‘Isa ibn Hisham, and to the
Improviser that of Abi ’l Fath al Iskenderi, and he is
said to have produced four hundred compositions of this
sort. They were of various lengths, some of them con-
taining a long adventure or composition, others consisting
of only a few lines. In some of them it appears that the
two persons of the drama are not introduced, and the
author speaks in his own character. It will be readily


20 INTRODUCTION.


understood that the rhetorician and the Rawi are only
put forward to give liveliness to the composition, and
that the object of the author is to display his eloquence,
his poetical power, and his learning. The setting, if it
may be called so, of the Makamah is unimportant, the
adventure related is often trivial, the diction is all in all.
Both the personages strive to exhaust the beauties of
the Arabic tongue, andthe Improviser especially is made
a master of eloquence. But it may be remarked here
that Hamadani is much less rhetorical than his imitator
Hariri; he has less artifice, if less genius, and in his
Assemblies the story or adventure is more dwelt
upon and less sacrificed to the display of style. The
lapse of a century had spread the fame of Al Hamadani
through the Arabic world, and he had before Hariri’s
time found imitators. The learned were pleased with a
class of composition which lent itself so readily to the
rhetorical diction they admired, and the people loved to
listen to the mingled rhythmical prose and verse as they
were half chanted by the reciter. Al Hamadani was
honoured with the title of Badi‘ az Zeman, “the Wonder
of the Time,” an appellation which almost supplanted
| his name. :

The influence of Hamadani could not but be powerful
on the learned and refined Hariri. The life of the latter
had been passed in scholarship, but he was approaching
his fiftieth year before he devoted himself to the work
on which his fame rests. The origin of the Assem-
blies was, according to the general tradition, as follows.
The armies of the Crusade had forced their way into
Syria, and carried on a remorseless war against the
Moslems. Baldwin, brother of Godfrey, took possession


INTRODUCTION, 21


of Edessa, which had been surrendered to him by the
inhabitants, who were mostly of the Armenian race.
According to an Eastern chronicler the following event
took place in the year 494 (a.p.1101). A Turkish chief
named Sokman collected, in the neighbouring city of
Serdj, a body of Turkomans and prepared to march against
the Franks. The latter advanced to meet him, and the
army of Sokman was put to flight. The Franks advanced
against Serij, laid siege to it, took it, and put to the
sword the men capable of bearing arms. The women
were made slaves, the place was plundered, and only
those of the inhabitants escaped who sought safety in
flight. ,

Some time after, Hariri, being in the mosque of the
Beni Haram, in the quarter of Basra where he lived,
observed an old man enter in worn garments, and with
all the marks of poverty. He had the wallet of a foot
traveller, and had evidently come from afar. Abi’l
Kasim ‘Abdallah, the son of Hariri, who tells the story,
says, ‘The company asked him whence he came; he
answered, ‘ From Serij:’ asked concerning his kinyeh or
byename, he answered that it was Abi Zayd.” This
wanderer had excited the curiosity of the company by
the fluency and eloquence of his address, in which he
had related the destruction of his city, the loss of his
daughter, and his own exile and beggary. Hariri went
home and wrote what is now the forty-eighth Assembly,
in which he describes this incident. In this Assembly,
which bears the name of Hardmiyeh, the usual order of
narration is reversed; for Abd Zayd is his own Rawi,
and Harith, son of Hammam, is introduced incidentally.
Aba Zayd is made to say that he had long wished to


22 INTRODUCTION.


visit Basra, the city of learning and piety, of mosques
and shrines, and that, at last, when fortune had brought
him to.it, he had made his way one evening to the mosque,
‘where the people were engaged in a grammatical dis-
eussion on the Jo!! —i,>, or interchangeable letters.
He had entered to ask their bounty, not to learn their
opinions on grammar; but, before he had time to test
their liberality, the hour of prayer arrived, and the
people began their devotions. "When these were over, a
man of noble mien and great eloquence stood forth and
made a pious address to the worshippers, who asked the
reason of his:zeal, and were informed by him that he
was a backslider, who had fallen from the practice of piety
into debauchery, and had broken the vow which he had
made never to drink wine. The stranger concluded by
asking the faithful if they knew of any due atonement.
The dialogue between the repentant sinner and the
people is of course recited at length by Abi Zayd, who
then relates that he had started forward and told the
stranger that there was an effectual method of wiping
away his guilt, and that was by bestowing alms on him,
Abi Zayd, for that he had fallen from high estate to
bitter poverty. In plaintive verse Abi Zayd described
that he was of the dwellers in Serdj, a people of religion
and right guidance; that there he had been wealthy and
liberal, his mansion the gathering place of guests, and
his substance freely given up to them; that like the
Arabs of old he had kindled his fire on the height to
attract the traveller, when the niggard let his fire burn
low. This prosperity had now passed away, for God had
brought the people of Rim (so the Arabs call the

Byzantines, whom Abi Zayd here confounds with the


INTRODUCTION. 23


Franks) on the land, and these had ee the home of
every Unifier of God, that is, every Moslem. He, him-
self, had been driven forth to exile and poverty, while
his daughter remained a captive in their hands, and he
had not wherewith to ransom her. If, then, the stranger
would pity and relieve him he would find pardon from
God for the fault which he deplored. Abi Zayd then
goes on to relate that the stranger had given him money
-and promised him more, and that Al Harith, son of
Hammam, had complimented him on his eloquence and
skill in opening men’s purses. But, says Abi Zayd: I
laughed exceedingly, and recited without hesitation :—


“Live by beguiling, for thou art in a world (or time) whose sons
are as the lions of Bisheh.


And turn on the stream of craft, so mayest ne make the mill
of livelihood go round.


Hunt after the eagle, but if the chase fail, be content if thou but
strike off a feather.


Seek to pluck the fruit, but if that escape thee, be satisfied with
the leaves.


Ease thy heart from distracting care if fortune be adverse ;
For the changing of events gives notice to man of life’s uncer-


tainty.”

Every subsequent Assembly senaed by Hariri
is but a variation on this theme. His hero, Abi Zayd,
is always the same ill-dressed, crafty old man, full of
genius and learning, unscrupulous of the artifices which
he uses to effect his purpose, reckless in spending in
forbidden indulgences the money he has obtained by
his wit or deceit, but with veins of true feeling in him,
and ever yielding to unfeigned emotion when he re-
members his devastated home and his captive child-
There can be no doubt that Hariri intends to represent


24 INTRODUCTION.


the groundwork of Abd Zayd’s history as true, however
much the vagabond improviser may romance on other
matters. But it may be as well to mention here a
supplement to the tradition concerning the origin of the
character. The commentator, Ar Razi, cited by De Sacy
in his commentary to the forty-eighth Assembly, re-
lates as follows: “I was told by the Imim Al Hafiz
al Bendchi, who had it from Abdi Bekr al Berathini,
who had it from Al Hariri, that the Serfji was a fluent
old man, full of eloquence and cleverness, who visited
us in Basra, and, standing in the mosque of the Bend
Haraém, conversed with the people and asked alms of
them. One or more of the ‘magistrates was there, and
the mosque was crowded with people of eminence,
whom he pleased with the fluency and beauty of his
language, describing how his daughter had been made
captive by the men of Rim, as is mentioned in the
Assembly called Al Haramiyeh. “That evening,”
continued Hariri, ‘there were assembled at my house
some people of eminence and learning in the city, and
‘I related to them what I had witnessed, describing the
eloquence of this mendicant, and his art in effecting his
purpose, upon which each one of them told how he had
heard the same man discourse in a different mosque, and
on a different subject, still more excellently ; for he had
changed his dress and figure in every mosque, and
showed his wit by a variety of artifices. I was filled
with wonder, and began that same night the composi-
tion of the Assembly Al Haramiyeh, imitating his style ;
and when it was finished I read it to a company of the
chief people, who admired it exceedingly, and brought
it to the knowledge of the Wazir, Sheref ad Din


INTRODUCTION. 25


Anishirwén ibn Khalid. He piseeed me to compose
others like it, and I complied.”

There is no reason to doubt the truth of this adven-
ture. The talent for rhetorical and poetical improvisation
which had always distinguished the Arabs, even in the
most barbarous times, had been so much exercised by
the literary fashions of the age, that it was no uncommon
thing to find even an obscure and needy person who
could pronounce a khotbah or moral address in rhymed
prose, or could versify on a given theme. The Abi’l
Fath of Hamadani, and the Abi Zayd of Hariri,
were not imaginary types, and though we may well
suppose that the themes of such strollers were often
common-place, and their style unpolished, yet they
served to give more gifted persons the idea of a new
form of composition. It may even be that the Assem-
blies of Hamadani had inspired, here and there, a poor
man of letters with the ambition of playing the part of
Abd’l Fath, and that Abi Zayd was one of these.
However this may be, it is certain that Hariri’s first
essay in this kind of writing was received with un-
bounded applause. The tradition which makes Sheref
ad Din Abi Nasr Anéshirwan al Isfahani the patron
of Hariri is probably correct. He was a man of ability
and taste, and became in later years Wazir to the Khalif
Mustarshid billah, and to the Sultan Mas‘id. In his Pre-
face Hariri says that the composition of his Assemblies
was at the dictation of one whose hint was a command,
and to obey whom was a pleasure and advantage. This
is generally supposed to refer to Andshirwan, though
Tbn Khallikan, in his life of the author, says, that being
at Cairo, in the year 656, he had seen a copy of several


26 INTRODUCTION.


of the Assemblies written by the hand of Hartri, and
on the cover of them a declaration that he had composed
them for the Wazir Jelal ad Din ‘Amid ad Dowlat ibn
Sadakah, who was also Wazir of Mustarshid. But this,
which rests only on the doubtful genuineness of a hand-
writing, cannot outweigh the general tradition that is
opposed to it, and Ibn Khallikan himself seems to feel
this, for he adds, ‘‘ God knows the truth.” It is reason-
able then to conclude that Andishirwan, having read the
first composed Assembly, and perceiving that Hartri had
rivalled in it his predecessor, Badi* az Zeman, urged the
author to add others to it, and that Hariri obeyed, with
less unwillingness and modesty than he pretends. The
tradition is, that he composed, from time to time, forty
Assemblies, each of them, as we see, recounting an ad-
venture of Abi Zayd, but without any connection with
any other. His performances obtained for him the
friendship of Andshirwan, and he frequently visited
Bagdad and payed his court to his patron. From a copy
of verses preserved by ‘Imad ad Din, it would seem that
the author was somewhat importunate in his devotion,
for he complains not only of his separation from Ant-
shirwan, but also of the latter’s neglect in not answering
his letters. But such was the style of the poets of the
time, who carried the besetting sins of servility and
adulation further than any of their race before or since.

The friendship of Anishirwan could not, however,
prevent Hariri from being endangered both in life and
property by the calamities which came upon his city.
Wars, predatory inroads of the neighbouring Arabs,
political revolutions, followed by merciless executions of
men in high position, disturbed many years of the author’s


INTRODUCTION. 27


life. But his Assemblies were still given to the world
from time te time. As soon as he had composed some
ingenious exercise, he fitted it to an adventure of Abi
Zayd, named it after some city of Islam, and repairing
to the portico of the mosque, read it to the admiring
crowd. The learned criticized; some in a friendly spirit,
others with less good will, and Hariri never hesitated to
correct his work if he found in it an inelegant expression,
a word used without authority, a solecism in grammar,
a phrase of the Koran or a tradition misapplied, or a
proverb wrongly quoted. On the other hand, he main-
tained his opinion when convinced that he was in the
right, explaining his meaning, and refuting his adver-
saries in commentaries by his own hand, or in lectures
to his pupils, whom he instructed in the full meaning of
his compositions. His reputation soon surpassed that of
the “Wonder of the Time” himself. Nothing so witty, so
ingenious, and, what an Arab savant valued above all, so
difficult, had ever been produced. Al Hamadani’s most
esteemed compositions were tame when compared with
the marvellous rhetoric of his successor. The Assem-
blies, handed about singly or in groups, made their way
to all the cities of the East, and were destined, before
the death of their author, to be perused from the Indus
to the Guadalquivir.

Yet Hariri was not without his literary mortifications. |
One of these affected him extremely. Having written
no less than forty Assemblies, he collected them into a
single volume, and repaired to Bagdad, to enjoy the
triumph which ought to await the first man of letters of
the time. But envy and misrepresentation had preceded
him thither. His opponents were not content with


28° INTRODUCTION.


asserting that the work was full of faults, they also
affected to believe that it was not his own. Al Ha-
madani had been a real improviser, as. has been men-
tioned ; he could compose extempore in prose or verse,
and in public, at the request of any bystander. But
Hartri was not. an Abi’l Fath, or an Abi Zayd. He
was a slow and, painstaking writer, and his exquisite
compositions required time and solitude. A part of the
public seems to have assumed the principle, that he who
describes: an improviser must himself be able to im-
provise, and finding that Hariri did not possess this
faculty, to have argued conversely that he was not the
author of the Assemblies. When Hariri came to Bagdad
he found that his ability and his honesty were doubted.
The adventure which followed is thus related by Ibn
Khallikin. “ Hariri at first composed only forty Assem-
blies. Coming from Basra to Bagdad, he presented
them as his work, but a number of the literary at
Bagdad would not believe that he was the author, and
said that the book was the work of a rhetorician of the
Maghrib (Western Africa) who had died at Bagdad,
and whose papers had fallen into Hariri’s hands. The
Wazir sent for Hariri to the Diwan, and asked him
what was his profession ; he replied that he was a munshe
(an official writer and composer): the Wazir then bade
him compose a risdleh (a kind of ornate letter or address)
on a subject which he named. Jariri retired with ink
and paper to a corner of the hall, and remained long,
but God inspired him with nothing, and he rose up
ashamed.” On this occasion, one of the doubters, Abi’l
Kasim ‘Ali ibn Afiah, or, as others say, another poet
among his opponents, made a satirical couplet on him:


INTRODUCTION. 29


"We have a Shaykh, descended from Rabfat al Faras, who
plucks the hairs from his beard in his perplexity :

May God send him an utterance at Meshin, as he has struck him
with dumbness at court.”


The point of this lies in the circumstance that Meshan
was a place of exile for those who displeased the govern-
ment at Bagdad, while it was also the, site of Hariri’s
estate, and the district in which he had discharged
official duties.. According to Ibn Khallikén it was very
unhealthy. It appears, also, that Hariri was accustomed
to boast of his descent from Rabifah, -and ‘that when
engaged in thought he plucked at his beard. ‘ On his
return to Basra he composed ten more Assemblies, and
sent them to Bagdad, excusing himself for his former
incapacity, by alleging his reverential fear in the Wazir’s
presence.” The number of the Assemblies was thus
raised to fifty.

From Hariri’s preface, from various indications in the
Assemblies themselves, and from traditions handed
down by the commentators, we can perceive that the
author had to meet other objections to his work. If not
a plagiary, he was in the opinion of some an incorrect
writer ;‘in the opinion of others a person of doubtful
piety. The critics spied out defects in his learning or
diction; the rigid inveighed against the lightness of his
narratives. Long after the Assemblies were completed,
the author in his Preface speaks of their origin, and
probably referring his present feeling to the epoch when
he began to compose, says that he had sought to excuse
himself with his patron from such a work, since he knew
the envy and opposition that are excited by authorship.
He says that he had reminded him of the proverb concern-


30 INTRODUCTION.


ing the man who puts together but two words, or indites
merely a couplet of verses, namely, that if he succeeds
he is exposed to envy, and if he fails he is brought into
coritempt.’ Hefanticipates any objections of plagiarism,
by stating that in his whole book only four lines of
poetry are taken from the writings of others, and that
‘these are introduced avowedly as quotations. The rest,
he says, is his own, whether it be good or bad. He
speaks with a modesty which was, perhaps, hardly sin-
cere, of the superiority of Al Hamadani, inasmuch as
the latter had originated what he, Hariri, could only
imitate. But his chief endeavour is to defend himself
from the charge of frivolity, and of giving to the world
idle compositions of a kind reproved by the Koran.
The strict Moslems had always held works of fiction to
be, if not blameable, at least unworthy to be written or
perused by Serious believers. The people had, indeed,
always delighted in the. narratives of the story-teller,
and yet, ,with the inconsistency of the multitude, they
were inclined to join with those who denounced them as
disreputable. The Koran undoubtedly gave a sufficient
pretext for bigotry. . Mohammed’s anger was often roused
by the satires which were directed against him by poets,
as well as by the histories and tales which Koraysh
preferred to his own revelation. The zeal of the re-
former was, perhaps, largely mingled with the jealousy
of the author. In later years, when he had become a
powerful prince, he showed a more tolerant disposition ;
he listened to and praised the verses of Al Khansa,
lamented that he had never looked upon the warrior-
poet “Antarah, and even presided at a mufakharah, or
poetical contest, as to superior worth and valour, between


INTRODUCTION. 31


the poets of his party and those of Tem{m, an incident
which led to the conversion of that tribe. But in the
Koran and the Traditions there was enough to justify
those who denounced such vanities. In the thirty-first
Sura it is written, “There is one who will buy idle
stories to make men wander from the way of God
without knowledge, and who takes them for an amuse- -
ment. To such a one is a debasing punishment. If.our
ordinances be recited to him he turns away proudly as
though he heard them not, as though a weight were on
his ears: announce to him a dolorous punishment.”
This passage had descended from on high as a
denunciation of Nadr ibn Al Harith, who had bought
books of the Persians, and told stories out of them to
the Koraysh (see Baydawi i doco), and had said, “ If
Mohammed tells you of ‘Ad and Thamid (the wicked
tribes destroyed by God), I will tell you of Rustem and
Isfendiar and the Chosroes.” This same Nadr had also
incited the Jews to pose Mohammed with questions
concerning the Seven Sleepers and Thu’l Karnayn, and
had brought on him a temporary humiliation, when the’
Prophet had undertaken to answer without having added
“Tf it please God,” and had been therefore left without
inspiration, until after a time Gabriel descended and
revealed the eighteenth Sura, called the ‘ Cavern.”
Nadr had been afterwards taken prisoner at the battle of
Bedr and beheaded by the hand of “Ali. As there could
be no doubt in the mind of any believer concerning
Nadr’s fate in the next world, his career was a terrible
warning to future story-tellers, who should put the
untrue on a level with the true. God had also de-
nounced (Sura xxiii, v. 68-69) that idle “night-talking,”


32 . INTRODUCTION.


in which his messages had been ridiculed, and to which
Hariri’s Assemblies bore a suspicious resemblance.

The author did not escape annoyance on this subject.
It is related that one Abdi Tahir, who afterwards
commented the Assemblies, came to Basra, attracted
by the reputation of Hariri. He repaired to the mosque
to see him, and as at that moment several learned men
were there, each surrounded by his circle of listeners, he
asked which was Hariri. ‘There he is,” said one,
“‘ spreading his follies among the people.” Abd Tahir,
surprised to find so distinguished a man unpopular
among his own people, retired without another word.

In the Preface, Hariri takes pains to answer these
objections. He says, that though the ignorant and
prejudiced might detract from him on account of what
he had published, and represent it as belonging to a
class of writings prohibited by the law, yet whoever
looked at the matter intelligently, and with a due regard
to principles, would place the Assemblies in the list of
useful writings, like the fables which introduce beasts,
or inanimate objects, as, discoursing. For the Assem-
blies, he argues, have like these a moral purpose; they
are for instruction, not for display, and the fictitious
story tends to the improvement of the listener. So that,
if good or ill desert are to be measured by intentions, he
is not only blameless, but may claim the merit of a
moral and religious teacher. This defence was well
adapted to satisfy reasonable theologians, since very few
ventured to condemn the fable and the parable, a style
of composition immemorial among Eastern nations, sanc-
tioned by the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures, and
singularly pleasing to the popular taste. The fables of


INTRODUCTION. 33


Atisop had been known to the Arabs of a very early age,
and been attributed to Lokman ‘the Wise, a mythical
personage whom some made contemporary with King
David. The Sanscrit “‘ Hitopadesa” had passed into
Arabic literature through a Pehlvi translation under
the name of “ Kalileh wa Dimneh,” otherwise known as
the Fables of Bidpai. It was one of the most esteemed
works in the literature, for the translator ‘Abd allah ibn
al Mokaffa’, though a Persian by birth and a Magian dur-
_ ing the greater part of his life, was so excellent a writer
of Arabic that he even affected to surpass the style of the
Koran, a piece of blasphemous vanity which shocked
the public. ‘Abd allah was horribly murdered by order of
the Khalif Mansir, about the year 140, but “ Kalileh wa
Dimneh” had been in Hariri’s time one of the most
popular books in the language for more than three
centuries. It may be observed that the Persian “Anwari
Sohayli” is another version of the same work. These
stories and others of their kind had been generally
looked upon as harmless and even profitable. The
liberal minded might even quote the Koran ii. 24, ‘God
is not ashamed to use a gnat or what is little larger,
as a similitude.”

We must not deny, however, that those inclined to
strictness had some ground for their censures. Hariri} is
not, indeed, an irreligious or, in any way, an immoral
writer. In the whole of the Assemblies, there is not
a phrase which can justify a suspicion of free-thinking.
His mind and temper were not those of a sceptic, still
less of one who would endanger fortune and position by
questioning the prevalent theology. Indeed the habit
of speculation was at this time on the wane in Irak.


3


34 ; INTRODUCTION.


The weakness of the Khalifate, and the troubles of
the time, had made the learned shrink from anything
which might bring them into disfavour, either with
the local authority or with the multitude. The new’
ideas which, under the reign of Ar Reshid and Al
Ma’min, had penetrated into Islam, through Persian
infidels and Syrian Christians, were now stifled, and
Bagdad no longer represented the revolt of a civilized
and intellectual society against the narrow formularies
of the Koran. The Arab intellect was indeed busy,
and some of its greatest masters of philosophy were
yet to flourish. But this activity was chiefly in Spain,
amid a community which had taken up the tradition
of a higher culture, when it was passing away in the
East. Though Andalusia had had its troubles, though
Cordova had been sacked, the palace of the Khalifs over-
thrown, the remains of the library of Hakim destroyed,
yet, in the time of Hariri, philosophical studies had
regained their former sway. It was not so in Irak, and
least of all in Basra, which was eminently the Moslem
city, and devoted to a strictly orthodox culture. So
far as we can judge from the Assemblies, Hariri was
utterly ignorant of Greek letters. He may, for what we
know, have held the prevalent opinion that they were
dangerous, and their patrons, like the Khalif Al
Ma’min, hardly good Moslems. He was versed in
the niceties of doctrine and discipline. The thirty-
second Assembly, of which a sketch will be found
further on, shows his knowledge of the. Shafit rite,
to which he belonged, and at every turn the Koran
and the Traditions are quoted. Furthermore, there is
a real moral excellence in much that he writes. Many


INTROD UCTION| 85


of his discourses and his verses, though ill placed in
the mouth of Abi Zayd, are without a blemish. But
undoubtedly the spirit of the whole composition might
well have offended the more scrupulous. Abdi Zayd,
with his dishonesty and dissoluteness, is made too at-
tractive, and it is plain that in the mind of the author
his genius more than compensates for all his faults.
Hariri depicts too favourably the witty and cynical
improviser with his two wives—one old and weather-
beaten, like himself; the other a handsome, impudent
young jade, the ready instrument in her husband’s
knaveries. He has too much partiality for the beautiful
and graceless son whom Abi Zayd is bringing up to
his own wicked ways, for his descriptions altogether
to escape censure. Then the appending of discourses,
filled with the most lofty devotion, to the adventures
of a profligate, the mingling of the sermon with the
jest, of the psalm with the Bacchanalian song, will find
objectors at all times. It may be argued in defence
of the author that the style of composition had been
fixed by his predecessor, Al Hamadani, and that in so
artificial a work the characters must not be judged by
the laws of matter-of-fact morality. Abd Zayd and his
family are but the setting of the pearls of poetry and
rhetoric which the author lavishes on the world.

Some of the Assemblies, though very few of them,
are not without a graver fault. Whatever be the age or
country of a writer, he cannot but lose in reputation
by indecency. Hariri has but very little to answer
for on this head: almost everything he has written
may be read in any assemblage, and this comparative
purity has done much to maintain his book as an in-


36 INTRODUCTION.


strument of education. Only one Assembly is founded
on a trick absolutely indecent. In others there are here
and there questionable phrases, which may be rendered
by euphemisms, without danger to the sense. When-
ever the author is led from the path of decorum, it is
by his desire to show his wit in the management of
double-entente. This figure, if I may call it so, was
looked upon by the literary of the time as a sort of
philological exercise ; and Hariri, ‘however grave and
sober might be his own character, addressed himself to
it as he would to any other branch of scholarship. To
produce a series of sentences which, to the duller
listeners, should be common-place, but should excite a
smile of admiration from the quick-witted, was an
achievement which Hariri had not the moderation to
forego. ‘He also mingled sacred things with something
like ribaldry, in a manner that must have given deep
offence to strict professors. In his description of his
dead warrior, in the twentieth Assembly, he quotes
the Koran; and in the forty-fifth, the ceremonies of
the Pilgrimage—the most sacred act of Moslem wor-
ship—are treated with a licence still more audacious.
But I must repeat that these faults are few and far
between, that they hardly appear, except to the Arabic
student, and detract little from the merit of Hariri’s
work.

The composition and correction of the Assemblies
occupied the last twenty years of the author’s life. As
has been mentioned, he died about the year 1122 of our
era, at the age of 68.. The arrangement of the work,
as we now have it, is by himself, and to several of
the Assemblies explanatory notes are added by his


INTRODUCTION. 37


own hand. As the adventures of Abi Zayd have little
connection with each other, there is hardly a trace of
order in the sequence of the compositions. The scene is
shifted from one city of the Moslem world to another far
remote from it, and the hero appears alone or with his
family, in poverty or wealth, without any attempt to
form a consistent history. The Haramtyeh, which was
the first composed, is placed forty-eighth in order. Only
the first and the last two have any special claim to
the place they occupy. In the first, Harith is repre-
sented as unacquainted with Abi Zayd. In the forty-
‘ninth, Abi Zayd, being in the decline of life, urges
his son to live by the noble and profitable art of beg-
ging, and in the fiftieth he is shown as a penitent,
redeeming, by a religious life, the errors, of his past
ways, and parting from Harith for ever. At the end
of the Assemblies is a paragraph by the author, in
the spirit of his apology in the preface. He says that
the composition was a task beyond his strength, and
undertaken unwillingly—alluding to the instances of
his patron, Anishirwin. He admits the little merit
of his work, and affects to believe that it has had but
small success. He asks pardon of God for whatever
it contains that is frivolous and unedifying, and throws
himself on the divine mercy. This literary modesty we
may assume to be hardly sincere. Hariri had really
a very high opinion of his own powers, and Abi
Zayd’s boasts only represent the author’s estimate of
the compositions which he places in the mouth of his
hero. Although in the preface he speaks reverentially
of Al Hamadani, we cannot but see that he believed
himself to have surpassed his model. In the forty-


38 INTRODUCTION.


seventh Assembly Aba Zayd is made to say :—“If the
Alexandrian (that is Al Hamadani’s hero Abi’l Fath),
did go before me, know that the light rain precedes
the shower, yet the excellency is with the shower.”
Indeed the praises which Hariri received were enough
to exalt him in his own opinion, and to make him
careless of unfriendly critics. Complimentary poems,
and still more solid proofs of esteem reached him from
his admirers. Mention has been made of the verses
of Nejm ad Dowleh, celebrating Hariri’s merits, and
lauding him as the glory of the tribe of Temim. In
the thirty-ninth Assembly, Hariri had mentioned in
terms of honour the Amir Dobays, the Asadi, son of
Sayf ad Dowleh Sadakah, the Arab prince of Hilleh, and
in the commentary of Sherishi it is related that Dobays
was so delighted with the compliment that he sent
him presents of the most costly kind.

More happy than this benefactor, who was put to
death by the Seljik Sultan Mas‘id, or, according to
another account, was driven out of the country, and
joined the Christian crusaders in Syria, the author of the
Assemblies ended his days in peace. He left three sons,
who followed the profession of their father, and appear
to have been men of ability and learning. One of them,
‘Obayd allah, became chief Kadi of Basra; another,
Abi’l Kasim ‘Abd allah, was an official at Bagdad; the
third, Abd ’l ‘Abbas Mohammed, succeeded his father in
his post at Meshan. They had been well instructed
by Hariri in the Assemblies, in order that they might
teach them after his death, and explain their difficulties
to the numerous students. Of Abi’l ‘Abbas it is said
that he was a learned and eloquent man, especially


e


INTRODUCTION. 39


versed in the Assemblies and ready with the best expla-
nations. From these and other pupils the first com-
mentators derived their materials. Among the contem-
poraries of the author, who admired and studied his
work, the first place is due to Zamakhshari. He will
be found frequently mentioned by the commentators,
under this name or that of Jar allah “the neighbour
of God,” which he received from having passed several
years at Mecca. In learning he was not inferior to
Hariri, and he was especially one of the acutest gram-
marians of the age. But it is as a commentator on
the Koran that he is chiefly famous. His great work, of
which an excellent edition has been published at Calcutta,
is the foundation of the more commonly used commen-
tary of Baydawi, who has borrowed from it largely.
But as Zamakhshari was tainted with the doctrines of
the Mu‘tazilin, his work has never been held as a sound
guide, while Baydawi represents the strictest Sunni
orthodoxy. Zamakhshari read the Assemblies with
admiration, and placed them on a level with the Mo‘al-
lakat. Two verses which he composed upon them have
often been prefixed to the manuscript copies, and will
be found on the title-page of De Sacy’s edition :—

“I swear by God and his wonders, by the place of the pilgrimage

and its rite,


Hariri is worthy that his Assemblies should be written in letters
of gold.”


Such was the judgment of contemporaries: of his
posthumous fame I shall have to speak in connection
with his imitators and commentators.

Ibn Khallikan tells us that Hariri was of mean aspect,
and extremely ugly. A stranger who came to visit him,


40 INTRODUCTION.


and to study under him, did not sufficiently conceal his
dislike of the master’s appearance. Hariri addressed him
in some verses, the purport of which was that,—_


«“ T am a man to be heard of, not to be seen.°”


( The reader will have already gathered that the Assembly
is a kind of dramatic anecdote in the telling of which the
_author’s object is to display his poetry, his eloquence; or
his learning, and that with this view the subject is con-
tinually subordinated to the treatment of it, the substance
to the form. But a full understanding of these composi-
_ tions and of the two elements of which they consist,
namely the rhymed prose and the verse, cannot be ob-’
tained without a consideration of the earlier Arabic liter-
ature. The origin of poetry among the Arabs, as among
other peoples, is lost in obscurity ) but there is a general
consent that in primitive times there was no poetry save
the verses which each man uttered as he had occasion.
A singular aptitude for poetital expression, and an im-
pulse towards it, distinguished both sexes from the earliest
ages. The feelings of love or hate, of pride, defiance,
ridicule, or pity, found utterance in verse, and this faculty
of i improvisation was, it would seem, cultivated assiduously
even by the most barbarous tribes. The ‘warrior defying
his opponent in the field, the lover imploring his mistress,
the herald in presence of a hostile band, would declaim a
distich, or more; and these utterances, if they contained
some’ striking thought or phrase, were handed down, and
inseparably associated with his name. This was the origin
of Arab poetry, and it is well to bear in mind its chief
characteristic, for it is one which runs through the litera-
ture from first to last. From the earliest recorded versicles


- INTRODUCTION. 41


down to the artificial pastiches Sane at Cairo or
Beyrout in the present day, the form of the Arab poem
is that of an allocution. |The dramatic and the epic
‘elements are almost wanting. It is the poet who addresses
his friend, or his patron, or the world, and makes known
the feelings of his own soul, just as‘did the unlettered
chieftain of pagan Arabia. His personality always pierces
through the composition, as also does for the most part
the personality of him who is addressed. The poet never
effaces himself, he is always present, telling us what he
thinks and feels, and bidding us notice that.it is his
panegyric, and his satire, and his moral observations that.
we are reading. ‘

It is worth while to give some .specimens of these
traditionary versicles’ in order that the reader may
view the earliest and least developed form, the pale-
ozoic life, of Arabic poetry. For the purpose of illus-
tration it does not matter whether the lines ‘wete ac-
tually spoken by the legendary personages .to whom
they are attributed: in some cases we know this ‘to
be impossible, in most it is very doubtful. But it is ,
certain that the verses are of. considerable antiquity,
that they have come down from days when ‘the regular —
poem, the kasideh, had not yet been developed, and
that they do actually represent that kind of improvised
poetical utterance to which each man had recourse on
occasion.

Zarifeh, the wife of ‘Amr ibn ‘Amir Muzaykiyah, had
a dream which presaged the breaking of the dyke of
Mareb, the event known in Arab tradition as the Say! al
‘Arim (see note to 17th Assembly). Horror-stricken she
addressed her husband,—


®


42 INTRODUCTION.


“Nought have I seen, O king, like to-day :!
I have seen a cloud that banished sleep,
A cloud that lightened long,
That thundered and its bolt burst forth.
It set in flames all on which it fell,
Nor remained ought but it was o’erwhelmed.”


To the questions of her husband Zarifeh returns poetical
answers of the same kind, and succeeds in persuading
‘Amr to quit the country. Of a similar character is the
dialogue between Jathimet al Abrash, king of Hira, and
his sister Rakdsh, when the latter hastily married ‘Adt
ibn Nasr, after the king’s consent had been obtained
during a fit of drunkenness,—


“Tell me, O RakAish, and deceive me not,
Hast thou given thyself to a free man, or to a base born ?
Or to one lower, for thou art fit for one lower?
Or to a slave, for thou art fit for a slave?”


Rakash answered,—
“Thou gavest me in marriage, and I knew it not
Till the women came to adorn me.
This is from thy drinking the strong unmixed wine,
And thy continuing in thy folly.”

The early legends are full of such lines, which, whether
or not we ‘admit their authenticity in each case, bear
testimony to the habit of the Arabs to use such poetical
discourse. Now there are two forms which the poetical
diction of the race has taken for itself. The first of these
is the rhymed prose, such as makes up the greater part
of the Assemblies of Hariri, the other is metrical verse
such as Abii Zayd declaims here and there. It is worth
while to consider the origin of these two dissimilar forms
of poetical expression, and how it comes to pass that each


1 Extract from Mas‘idi given by De Sacy in his “ Mémoires sur
Vhistoire des Arabes avant Mahomet,’ Vols. 47 and 48 of *‘ Mémoires
de l’Académie Royale des Inscriptions et belles lettres.”


INTRODUCTION. 43


should have so permanent a popularity, and be united
with the other in the same composition. os
xIt is impossible to become acquainted with Arabic
literature without perceiving that there is a fundamental
relationship between the poetry of the Hebrew and that
of the desert tribes, whose intellect was first awakened
fifteen hundred years later. On the resemblance, or we
might rather say the identity, of the vocabulary of the
two languages it is needless to speak. It is said that six-
sevenths of the Hebrew roots are to be found in the
Arabic Lexicon, and whole classes of the most familiar —
words, such for instance as the parts of the body, are the
same in both languages. Such a radical identity of
speech not only proves a community of race, but justifies
us in believing that the intellectual tendencies and the
forms in which they would arrange themselves would be
similar. Both the Hebrew and the Arabic poetical litera-
ture were built up, we may assume, on the common
foundation of the Semitic life, and they certainly amid all
their diversity, bear traces of this primitive union. On
this point it is interesting to compare the versicles which
we find attributed to the early heroes and heroines of
Arabia with those which are imbedded in the most ancient
narratives of the Old Testament. Of these the one which
comes to us as absolutely primeval, and which probably
has a very high antiquity, is the address of Lamech to his
two wives, which in our version runs as follows :—
“ Adah and Zillah, hear my voice,

Yeo wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech :

For I have slain a man to my wounding,

And a young man to my hurt.


If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,
Truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.”


44 INTRODUCTION.


The origin and meaning of this strange composition
are lost to us. But to whomsoever it is to be attributed,
it undoubtedly belongs to that kind of poetical utterance
on occasion which existed among the early Arabs. It
may be noticed here that the first four lines of Lamech’s
song have a species of rhyme in the uniform desinence of
the affixed pronoun. The curse and blessing of Noah on
his sons, though less poetical in form, may be considered
as belonging to the same class. Compare also the answer
of Jehovah to Rebekah when she inquires concerning the
struggling of the children in her womb, and the blessings
of Isaac upon Jacob and Esau. Compare also the bless-
ings pronounced upon Isrdel by Balaam, the curse on
Moab at Numbers xxi. 27, and the song of Israel at the
digging of the well, verse 17. With the age in which
these compositions were produced we are not concerned.
It may bé that some of them express the patriotic pride of
Israel after the triumphant establishment of the tribes in
Canaan, But neither the popular tradition nor the histor-
ical compilation would have attributed such a diction to
patriarchal times unless the habit of poetical expression
in important circumstances of life had been known among
the people. In fact, the original type of Hebrew poetry is
ever the ode, or song, inspired by some great event, and
showing forth the joy or sorrow, the thankfulness or
supplications, of the poet. Such are the songs of Moses
in Exodus and Deuteronomy, the song of Deborah, the
lamentation of David over Jonathan, and the Book of
Psalms generally. Like the Arab poetry, they are the
expression of individual feeling in which the personality
of the bard is never lost, and it is reasonable to believe
that the original type of them was a species of impro-


INTRODUCTION. | 45


vised utterance common to both thesa branches of the
Semitic race.

A further similarity is to be found in the form. of
Hebrew poetry. The reader of the English translation of
the Bible can comprehend, as well as the scholar, the pre-
vailing characteristic of a great part of its poetical lan-
guage. This is what is called parallelismy which consists
in making the second clause of a sentence answer to the
first, either in the way of antithesis, or by the expression
of the same idea in different words, or by the amplification
of the idea. Itis, as it were, a rhyme of the sense, and not
of the sound. This peculiar structure of Hebrew poetry
has rendered it especially fitted for translation, since
it is independent of the tongue in which it is expressed,
and can only be destroyed by gross want of taste in the
interpreter. Whoever will content himself with a literal
rendering of those sublime thoughts, may transfer the
Bible to his own language essentially unharmed. The
loose paraphraser may dissipate the spirit of the Psalms,
or the Book of Job; nothing that is grand or beautiful
can survive his incapacity; but the experience of ages
has proved that the power of the Hebrew writers has
been hardly diminished in the translations which have
made them known to the Christian world. This parallelism
is the chief though not the only formal rule of Hebrew
poetry. Where it is absent we find its place supplied by
strophic arrangements of the versicles, by refrains of
words, by alliteration, and to some extent even by rhyme.
But whatever rhythmical aids the Hebrew poetry may
have adopted, we must hold as established that it was
not subjected to the laws of what we call prosody. For
centuries this has been doubted, and writers of succeeding


46 INTRODUCTION.


ages, both Jews and Christians, have sought to discover
in the poetical books of the Bible certain rules of versifi-
cation. The vain efforts of European scholars have been
mainly incited by the declarations of Josephus. That so
famous and so learned a writer should have erred, is not to
be admitted without manifest proof, yet the barrenness of
the labours of so many ingenious men seems to leave no
doubt that the author of the Antiquities of the Jews mis-
understood or misrepresented the genius of what had in
his time already become an archaic language. Desirous,
apparently, to give the Hebrew literature importance by
showing that it was formed on models similar to those of
Greece and Rome, Josephus speaks of the hexameter,
pentameter, and trimeter measures that are to be found
in the Bible. Of the song of Exodus xv. he says: Kai
Movo7js wdny eis tov Ocdv, éyxdptdv Te Kal THs edpevelas evyaptc-
tlav meplexovaay, év é€apérpp Tove ouvrlOnor. Jewish Anti-
quities, Book II., c.16. Similarly in Book IV., ec. 8, he
speaks of the second song of Moses in Deuteronomy as
molnots éEdperpos. In Book VII., c. 12, he says that David,
" having overcome his enemies, and given peace to the land,
wdas eis Tov Ocdy Kal tuvous cvverd~ato pétpov Trotkidov. Tos
pev yap Tpipérpous, Tous Sé wevrapérpous emdince. It is fair to
Josephus to suggest that he possibly meant that these
ancient compositions were of a kind which in the classic
languages would have taken the form of heroic, or elegiac,
or lyric verse. But modern writers have not so under-
stood him, 4nd the notion that the Psalms and the Book
of Job could be separated into spondees and iambuses,
dactyls and anapests, has haunted Hebraists from the
times of the early fathers down to our own day. Even so
eminent an Orientalist as Sir William Jones has sought


+ INTRODUCTION. 4]


to apply the Arabic prosody to the Book of Job. The
malediction of the patriarch on his natal day at chapter iii.,
he divides into long and short syllables after a method of
his own; but, when all is done, he entirely fails in proving
to us that there is any metre at all. The more searching
criticism of modern scholars has given sufficient negative
proof that metre, as it exists in the classic languages and
in Arabic, is not to be found in the sacred poets of the
Bible. ‘
Nor ought the Arabic scholar to wonder at its absence,
Josephus and Jerome were prepossessed by the analogy of
the classic languages; the scholars of modern Europe, who
came to the study of Hebrew with tastes formed on classic
canons, may have thought poetry without metre to be
impossible, and hoped that the key which should unlock
the secrets of Hebrew prosody would be yielded to per-
severing ingenuity. But the Arabic scholar is aware that
the most ancient, the most popular, the most sublime, and
powerful order of poetry in the Arabic language is as little
metrical as Isaiah or Job: Among both races the original
and primeval type of poetry is the old Semitic unmetrical
accordance. Among both the simplest element of poetical
speech, the primitive literary unit, is the Versicle, a short
and serried sentence vigorously expressing a single idea,
and detached from what goes before and comes after it.
This, in its original form, as it exists in Hebrew and in a
large department of Arabic poetry, is without metre. All
poctry in both languages is made up by the agglutination
of these versicles to one another; but the Arab type
differs from the Hebrew in this, that whereas the Hebrew
chiefly confines itself to parallelism, that is to a polarity
or dualism between two versicles, the Arabic possesses


48 INTRODUCTION. .,


this dualism, combined with the principle of continuity.
The dualism appears in the parallelistic speech, as it was
uttered by the orators of the desert, and as it exists in the
Assemblies of Hariri. The continuity is more conspicuous
in the semi-metrical verse, called reez, while both are
combined in those compositions of a stricter prosody
which alone the Arabs dignify with the name of poetry.

When we examine the most ancient legends that have
come down to us we find that they contain poetical
utterances in the unmetrical form. Zarifeh, of whom
we have already spoken, prophesies the bursting of the
dyke of Mareb in rhymed prose :—

“By the light and the dark ; by the earth and the heaven ;
Surely the trees shall perish ; and the waters shall return as in the
time of old.”

In each of these lines the first and second parts rhyme
in their last word, while the whole is unmetrical. In the
ensuing dialogue the answers of Zarifeh are in a similar
strain and rhythm, and whoever may have been the author
of them, they undoubtedly represent the oldest form
of Arab poetical speech.

I would, therefore, place the rhymed prose of the
Arabs as the analogue of the Hebrew poetry, and refer
the origin of both to the primeval ages of the Semitic
race. To utter one versicle, and attach to it another
with an antithetic correspondence in sense or sound,
formed the germ of all poetical composition. This
parallelism, which among the Pagan Arabs was gen-
erally applied to a discourse in this style, perhaps
existed before rhyme was introduced, for it is said that
in ancient times the khotbah, or oratorical address, was
not rhymed. But rhyme was at a later period universal,


INTRODUCTION. 49


and the rhymed prose to which the Arabs pian the name
of ss, from a fancied resemblance between its rhythm
and the cooing of a dove, is the peculiar diction of the
race. It may almost be said that there can be no
narration or oratory of the highest order except in
rhymed prose. It is beyond a doubt that it was cul-
tivated among the tribes long before regular poetry was
known, and was used almost in common conversation.
Whenever the speaker wished to be emphatic and im-
pressive he supplemented the proposition he uttered by
another of similar tenor, which should rhyme with it in
the last word. This will be sufficiently comprehended
by whoever reads the present translation ‘of the Assem-
blies, Women and even children learned to throw their
thoughts ‘into this rhythmical form, which gave an
epigrammatic piquancy to their addresses or retorts.
The rhymed diction of ordinary life was doubtless of
the most simple kind, consisting of but two or three
short sentences of similar desinence; but on greater
occasions long orations in this style were uttered. The
chief of a tribe addressing his followers, the herald
claiming satisfaction or hurling defiance, the plaintiff
before the judge, the rivals contending for superiority
of pedigree or achievements spoke with rhyme. Elo-
quence was looked upon as tame and powerless without
this symbol of elevated style. The history of rhymed
prose is the history of the Arabic literature. It was the
earliest, and has been the most enduring form of poetical
eloquence. From the orators of the Ignorance it was
adopted by the preachers of Islam, and the name ibs
was applied to the weekly exhortations of the mosque,
which are commonly in rhymed prose. Works of the
4


50 INTRODUCTION.


highest character have been written throughout with
rhyme, among which I may mention, on account of its
extraordinary merits, the History of Timur or Tamer-
lane by Ibn ‘Arabshah. This composition, which
approaches nearer to the epic poem than anything in
the language, is one of the latest productions of the
great ages of Arabian literature. Sir W. Jones bears
witness to the genius of the author. ‘ Equidem inter
poemata heroica Zimuri historiam, quam composuit scrip-
tor admirabilis Ebn Arabshah, non vereor recensere: ita
pulchris enim abundat imaginibus, ita jucundis narra-
tionibus, et descriptionibus naturse, morum, affectuum ;
ita magnificis illuminatur figuris, tam dulci numerorum
varietate, tanta elegantiarum copia conspergitur ut nihil
cogitari possit accommodatius ad lectorem vel delectan-
dum, vel ‘docendum, vel etiam permovendum. (Poeseos
Asiaticee Comentarii.)”

In this work rhyme and assonance abound with a
luxuriance that almost oppresses the reader, and the em-
‘ployment of such a style by an author of originality
and genius, who had before him the greatest productions
of his predecessors, shows how deeply rooted in the
nature of the people was the sentiment for unmetrical
cadence. In almost all Arabic works the Invocation
and Preface with which the book begins are also in
rhymed sentences: in the ordinary prose of the most
sober narratives rhyme continually appears when the
writer is describing anything which excites admiration
or astonishment. So independent of a metrical prosody
is poetry among the Arabs.

The reasons for the prevalence of rhyme, and for the
undoubted fact that it has existed anterior to and in-


INTRODUCTION. 51


dependent of metre, may be found in the structure of
the Arabic language, and the mathematical precision of
its forms. If the root letters of a word be represented
by white counters,- and the ten augmentative letters—
those contained in the words slu3 ,.!\—be represented
by coloured counters, every strictly Arabic word, whether
primitive or derived, can be expressed to the mind so
that we can say whether the counters mean that the
action indicated by the root is past or present, is per-
formed by male or female, or whether they signify him
who does the action, or who suffers it, or who is of a
capacity to do it, and so on of a multitude of notions
related -to the root. The derivative idea is always
expressed by the same derivative form, and a form of
one root is necessarily assonant to the same form of
another. Here then is a connexion between the sound
and the signification of words which would naturally
suggest the use of rhyme: and we may conclude that
it made its appearance not merely in obedience to a
rhythmical impulse of the soul, but as representing


a real connexion and responsion of ideas.
I have said that the Arab poetical speech not only


makes use of parallelism as in the simplest form of
rhymed prose, but also expresses itself in a sequence of
corresponding versicles. These, whether metrical or
not, have a continuous rhyme, and such a sequence of
continuously rhymed periods is the germ of the Arabic
poem. The unmetrical sequence is to be found in its
highest perfection in the earlier and more poetical Suras
of the Koran, when Mohammed, first touched with the
prophetic afflatus, poured forth his warnings and denun-
ciations among the Koraysh. It is related of Mohammed


52 INTRODUCTION.


that he was ignorant of the laws of versification, as they
were employed by the great poets of the century which
preceded him; and that when by chance he quoted a
verse he often destroyed the metre by changing the
order of the words. Thus, when ‘Abbas, son of Merdas,
and of Khansa, the poetess, dissatisfied with a division
of spoil, addressed the Prophet in some verses, among
which was the line :—

“My booty and the booty of my horse ‘Obayd has been given to

*Onaynah and Al Akra’.”

Mohammed quoting the line said, “Al Akra‘ and “Onay-
nah,” which destroyed the metre. Abd Bekr corrected
him, and observed, “‘ Truly has God said in the Koran,
‘We have not taught him poetry and it suits him not,’”
Koran, xxxvi. 69. But Mohammed had a poetic style
of his own, which was consonant with the deepest feelings
of his race. In his transports of zeal or devotion he
uttered his unmetrical rhythms and awed even his most
determined enemies. The shortest and simplest, but not
’ the least powerful of these, are the Suras which are
placed at the end of the Koran, ‘and consist of but a
few versicles, as the Ikhlas, in which he elears or quits
himself of believing in any but God; the Suras called
Al Falak and An Nas, in which he invokes the divine
assistance against calamity; and that in which he curses
Abi Lahab and his wife. The most poetical Suras are,
somewhat longer, but present the same characteristics.
According to tradition, the first revelation received by
the Prophet was the 96th Sura, called Al “Alak. In
this the rhyme is four times changed, the versicles of
each paragraph being marked by a different desinence.
The two first versicles have one desinence, the three


INTRODUCTION. 53


next another, the nine next a third, the four next a
fourth, while the last, according to a caprice which is to
be met with more than once, rhymes to no other.

Oné of the noblest compositions in the Koran is the
8ist Sura, called At Tekwir, descriptive of the day of
judgment. It begins as follows :—


“ When the sun shall be enwrapped ;

When the stars shall shoot down;

When the mountains shall be moved ;

When the brood camels shall be abandoned ;

When the wild beasts shall troop together ;

When the seas shall boil ;

When the souls shall join the bodies ;

When the maid buried alive shall be asked

For what crime she was slain ;

When the leaves of the Book shall be opened ;

‘When the heaven shall be drawn aside ;

When the blaze of hell shall be kindled ;

When the Garden shall, be brought near,

The soul shall know its work.”
These fourteen versicles have the same desinence; then
the Prophet takes another, to which he gives four .
versicles; and lastly, a third, to which he gives eleven.
This last paragraph is marked by the peculiarity that in
the rhyme it makes no distinction between the letters
Mim and Nin, owing, doubtless, to the elose relation
between their sounds. I might multiply examples, but
shall content myself with drawing the student’s atten-
tion to the 87th and 92nd Suras, which have a continuous
rhyme throughout, one of nineteen and the other of
twenty-one verses, and requesting him to compare them
with the 20th Sura, in which the same rule is observed
with longer and more prosaic sentences.

These rhymed but unmetrical utterances of Moham-

med make a nearer approach to versification than the


54 INTRODUCTION.


ordinary rhymed prose, which consists of but two kari-
netdn, or corresponding sentences, rhyming with each
other, inasmuch as the former have the continuous
rhyme, which is a chief characteristic of the regular
poetry. But a still further advance is represented by
the semi-metrical rejez. This is the oldest and simplest
form of versification known among the Arabs, and vast
numbers of lines belonging to it were handed down from’
the pre-Islamic period. It was the favourite vehicle for
the poetical or sententious utterances of chiefs and war-
riors, sages and diviners. When poetry was more
seriously cultivated, its composers aspired to a more
harmonious and dignified measure, and placed them-
selves under the restrictions of a more elaborate prosody ;
but the early declaimers, who improvised in obedience
to the feelings of the moment, and were probably un-
conscious that they were uttering poetry at all, contented
themselves with the rude measure which reminded the
-hearer of the weak and trembling trot of the sickly
she-camel. The rejez in its normal form consists of a foot,
—— ~ —., twice or three times repeated, but as each
of the first three syllables may be'made long or short,
the structure is simple to baldness, and the tone un-
dignified. Khalil ibn Ahmed, though he gave the rejez
a place in his Circles, would not admit that lines
composed in it were «5 or poetry, since they wanted
the peculiar property of the Arabic ~~ or verse, which
eonsists invariably of two hemistiches. Yet the reez,
though superseded in ambitious compositions by more
perfect metres, has never been neglected by the literary.
It has always received a kind of respect as a primitive
form of versification, descended from the heroic ages,


INTRODUCTION. 55


and still adapted to short and pithy compositions. Hariri
makes much use of it in his work, and for excellent
specimens of it the student may be referred to the Third
and Fifth Assemblies. The Arabic prosodists seem to
have detected the relationship of the rejee to rhymed
prose, for Al Akhfash held that the two-footed rejez was
only prose.: The first who composed a regular poem, or
kasideh, in reez, is said to have been Al Aghlab al ‘Ajili,
in the time of Mohammed. After him came Al “Ajaj; but
T believe that no long poem of conspicuous merit has been
- written in this measure. The grammatical treatise, called
the Alfiyeh, by Ibn Malik, which is often cited in the
nofes to this translation, is in rejez muzdawij; that is, the
second hemistich of each verse rhymes with the first,
and each rhyme is limited to a single verse. So also are
the “‘ Beauties of Syntax,” by Hariri.

Verse, or poetry proper, was a development of rejez.
As poetical culture was extended, the Arabs felt the want
of more harmonious and stately measures, and gradually
formed for themselves a more varied and yet a more
severe versification. Throughout the Arab prosody we
may, however, trace the primitive and rudimentary reez
in the iambic and anapeestic character of the lines. The
taste and scholarship of Hariri have enabled him to
diversify his work by introducing most the metres which

were in use in his time; but among the older poets only
four or five of these were commonly employed. In the
celebrated collection of Arab verses, called the Hamaseh
of Abi Temmam, more than five hundred of the pieces
are in the metre fawil; the kidmil, wdéfir, and basit follow
at a great distance, each having less than a hundred,
while the others are but sparingly used. Of the seven


56 INTRODUCTION.


Mo‘allakét, as gencrally given, those of Imr al Kays,
Tarafeh, and Zohayr ibn Abi Sulmé are of the metre fawil,
those of Lebid and ‘Antarah are kdmil, that of ‘Amr ibn
Kulthtin is wdfir, and that of Harith ibn Hillizeh is
khafif. The favourite metre of the early poets, the ¢azil,
is remarkable for its grave and sonorous character—it
may be called the heroi¢ measure of the Arabs. In some
verses, addressed by Abd ’1 “Ala to a man of letters, the
poet, excusing his own deficiencies, says, by way of
illustration, ‘Do you not know that the metre which is
the most complete of metres, is sometimes modified by a
weak letter.” This epithet of “complete” is explained
to refer to the ¢awil, because a verse of this metre may
consist of forty-eight letters, while in the medid and basit
the longest verse can only contain forty-two. This property
from which it takes its name, and also the prevalence of
long syllables, made it especially suitable to the loftier
class of poetry, whether descriptive or elegiac. The kdmil
is in its structure the most closely related to the reez.
Indeed, a kdmil line may become pure rejez by the employ-
ment of permissible licences, though if the peculiarity of
the kdmil, the use of two short syllables at the beginning
of the foot appear even once, the poem is considered to be
in kémil, and not in reez. It would, therefore, seem that
kémil and the closely related metre wdfir represent the
first developments of the reez, and mark me transition to
a more elaborate versification.

Hariri, one of whosé aims was to exhibit the classi¢
metres, uses for the most part those for which there is
high authority; but, long before his time, the peets of
Islam had added to the number which had been known
during the Ignorance. Although the metres of the old


Uy


INTRODUCTION. 57


time were looked upon as the best and noblest, and
justly so, since they sprang from the original poetical life
of the people, yet the craving for variety, and, perhaps,
the intercourse with other nations, led poets to séek new
forms of versification. (One of the first who did this
was the celebrated Habib ibn ‘Ows, commonly known
as Abi Temmém. He was born about the year 190
(a.D. 805), near Damascus, and is placed with his country-
man Mutenebbi in the first rank of the later poets. His
' profound knowledge of the Arabic literature is proved by
the collection of poetical pieces, called the Hamaseh, which
he made, and which is only one of three similar compila-
tions; the other two being the Fohdél ash Shu‘ara (the
Heroes of the Poets), and the Ikhtiyarat, or Selections.
He is said to have known by heart fourteen thousand
pieces of the metre rejez, besides Kasidehs, and fragments.
Nor were his own compositions few. His poems in all the
various classes of eulogy, satire, elegy, and the rest, are
said to number 4849 and to contain 7707 verses. Two
or three new metres are ascribed to him, and as he had
an unbounded popularity in his own age, it is probable
that the poets who imitated him considered, his authority
for their use as equal to that of the ancients. But the
best writers restricted themselves generally to the sixteen
metres described by Khalil ibn Ahmed, the systematizer
of the national prosody; and even of these some have
always been but little used. The Persians, who adopted
®e Arabic versification, have formed for themselves other
metres, such as karib, jedid, and mushakil, and have
invented circles to explain the metamorphoses of the
Ruba‘i, or quatrain, which they orignated. But in
Hariri, the forms of the original Arabic poetry will be


58 INTRODUCTION.


found almost unperverted. His work resumes all that
was most classical and of thé highest authority in the
writings of his predecessors, and no better aid to the
study of the laws of Khalil can be found than the diverse
improvisations of Abd Zayd.

It will thus be seen that in the Assemblies the highest
literary forms: of the language are united. Abd Zayd’s
harangues and sermons are those of the pagan orator
or the Moslem preacher; Harith’s descriptions are in the
rhetorical style -which the most accomplished writers
imitated from them; the diversified poetry of the Arabs,
from the simple rgez to the most ornate diction of the
kasideh, is represented in Abi Zayd’s verses, and we have
‘a compendium of all that had established itself in popular
favour during many centuries. European readers will
perhaps wonder that the author, who was master of such
resources, should have restricted himself to two or three
characters, dnd to such a monotony of adventure. He
has evidently fancy and originalitye how is it then that,
having advanced so far to the dramatic form, he should
- not have been led to improve on his type, to place Aba
Zayd in.more varied circumstances, and surround him
with more interesting people ? We have all through the
same adventurer, making gain by tricks which resemble
each other ; we have always the circle of dilettanti, or the
Kadi generous, or foolish, or stingy, as the case may be.
Yef the author, whatever may be his apprehensions of
other demerits, never excuses himself for his repetitious.
One explanation of this is that the adventure is always
treated as subordinate to the poetical or rhetorical dis-
play, that the audience did not care how Abi Zayd
was brought on the stage so long as he discoursed with


INTRODUCTION. 59


sentiment and wit. But it must also be| observed that
this uniformity of type is one of the characteristics of
Arabic literature. The East has never been studious of
novelty, and if a thing was good, an audience would not |
weary of it any more than of the striped mantle, or the
turban which had been worn from time immemorial. We
modern followers of fashion, who cannot read the same
authors, follow the same amusements, or wear the same
shaped clothes two years together, have an impatience of
monotony unknown even to our own European race in
former ages. The comedy of the ancients had but a—
limited range of character and incident. The two old
men, and the “ cultus adulter, stultus vir, callida nupta ”
were reproduced in a manner which in modern times
would weary the most indulgent audience. The popular
Italian comedy with its harlequin and scaramouch carried
sameness to the extreme. The people in its unsophisti-
cated state loves to recur to familiar types, as a child will
sooner hear Jack the Gian® Killer, or Tom Thumb, for
the tenth time than be told.a new story. This‘clinging
to established forms is especially remarkable among the
people of the Semitic race. Successive generations of
writers are content to produce variations upon a single
theme. To fear the reproach of imitation never enters
the mind of those to whom the prevalent usage has al-
most the sanctity of a law. ‘They follow the manner,
and even repeat the phrases of compositions conse-
crated by antiquity, or popular esteem ; for their country-
men, far from desiring originality of style, would pro-
bably resent it. So we find some of the later Hebrew
Psalms to be almost a repetition of those of an earlier age,
and as if pieced together from their fragments. The


60 INTRODUCTION.


diction of prophecy is fixed by Joel, or by some pre-
decessor whose compositions have not reached us, and
through five centuries the strain of promise and maledic-
tion never varies. The spirit, the style, the images, the
rhetoric, are everywhere identical. We can see that each
prophet is inspired, not only by his own fervent genius,
but by the utterances of those who have gone before, and
that he adopts instinctively and, it may be, unconsciously,
the traditional sacred language of his order. We have
even direct imitations of particular passages, as, for in-


" stance, the prophecy against Moab at Jeremiah xlviii.,


which is plainly taken from Isaiah xv. and xvi. ; also the
curse of Jeremiah on his birth at xx. 14, which is identi-
cal with the opening verses of the third chapter of Job.
In Arabic literature the same character is manifest.
The poet never hesitates to fashion his composition after
a prevailing type, and to repeat this continually without
any striving for originality. To mould his production
on any other than the tM@ditional form would be to


_ expose himself to the charge of bad taste, and what was


worse, of want of learning. {(The, kasideh, the finished
poem of the Arabs, was subjected to arbitrary laws,
which, though perfectly needless, were observed by
numberless writers as if sacred and inviolable. The
first kasideh is attributed to Mohalhil Ibn Rabi‘ah, who
composed it on his brother Kolayb Wa’il, one of the
most celebrated persons of antiquity; but the poet who
impressed on the kasideh the type which it retained for
ages was the celebrated Imr al Kays, the son of Mohal-
hil’s sister Fatimeh. The judgment of Mohammed and
‘Omar upon this prince of Arab bards has been already
mentioned. The Khalif ‘Ali, a man of taste and cul-


INTRODUCTION. 61


ture, was also full of admiration for the great poet of
the Ignorance. These three founders of Islam only
followed the opinion of the most illustrious people of
their age, and transmitted it to posterity. Imr al Kays
had introduced, or first made popular, a certain opening
of the kasideh, which consisted of an address of the poet
to two friends, who were supposed to have halted with
him at a spot where at some past time the tribe of the
poet’s mistress had dwelt. The poet points out the traces
of the encampment, the ashes of the extinguished fires,
the deserted pen of the camels, entertains them with the
story of his loves, and then passes, by an abrupt transi-
tion, to the proper subject of his poem. This capricious
overture caught the fancy of contemporary poets, and
to introduce a subject by the two boon companions, the
mistress, and the deserted encampment, became a favourite
device. Each of the seven Mo‘allakat opens in this .
manner, and what was originally only the caprice of a
single poet became an almost inviolable law. Even
Harith, son of Hillizeh, who was a hundred years old
when he improvised his Mo allakah before “Amr ibn Hind,
and so leprous that he stood behind a veil till the king,
delighted with his poetry, bade him come forth and sit
by his side, laments his separation from an imaginary
beauty. Succeeding poets followed the same fashion.
Whatever the occasion of the kasideh, the writer intrc-
duced his mistress, praising her beauty, and lamenting
her absence, before he turned to his subject, which was
generally the eulogy of some great man. Mutenebbi’s
mistress figures in some of his poems, but he is said to
have been the first to have discontinued this nasib, or
mention of the beloved one, and to have begun with the


62 INTRODUCTION.


eulogy of the patron. Such a poem was, however, not
judged to be complete according to poetical laws, and
was described by the words = and Wlazi\, as if docked
or truncated. It is needless to dwell upon the general
uniformity of the Arab kasidehs in other respects. The
poet praises himself, his race, his camel, his horse, his
martial exploits, his sword and spear, and, in later times,
the prince whose favour he desires to win. For cen- ©
turies every composition of this class was constructed on
the same type, and limited to the same narrow range of
ideas. The poet’s merits were judged by the skill with
which he reproduced and varied the thoughts of antiquity.
We need not wonder, then, that Hariri neglected to
change the character of the Assemblies as received by
him from Hamadani. Not only did the traditional im-
proviser and rdw? suffice for his contemporaries, but even
succeeding imitators have never thought it necessary to
add to the persons of the drama. The Assemblies of
Nasif al Yazaji, composed within the last few years, are
as rigidly simple in their structure as the productions of

~ eight hundred years ago.’
It now remains for me to speak of those qualities
of Hariri’s work which give it so great a linguistic
value, and have made it, wherever the Arabic language


’ An analogous instance of permanence of a fashion in composition
is to be found in the Persian ghazal, which, by a law as capricious as
that I have mentioned, must contain the poet’s name in its closing
lines, as a sort of signature. The poet Kab ibn Zohayr began his
kagideh in honour of Mohammed with the words “Su‘id has departed,”
and such was the influence of poetical fashion that, according to
Suyiti, the Arabs in after times had no less than 900 poems begin-
ning with “Su‘id has departed.” Su‘id thus became the name
generally used to signify a cruel and capricious mistress. (See
French note at Vol. Il. p. 195, of De Sacy’s Hariri).


INTRODUCTION. 63


is studied, the text-book of those who would obtain
a profound and scientific knowledge. It is not too
much to say that whoever has read the Assemblies
and their commentators, will have formed a notion of
every department of purely Arabic and Moslem
culture. Grammar, lexicography, rhetoric, poetry,
history, antiquities, biography, popular customs and
sayings, thedlogy, religious traditions, civil and eccle-
siastical law,—all enter into the work ; which is, as
it were, a compendium of “ leading cases,” in all sorts of
studies. The student is placed on the track of almost
every kind of learning, and if he follows the indications
of the author, and seeks, with the help of the commen-
tators, to explain his allusions, penetrate his intentional
obscurities, overcome his cunningly-devised difficulties,
verify his endless quotations, and keep in memory the
‘multifarious information on language and grammar, he
will have been initiated imto all the learning of the
author’s age, and in his subsequent studies will have
only to build on a foundation which has been solidly and
securely laid.

The first peculiarity of the Assemblies is the use of
words which are rare but ancient, classical, and remark-
able in the eyes of the learned, from their having been
found in some esteemed composition, and become the
subject of doubt or contention. In the time of the
author the language was much corrupted among the
people, by long, intermixture with foreign races. The
Arabs had always held the belief that seclusion from the
rest of mankind was necessary to preserve the purity of
their language. The undefiled speech of the race was
only to be found among those tribes of Hijaz or Nejd


64 INTRODUCTION.


which had lived remote from Persian or Greek influence,
and developed the Semitic tongue into the matchless
idiom of the Mo‘allakét and the Koran. Ibn Khaldin,
an acute and reflecting writer, and in critical power
above most of his countrymen, speaks in a well-known
passage of the corruption of the Arab language. He says
that the descendants of Modar, who used the classical lan-
guage, lost the faculty of speaking it in purity by dwell-
ing among people of other races, since they borrowed of
them forms and words. And for this reason, he con-
tinues, the speech of Koraysh was the most eloquent
and pure, since they were most remote from the abodes
of foreigners. Next in excellence was the speech of
Thakif and Hothayl and Khoza‘ah, and the Beni
Kinaneh and Ghatafan and the Beni Asad, and the
Beni Temim. But as for the tribes more remote from
Koraysh—as Rabi‘ah, and Lakham, and Jothim, and
Ghassan, and Tyyad, and Koda‘ah, and the Arabs of
Yemen, their speech was imperfect, through their mix-
ture with the Persians and the Abyssinians; and thus,
in the opinion of Arabic linguists, the greater or less
distance of a tribe from Koraysh was the measure of its
deflection from the pure language of Modar. It may be
noticed here that this opinion concerning the conserva-
tion of the language in the heart of the peninsula has
acquired an irresistible argument from the travels of Mr.
Palgrave, who has satisfied scholars that the language of
the Koran, with all its inflections and syntax, is still the
dialect of the secluded Nejd. But in the days of Hariri,
and in the city of Basra, the chaste speech of the Arabs
was the possession of only a few. The unlettered
Bedouin, who came with camels or horses from the


INTRODUCTION. 65


desert was, for the use of words and their precise pro-
nanciation, a greater authority than the most learned
grammarian. For the corruption that had set in imme-
diately after the first conquests of Islam, had so trans-
formed the speech of Irak and Syria, that the classic
language, in its refinement, was obsolescent, and had
become the artificial study of the lecture-room and the
mosque. Even so early as the’ close of the first century
of the Hijra, the great Khalif, Welid ibn “Abd el Melik,
spoke so corrupt a dialect that he could not make himself
understood by the Arabs of the desert.' Great scholars
like Sibawayh and Zamakhshari, are said to have
possessed in perfection the idiom of Modar, though not
even of Arab blood, but Ibn Khaldin relates that they
had acquired this by mingling from infancy with men of
the tribes who spoke a chaste language. To the great
number, even of the educated, the speech of Koraysh and
of the great poets was almost a dead language, not only
as regarded its desinences and constructions, but even as
to the use of individual words. Now this ancient
speech, which every day became less understood of the
people, was the principal study of the learned. Gram-
matical researches began in the first century of Islam,
through the necessity of explaining doubtful passages of
the Koran. It was then that the diacritical points were
added to certain letters, the Arabs having originally, in
the little that they wrote, expressed more than one
sound by the same character,—a practice which filled
the sacred text with ambiguity. The tyrant Hajjaj ibn
Yasuf was, according to Ibn Khallikan, the first who
attempted to remedy this defect, but his system differed
1 Lane. Preface to Lexicon, p. Viii.
5


66 INTRODUCTION.


from that which was afterwards introduced by Abia ’1
Aswad. As the vocabulary of the language increased,
through a sort of fusion of the dialects of the tribes,
which took place in the non-Arabian provinces; as
various forms of the same word, of greater or less
authority, came to be indiscriminately used; and as the
multitude borrowed from the Persian, the Syriac, or the
Greek, so much more did the learned think it incumbent
upon them to separate the chaste idiom from the corrupt,
to show what was Arab and what was A‘jami or foreign;
to determine the most genuine form of any word that
was spelt or pronounced in more than one manner, to .
declare whether _» or .», & or (2, ¢ OF ¢, ¢ OF s was
correct, to decide on the presence or absence of hamzeh,
and to fulfil for the people the functions of an Academy
of Letters.

Theirs was no easy task. The European, who launches
out into the vast ocean of the Arabic language, knows
how long and weary is the voyage, and yet he has to
guide him the grammatical luminaries of a thousand
years. The doctor of Basra or Kufa did, indeed, speak
the language which he commented, but this very fami-
liarity in some respects increased his difficulties. He
dwelt amid a Babel of conflicting forms and vocables, and
had to decide—from a Koran of imperfect orthography,
from poems which, for the most part, were only orally
transmitted, or from the diverse utterances of various _
tribes—what was the pure Arabic form of this or that noun
or verb. It is impossible for one who has not perused
the writings of these acute and indefatigable scholars
to imagine the labour they expended in the determination
of the classic tongue. For the proper form and signifi-


INTRODUCTION. 67


cation of a word they looked primarily to the Koran as
the absolutely perfect standard of speech, and then to the
productions of the early poets. In this they had the
sanction of the Prophet himself, who, according to a tra-
dition, had said, that when a man was in doubt as to the
language of God’s word, he would do well to take the
poets to counsel. Poetry was especially fitted to fix the
form of a word, since the sdcnsion of a line would depend
on the vowelling and on the inflection of the words of
which it was composed, and thus insure an approximation
to exactness. The shawahid, or proofs of lexicography
and grammar, were therefore chiefly verses of the poets,
and these are to be found imbedded in endless numbers
in all commentaries and grammatical treatises. But only
-the earlier poets were of high authority. Within a cen-
tury of Mohammed’s flight from Mecca, the Moslem
empire stretched from Kashgar and Moultan to Morocco
and the Pyrenees, and the Arab man of letters was exposed
to the corrupting propinquity of men of many different
races. Only a poet of the Ignorance, that is, one who
had died before the preaching of Islam; or a Mukhadram,
that is, one who was contemporary with it, was looked
upon as of paramount and unquestionable authority. An
Islami, that is one who was born after the rise of Islam,
was of less consideration, and after the first century, the
poets are called Muwelleddin, and are only quoted for
their literary beauties, and not as authorities for the
Arab tongue.

It was among the designs of Hartri to exhibit in their
right form, or signification, a number of these words about
which there was, or had been, doubt. With this view he
introduces them into verses in such places that the metre


68 INTRODUCTION.


determines their structure, or the rhyme their orthography.
Where two similar forms may both be correctly used, he
contrives to bring them together, and to make it evident
from the sense that they have the same meaning. Where
two words are derivatives from the same root, but differ
in form, or where they are identical in orthography, but
are derived from different roots, or where they have the
same letters, but a different vowelling, the juxtaposition
serves also to awaken the reader to a nice discrimination
between them. It must not, however, be supposed from
this that Hariri’s intention was strictly to write a philo-
logical treatise. That is a notion which has prevailed
among some critics, who would make the Assemblies
merely an ingenious and pedantic puzzle, but no real
Arabie scholar will hold such an opinion. The As-
semblies were written, primarily, to amuse and entertain,
and they were listened to with pleasure by numbers who
cared nothing for their hidden learning. But the author,
having been accustomed to philological discussions all his
life, and having audiences equally zealous, was led na-
turally and almost unconsciously to insinuate into his
work the subtleties which were uppermost in his mind.
In the same way the use of rare expressions, which
forms one of the chief difficulties of the work, may be
conceived to be more spontaneous than it at first sight
appears. The doubtful words and phrases of the early
time, and particularly those derived from the Koran, had
been often the subjects of debate for generations, and the
author might well be tempted to rouse the attention of
his audience by throwing among them one of these apples
of discord. In a translation the learned vocabulary of
Hariri is lost, and yet it will be perceived that his com-


INTRODUCTION. 69


positions do not lack vigour or pathos. May we not then
acquit him of having merely digested an antiquarian
glossary into a dramatic form.

The Assemblies, indeed, are far from restricted to
antique words and phrases; on the contrary, they are
in some respects extremely unclassical, inasmuch as the
author delights to introduce the provincial expressions,
and to refer to the manners of Irak. There is a singular
mixture of old and new in the work; strange and
obsolete words, rough with gutturals, such as are met
with in the proverbs of Maydani, or in the earliest
poets, stand side by side with others that have been
borrowed from the Persians and the Greeks. There ‘is
more of this foreign element than the purist quite
approves, Words of exotic origin are: indeed to be
found even in the Koran, a8 _ plug, (juckl3, soul, Nae;
but strict Moslems have made excuses for them, even
to the point of denying their foreign extraction, and of
asserting that they are common to Arabic and to other
languages. Their dictum was plausible, since undoubt-
edly they could show that those words and many‘others
had existed in Arabic speech before the advent of Islam ;
nor can it fairly be denied that terms which were in use
among the Arabic-speaking Jews, such a8 4,5, euie,
dighs, gli, might be fairly taken to be Arabic. But
Hariri’s employment of non-Arabic words is capricious
and sometimes excessive: they are introduced unne-
cessarily, as if his purpose were to give liveliness to
his composition, and to suit himself to a popular whim.
The Andalusian Sherishi is obliged to confess his ig-
norance of some of them, and as we are told that even
in the author’s own time and city he was accused of


70 INTRODUCTION.


incorrect expression, we may assume that some of the
learned in Irak objected to his too liberal vocabulary.
The use of rare phrases, the origin and meaning of
which were doubtful, is of constant occurrence in this
work. The explanation of these, according to the best
lights I have been able to obtain, makes up a large part
of the notes which are appended to this translation.
Some of them are interpreted by the author himself,
in short commentaries which he has added to some of
the Assemblies, others are left unnoticed ; but Hartri
lectured on them to his sons and pupils, and his judg-
ments are recorded by the commentators. An immense
number of sayings, proverbs, and idiomatic phrases were
current, all supposed to have originated with the eloquent
Arabs of the desert, and consecrated in the eyes of the
scholars of the time. Some of these had become the
trivial expressions of the vulgar, and it is difficult for
Englishmen to understand the literary taste which
attached such importance to them. It is as if in this
country the most intellectual and learned men of the
day devoted themselves to elucidating such phrases as
“he cut his stick,” “he kicked the bucket,” “he hopped
the twig,” “mind your P’s and Q’s,” “we were all at
sixes and sevens,” “no mistake ri aa as if the most
gifted author of the time were to produce @ composition
containing all these expressions, and append an inter-
pretation to the effect that “he cut his stick” was a
phrase derived from the backwoods, and signified to
depart, since a man in the forest when about to go on a
journey cut a stick from a tree to aid him in walking;
that to “kick the bucket” and “hop the twig” were
seamen’s phrases, signifying to commit suicide by hang-


INTRODUCTION. 71


ing, or by jumping from the yard arm; that “ mind your
P’s and Q’s”’ was originally a theatrical phrase, “mind
your cues,” the addition of “ P’s” being an unintelligent
corruption; that ‘‘no mistake” had its origin in the
answer of the Duke of Wellington to Mr. Huskisson :
“There is no mistake, there can be no mistake;” and
that as for the phrase “sixes and sevens,” God alone
knew what it meant. This is scarcely an exaggeration
of the purport of much of the Assemblies, with the
difference that the phrases which Hariri embodies in his
writings were supposed to be idioms of a classic tongue,
and to have first passed from the lips of a heroic’ race.
The favour with which such compositions were received,
bears witness to the zeal and almost Massoretic diligence
with which the educated class studied the records of
their language and history.

The grammatical questions are of hardly less import-
ance in the author’s eyes. His other works show the
subtlety of his intellect and the fastidiousness of his
taste, and many of the precepts which he utters in them
he enforces by examples in the Assemblies. Yet there
is a peculiarity in his art which is worth noticing.
Where a question is doubtful, and two men of eminence
whose opinions are probable, have differed, Hariri will
make use of a form which there is reason to believe he
disapproves, as if his object were rather to continue the
controversy than decide it. A conspicuous instance of
this occurs in the thirty-fifth Assembly, in the phrase
al! gp lal, of which the nearest rendering in English is
‘Behold he was him!” that is, the person I looked at
was Abii Zayd. Now a controversy had been carried on
between the schools of Basra and Kufa on this matter ;


72 INTRODUCTION.


the Basrians held the phrase to be incorrect, and that
one ought to say 4> o> {ul3, “Behold he was he.” The
grammatical question is discussed in the notes to the
twenty-fourth Assembly, and need not be dwelt upon
here; but a commentator expresses his wonder that
Hariri, who was a Basrian, should use a phrase con-
demned by the grammarians of his city, and one which
most people looked upon as faulty. This controversy, how-
ever, was classic, inasmuch as it had been originated by
one of the greatest of the grammarians, Sibawayh, and
was said to have been the cause of his death. The story
is as follows :—Sibawayh was one day in the presence of
Haran ar Reshid, or as others say. of Yahya ibn Khalid
the Bermeki, when they were discussing grammatical
questions, and he asked Al Kisa’i, which is right, “T
thought that the scorpion was different from the zenbir,
and behold 4 49,” or “behold sl)! ,».”” “The latter,” said
Al Kisé’i. Sibawayh contradicted him, and the Khalif
resolved to refer to some native Arabs. Al Kisa’i then
contrived that he should refer to a tribe who were not of
pure speech, and these said that Sibawayh was in the
wrong. The great grammarian angrily departed from
court, and retired to Khorasan, where he soon died.
Hariri seeks to awaken in his hearers the memory of
this anecdote by using the condemned form, which would
bring to their minds the celebrated controversy. So in the
thirty-seventh Assembly the expression sy 3 _ >I his,
imitated from Koran vii. 148, gives to the imper-
sonal verb of the original a faulty construction, though
Hariri has himself noticed this very error in his book
called the “ Pearl.” But a controversy had taken place
on this subject involving even the proper reading of the


INTRODUCTION. 73


verb in the Koran; and Hariri, by making use of what
he does not approve, shows that he is not ignorant of the
discussion. Several instances of a similar kind will be
found in the notes, and I will notice but one more. In
the thirty-sixth Assembly ,,i! is used where, from Hariri’s
own explanation in the “ Pearl,” it is plain that accuracy
requires 3,4) 34!. The author’s design may have been
to claim for this particular word a licence derived from
popular use.

From these examples the reader will be able to judge
how intimate a knowledge of the niceties of the tongue
may be obtained from the study of Hariri and his com-
mentators. An acquaintance with the pagan antiquity
also necessarily follows an examination of his incessant
allusions. These, for the most part, occur in the form of
proverbs, and of such popular sayings as have been
already mentioned. The Arabic word .Jt» does indeed
comprise any phrase current among the people, or any
sententious utterance of the past time, and is not con-
fined to moral apophthegms. The Arabs, in imitation of
the Greeks, began at an early time to make collections of
the multudinous proverbs of their language. The collec-
tion of Maydani is invaluable, as preserving for us some of
the oldest forms of Arab speech,—perhaps the most primi-
tive utterances of the race. There is hardly a celebrated
occurrence in early Arab story that is not illustrated by
one or more of these phrases, which were attributed
to the heroes and heroines of the old time; and whether
authentic or not have, undoubtedly, for the most part,
come down from the times of purely oral tradition. A
whole series of proverbs connects itself with the
history of Jathimet al Abrash, Queen Zebba, and Kosayr.


74 INTRODUCTION.


Another belongs to the story of Kolayb Wa’il and the
war of Basis. When the poet ‘Obayd ibn al Abras
was sacrificed by the king of Hira at the tomb of his
boon companions, ‘Obayd uttered sentences which be-
came proverbial. Many of these proverbs indicate an
archaic state of the language, and the combinations of
letters are less euphonious than in the dialect of Koraysh.
Every page of Hariri’s work contains some of these
relics of a past time, and they are imbedded in the
Assemblies like the stones of a Roman ruin in the
walls of a modern Italian villa. Whole passages are but
a.cento of primeval phrases, mingled with sentences
of the Koran or the Traditions, and remarkable idioms
from poets of repute. The proverb served to call the
hearer’s attention to the incident from which it was said
to have arisen; and if he were a pupil, he that recited the
composition to, him would take care to examine him
respecting the origin of the saying, and the precise form
in which it had been most authoritatively handed down.
An instance of the exactitude with which the purists
required these proverbs to be used is given in the
work of Maydani, where it is said that the proverb
wll) rend Kind! $: “Thou (a woman) didst lose the
milk in the summer,” should be used in the feminine
singulat, even though it be addressed to a male or to
more than one person, since it was first uttered by “Amr
ibn ‘Odas to his wife Dakhtenis.” !

The Koran is exemplified by continual quotations,
and these are full of instruction for the foreign scholar.
But the sacred book was so well known to those for
whom the Assemblies were composed, that I cannot

} Ar. Prov. I1., 197, and De Sacy’s Hariri I., 577.


INTRODUCTION. 75


think the author had in view the inculleation of any
special knowledge. Moreover he does not appear to
quote difficult passages, or those which require special
interpretation ; he rather endeavours to show his wit by
the use of it in a strange and unexpected manner, as,
for instance, at the end of the third Assembly.

Before proceeding to consider other peculiarities of this
work, and especially the artificial character of so many
of the pieces, it will be as well to give a short summary
of the Assemblies which do not appear in this volume,
so that the book may be considered as a whole. The
preface and the first twenty-six are here translated,
and as each has a short argument or introduction, there
needs no further mention of them. The remaining
twenty-four are not inferior in merit, though the repe-
tition of similar adventures and similar rhetoric becomes
monotonous. They are also, if possible, more elaborate
than those which are placed earlier in the work, and two
or three of them are of exceeding difficulty. In the
twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth, the author produces
compositions resembling those of the sixth and twenty-
sixth. In the sixth is given an address, the words of
which are alternately with and without pointed letters.
In the twenty-sixth the artifice is varied, and each
‘alternate letter is pointed, the others being unpointed.
In the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth the ortho-
graphical feat is again changed, for they contain compo-
sitions in which every letter is destitute of points. In
the former, Abi Zayd preaches an eloquent sermon
on the certainty and the terrors of death; in the latter,
after describing a loaf of bread and a flint in enigmatical
language, somewhat after the style of the eighth, he


76 INTRODUCTION.


indites a benediction at a wedding, into which he had
inveigled Harith. Both of these addresses are composed
of letters without a single point. The thirtieth. is
remarkable for the use of what are called Sasani phrases,
that is, the cant of beggars, mountebanks, prestigiators,
and the like. -Harith enters by chance into a house
hung with rags, which he discovers to be a place of call
for such people. A wedding is going on, and the beggar
bridegroom, in gaudy apparel, takes his seat with the
dignity of king Munthir ibn Ma as.Sema. Then steps

forward an old man, who, of course, turns out to be Abi
Zayd, and delivers himself of a wedding sermon, with |
the regular exordium of the mosque. In this address
the Koran is mixed up with the metaphorical jargon of
vagabonds after the strangest fashion, and at the close
Abad Zayd performs the marriage ceremony. This argot
appears to have been thought not unworthy of study, for
one Abi Dulaf wrote a kasideh in it, setting forth the
habits and ways of life of such people, and their singular
dialect.

' The thirty-first Assembly is a composition of exquisite
beauty. Harith makes the pilgrimage to Mecca, and
there finds Abii Zayd, who addresses the worshippers
first in the usual rhymed prose, and then in verse, on the
duties of true religion. The Hajj, he tells them, does


1 This Abé Dulaf is not to be confounded with Aba Dulaf al
‘Ajili, the celebrated general. of the Khalifs Ma’mtn and Mo‘tasim,
and the founder or extender of the city of Kerej, from which the
twenty-fifth Assembly takes its name. This mistake has been made
even by Motarrezi (see Fr. note, p. 145 of Vol. II. of De Sacy’s
Hariri). The great Aba Dulaf was certainly a writer as well as a
warrior, but the Abi Dulaf who wrote the poem in question was a
different person, and is known as Al Khazraji.


INTRODUCTION. | 17


not consist in hastening on camels to the holy city, or
wearying the body, or parting from home and children,
but in adding to these performances abstinence from sin,
purity of intention, and the practice of virtue; for
‘washing in fonts cleanses not from immersion in sins,
the baring of the body compensates not for the laying up
of guilt, nor will the donning of the pilgrim’s garb avail
him who clothes himself with the forbidden.” The
verses which follow are inspired by the loftiest morality.
When he has concluded Harith approaches him, but Aba
Zayd declares that he has a vow not to associate with any
one during his pilgrimage, nor to make gain, nor to
recite his pedigree, nor to ask alms. As the pilgrims
pass by on their journey he again addresses them in
edifying verse.

The thirty-second is of a very different character, and
is, perhaps, the strangest and most difficult in the work.
Indeed, without plentiful commentary, it would be per-
fectly unintelligible. It is that which the author alludes
to in the preface when he speaks of “legal decisions
dependent on the use of words.” Abi Zayd is discovered
playing the part of a mufti, or jurisconsult, amid a tribe of
Arabs, and bidding them ask questions of him. One of them
steps forward, and says that he has gathered a hundred
questions from people learned in the law, and he pro-
pounds them one by one to Abii Zayd. The peculiarity
of these questions is that each contains a word which may
be understood in two senses, the design of the questioner
being to test not only Abi Zayd’s knowledge of the
Moslem canon law, but also his acquaintance with the
niceties of the language. Abi Zayd is represented as
discerning the hidden meaning of each question, and as


78 INTRODUCTION.


returning an answer which, while directly contrary to
that which might be expected, is yet correct if the ambi-
guous word be taken in its less popular signification.
For instance, it is asked, “Does a man ill who neglects
to wash his (ws (hatchet)?” Aba Zayd replies, “ Yes,
it is as though he washed not his head:” for (wb signi-
fies not only a hatchet, but also the upper part of the
back of the head. Again, it is asked, “‘May a man say
his prayers after he has been carrying ,>- (puppies)?”
which are unclean animals. The answer is, “ Yes; it is
no more than if he had carried beans.” > signifies a
puppy, or the whelp of a beast. of prey, and also the young
cucumber, or the pomegranate. .And so of the whole
hundred questions. Similar puzzles were not unknown
in Europe, as the question, ‘‘ Num peccatum est occidere
patrem suum,” where not “one’s own father,” but “the
father of swine,)’ is meant. This Assembly is an elabo-
rate exercise on the synonyms of the language. It
may be noticed that the decisions are according to the
rite of Ash Shafi‘, to which Hariri belonged.

The thirty-third presents nothing worthy of especial
notice. Abd Zayd, feigning to be palsied, recites verses
which obtain for him the alms of the people, and when
discovered by Harith, eonfesses his imposture. In the
thirty-fourth, Abfi Zayd sells his son to Harith as a slave,
taking care, however, that the boy shall exclaim to him,
“Tam Joseph, I am Joseph,” words taken from Koran
xii, 90. Harith thinks that the boy is only telling
his name, whereas he was indicating that he was free
born, and ought not to be sold any more than Joseph,
the son of Jacob, ought to have been sold by his brethren.
The boy obtains his liberty, and Harith loses his money.


INTRODUCTION. 79


The thirty-fifth is a composition in the style of the eighth,
and the earlier part of the twenty-ninth. Abdi Zayd
describes a wine-cask metaphorically under the name of
a maiden, for whom, as he tells the people, he desires to
purchase wedding attire. They give him money, and
it turns out that by the wedding attire is meant a flagon
and a cup, which were necessary to wed, as it were, the
wine-cask to the drinker.

The thirty-sixth contains twenty conundrums, all of the
same form: ‘“ What word signifies so and so?” For
instance, what word signifies ‘‘ Receive a thousand de-
nars.” The answer is, wole (she that guides aright):
for » means “take,” and wo is the fine or blood-wit
for killing a man, which was fixed at a thousand denars.
It is needless to give any further specimens of the author’s
ingenuity. The answers to these conundrums, and to the
legal questions in the thirty-second, are given by Hariri
himself, at the end of the respective Assemblies.

The thirty-seventh exhibits Abi Zayd and his son be-
fore the Kadi of Sa‘dah, obtaining money from him, as
usual, by trickery. The father accuses the son of dis-
obedience, and the son declares that his father had sought
to degrade him by making him a beggar. The son recites
some lines against beggary which he says his father had
once taught him, and which justified him in disobeying
the paternal commands; and the father retorts with others,
which the son had recited to him, in praise of making gain
in every way possible. The dialogue is kept up with
great spirit, and the adventure ends by the Kadi bestow-
ing his bounty on both.

‘In the thirty-eighth, Abt Zayd addresses the governor
of a town in some fine verses in praise of liberality to men


80 INTRODUCTION.


of genius, and is rewarded as usual. In the thirty-ninth,
the adventure is somewhat after the fashion of the twelfth.
Harith is on ship-board, about to make a voyage, when a
voice is heard from the shore, in the darkness, begging a
passage. The stranger is taken on board, and soon in-
forms the travellers that he has a talisman, a form of
words handed down from the prophets, which would guard
them from all dangers. He repeats it, and they think it
futile ; but, at a port whither they are forced to put in
through a storm that overtakes them, Abi Zayd finds
great lamentation among the servants of a noble family
on account of the long labour of their mistress in child-
‘birth, and he writes for them a-copy of verses in which
the child is warned of the miseries of the world, and
recommended not to come into it. This, which seems the
very contrary of what the lady’s case demanded, is hung
round her neck, and her safe delivery follows. Abd Zayd
is handsomely rewarded.

The fortieth is a quarrel between Abi Zayd and his
handsome young wife, who go before the stingy judge of
Tebriz, he to complain of her contumacy, she of his abuse
of his conjugal rights. The contention is remarkable,
not only for the fury with which they rail at each other,
but for the learning they display. ‘I married thee,”
says Abi Zayd, “and found thee all that was bad. But
T concealed thy faults, though if Shirin had given thee
her beauty, and Zobaydeh her riche’, and Bilkis her
throne, and Baran her bed, and Az Zebba her kingdom,
and Rabi‘ah her piety, and Khindaf her glory, and Al
' Khans& her poetry on her Sakhr, I would have hated
thee to be my wife.” She answers, ‘O thou baser than
Madir, with more, vices than Abd Dulaémeh’s mule, know


INTRODUCTION. 81


that if thou wert Al Hasan in utterance land admonition,
Ash Sha‘bi in learning and memory, Al Khalil in prosody
and grammar, Jerir in love song and satire, Koss in purity
of speech and in discoursing, ‘Abd al Hamid in eloquence
and writing, Abd “Amr in Koran-reading and inflection,
Tbn Korayb in recitations from the Arabs, I would not
keep thee.” The quarrel is, of course, a feigned one, and
the wife’s address supplied by Abi Zayd himself. The
rest of the adventure is of the usual kind. :

The forty-first contains a sermon of Abi Zayd, by
means of which he and his son extract money from the
public. The forty-second contains riddles, not necessarily
dependent like the conundrums of the thirty-sixth on the
play of words, but indicating a thing by the description
of it, as:—

What is he, who weds two sisters, both openly and secretly, but,
none accuses him for it?

When he visits the one, he visits also the other ; and though bus-
bands may be partial, he is not so.

He increases his visits as his wives grow gray: now, this is an
affection rare among husbands.


The answer to this is, the pencil used to place the kohi,
or ointment, on the eyes: the two eyelids are the wives,
each of which.it anoints at the same time, without par-
tiality, and as they grow old, the necessity for anointing
them increases.

The forty-third has an adventure too long to relate,
and bears the name of the “ Virgin and Matron,” because
it contains the reasons for and against marrying either
of these classes of ladies. The forty-fourth introduces
us to more riddles, which this time, however, depend
for their solution, like the legal questions of the thirty-


82 INTRODUCTION.


second, on the various significations of the same word.
Thus :—


‘“‘T have seen Arabs in a barren year roast a rag for food, and it satis-
fied them.” 5, which signifies a rag, signifies also a swarm of
locusts.

‘I have seen scribes, whose fingers never wrote a letter, and who


read not what is written in books.” wy: which signifies sertbes,
signifies also cobblers.


The forty-fifth like the fortieth is a quarrel between Aba
Zayd and his wife, before a judge, with the intention of
attracting his bounty. The forty-sixth is one of the most
elaborate in the work. Harith being at Hims (Emessa),
a place noted for the stupidity of its inhabitants, like
Abdera among the Greeks, sees a schoolmaster, one of a
class especially famous for their dulness, instructing his
pupils ; he approaches, thinking to be entertained by the
poor man’s blunders, but finds to his astonishment that
the children were able to accomplish the most surprising
feats. One of them recites a poem consisting entirely of
unpointed letters; the next writes out some which not
only have every letter pointed, but are full of assonances
and alliterations; a third produces lines of which the
words consist altemataly of pointed and unpointed letters;
a fourth gives verses in which there is tents or homo-
‘geneity in sound or in letters between each two suc-
cessive words; the next produces a couplet, each line of
which begins and ends with the same syllables. Then
the nature of the exercises changes, and some lines are
given containing words which ought to be written with
the letter |, but about which some Arabs are doubtful.
Then come the words which should be written with )
then those that may be written with either, At last one


INTRODUCTION. 83


pupil gives in verse the rules for eithg the verb whose
last letter is weak. Another repeats a poem comprising
all the words in the language which contain &; this
table is especially useful, since a common mistake among
the Arabs was to confound & with (4; the old Semitic
language having a less variety of sounds than the culti-
vated Arabic, as may be seen by a comparison with the
Hebrew. It need not be said that the schoolmaster is
Abi Zayd. In the forty-seventh, Abi Zayd is dis-
covered following the despised calling of a cupper or
bleeder, but the adventure does not call for notice. The
forty-eighth, called Hardmiyeh, the first composed, has
been already described. In the forty-ninth, Abi Zayd,
in his old age, lauds the name and calling of Sasdn,
the prince of the beggars, and urges his son to follow the
noble and lucrative art of mendicancy. This Assembly
is one of the finest pieces of rhetoric in the work. But
perhaps the first place in regard of merit should be
given to the fiftieth and last Assembly, called “of
Basra.” In this composition, to which I have already
referred, Harith exhibits his hero as penitent and re-
formed. In it is introduced a most eloquent eulogium
of the city of Basra; the hymn of Abi Zayd breathes
the purest spirit of devotion. H4rith weeps in sym-
pathy with his repentance, as he had formerly wept
for his misdeeds, and in the end they part to meet
no more.

It remains that I should say something concerning the .
style of this singular work, which, as the reader is now
aware, is a continuous display of rhetorical artifices, and
is full, from beginning to end, of alliteration, assonance,
rhyme, paronomasia, and what Europeans are apt to con-


84 INTRODUCTION.


sider merely verbal conceits. These caprices, so alien from
our taste, have since pervaded not only the Arabic litera-
ture, but the literatures which, like the Persian, the Hin-
dustani, and the Turkish, have accepted the rhetoric of the
Arab scholars, and have followed their canons. We find
the authors, not of one age and nation, but of all the
Moslem world, for many centuries, delighting in what
seem to us the poorest artifices of composition, cursed
by’ a vitiated and pestilent taste, and degrading their
genius by mingling the loftiest themes with displays
of verbal cleverness, in no way above the level of the
pun and the conundrum. If the Persians borrowed their
conceits from the Arabs, they bettered the instruction,
and the reaction of their literary influence tended to con-
firm ‘the ‘taste. of their masters. But it would be a
narrow view of the subject to regard such compositions as
the Assemblies ;as the result of literary fashion or scho-
lastic pedantry. The Arabic student cannot but perceive
that the language lends itself with singular readiness
to tesponsiveness and parallelism of sound, and that
assonance and paronomasia offer themselves almost
unbidden. The triliterity of the root, and the ramifica-
tion from it of a vast number of forms, each of which has
an accordance of sound with the same form of other
roots, give a natural and imevitable similitude to Arabic
words, which forces itself on the attention of the orator
and his audience. Then the development of almost
every abstract idea from a root which signifies a strictly
material action; the primitive meaning being ever dimly
visible to the mind’s eye of the people behind the deriva-
tive meaning, and not, as in our words of Latin and
Greek provenance, wholly lost, tended to suggest com-


INTRODUCTION. 85


parisons between the multitudinous ideas associated with
a single root, which gave an involuntary impulse towards
paronomasia. We do, indeed, find a tendency towards
these rhetorical figures in the very earliest productions
of the Semitic race. The alliterations, the assonances,
the antitheses of sound, the evident paronomasia, and,
above all, the strange etymologies of the Bible, bear wit-
ness that, even in the most remote times, the most simple
and noble of composers were not without a kind of
verbal consciousness ; repressed, indeed, in them by the
pure and classic spirit of their genius, but still the germ
from which in later times were developed the puerilities
of the Rabbins and the artificial rhetoric of the Arabic
authors.

The instinct to gratify the ear—or something deeper
than the ear—by accordance of words, and to create a si-
militude between the sound and the sense, is common to
every race, and, if regarded philosophically, will not be
found worthy of contempt or reprobation. It has been
especially strong in our Teutonic branch of the human
family, which not only has had an alliterative and asso-
_ nant poetry in former ages, but still fondly clinges to
phrases and proverbs which recal the ancient rhythm.
No one would wish such expressions as “‘ to have and to
hold,” “bed and board,” “kith and kin,” “last not
least,” to be banished by a pseudo-classic taste from the
use of the nation. In Hebrew such combinations appear
with frequency, and the alliterative accordance which
they exemplify appears to have almost stood in the place
of metre as a poetical instrument. From these to paro-
nomasia, and play on words, there is but a step. Of this
figure, a few examples may be given. At Psalm xl. 3,


86 INTRODUCTION.


and lii, 6, according to the numbering of our version,
there is a play on words between “see” and “ fear,”
which occurs also. elsewhere. Compare also Isaiah v. 7,
lvii. 6, and lxi. 3; also on the same word as this last
Job xxx. 19, and alii, 6; also Psalm xviii. 7, Ecclesiastes,
vii. 6. To aliase may be added the chant of Samson at
Judges xv. 16, and perhaps the apeount of the sons of
Jair at x. 4.

But it is in connection with proper names that this ten-
dency is most manifest. We may either see in the etymo-
logies of the Pentateuch the ingenious labours of Hebrew
priests and scholars, anxious to give an applicability to
names the origin of which was lost, just as Ya‘rob is
made by the Arabs to have been the first man who spoke
Arabic, and Muzaykiyah is said to have been so called
because he tore up his clothes every evening; or we may
suppose that the etymologies were framed at a very early
period, almost unconsciously, by the people themselves,
who, being accustomed to name their children, their
habitations, 4nd remarkable places by apposite terms, and
being hardly able to conceive an appellation without a
meaning, instinctively sought the signification of the
patriarchal names, and sometimes moulded the legend in
accordance with the supposed etymology. It is reasonable
to conclude that both these sources have contributed to
the large stock of derivations which we find in the Pen-
tateuch. Some of them seem too artificial to have arisen
spontaneously among the people: they resemble rather
the laboured comparisons of scholars than the similarities
which would strike the popular ear. But the greater part
are probably derived from remote and unlettered tradition-
It is unreasonable to doubt the antiquity of the speech of


INTRODUCTION. 87


Lamech, at Genesis v. 29, which contains a play upon
the name of Noah; or of Noah’s curse and blessing, at
ix. 25, in:-which the name of Japhet is similarly treated:
Furthermore, the name in some cases has evidently in-
fluenced the narrative, as where Abraham and Sarah suc-
cessively daugh in connection with the birth of Isaac,
(Genesis xvii. 17, and xviii. 12; compare also xxi. 6.);
as also in the unholy ancestry attributed by Israel to
its enemies, Moab and Ammon. We may also fairly
allow a popular origin to the etymology of the word
Manna, suggested at Exodus xvi. 15. But whether
originating with the people or the learned, we find
at a very early period in Hebrew history a tendency,
which cannot be mistaken, to reflect upon names and
significations, to play and refine upon them. In the
later writers, this spirit is still more manifest. A proper
name frequently suggests paronomasia, and the instinc-
tive tendency towards this figure throws a light on the
formation of the etymologies of which I have spoken.
Compare Isaiah xxi. 2, with regard to the name of Elam ;
Jer. vi. 1, with regard to Tekoah; Ezekiel xxv. 16, to
Cherithim ; Jer. xlviii. 2, to Heshbon ; Nehemiah ix. 24,
to Canaan. A number of others may be discovered by
an attentive reading of the prophetical books. But eriough
has been said to show that the germ of those literary
tendencies, which were in after ages developed in the
Arabic literature, existed from the earliest times among
their Semitic brethren.

A still more striking example of artificiality in compo-
sition is afforded by those alphabetical pieces, which have
raised so much curiosity and discussion among scholars.
The Hebrew literature did not escape the fate which con-


88 INTRODUCTION.


demns nations to lose much of their poetical vigour and
spontaneity by a long continued culture, especially when
they restrict themselves, as did the ancient nations for the
most part, to a traditional range of ideas. From Athens to
Alexandria, from Alexandria to Constantinople, we may
trace the decline of Greek letters—ever more learned, ever
more laborious, and ever more feeble. The later ages of
the Hebrew literature were, indeed, illustrated by compo-
sitions of surpassing grandeur and beauty, such as the
pieces appended to the Book of Isaiah (chapter xl. to the
end); the Lamentations, of which the greater part are in
the alphabetical form; and the Book of Daniel, which,
composed probably as late as the second century before
Christ, opened the magnificent series of apocalyptic writ-
ings, the germ of which may be found in the prophecies
of Ezekiel. But it is not the less evident that, even be-
fore the Captivity, composition had become more the task
of a literary class, prone to imitate rather than originate,
and to look for inspiration in the works of its predecessors
rather than in nature and human life. Among these arose
the alphabetical poem, in which the compiler seems to
have sought to add freshness to his groupings of ancient
thoughts by a new and striking literary device. The
success of this kind of composition bears witness to the
taste of the Jews and the nations related to them. Similar
compositions appeared among the Syrians and the Samari-
tans, and the neo-Hebrew, or Rabbinical literature, is full
of them.' The Biblical poems, which belong to this order,
are Psalms xxv., xxxiv., XXxVii., cxi., cxii., cxix., cxlv.;
the description of the virtuous woman, at Proverbs xxxi.
10-31, and the Book of Lamentations, with the exception
1 Ewan, Dichter des Alten Bundes, p. 202. Ed. 1866.


INTRODUCTION. 89


of the last chapter. In Psalms cxi. sit aah the artifice
is carried so far that not each verse, but each member of
the verse, is alphabetical. In Lamentations iii., the
verses are divided into twenty-two triplets, the verses of
the triplets beginning with the twenty-two letters of the
alphabet in succession. The hundred and nineteenth
Psalm shows a still further elaboration of the same idea,
and in its structure and purport bears a visible analogy to
such productions as the Assemblies of Hariri. In this
lengthy composition the hundred and seventy-six verses
are divided into twenty-two groups of eight verses each,
and the verses of the groups begin with the twenty-two
letters in alphabetical succession ; that is, the eight verses

,of the first group begin with Aleph, the eight of the
second group with Beth, the eight of the third group with
Gimel, and so on. This Psalm has, however, a more
remarkable peculiarity, inasmuch as the author strives in
the true spirit of an Eastern scholar to attract the fancy
to his theme, by introducing into every verse, without
exception, a synonym for the word or commandment of
God.

Before quitting this part of the subject, I will venture
to suggest a comparison between the gnomic and senten-
tious character of the Arabic poetry, as exhibited in the
Assemblies, and some portions of the Old Testament—
as the books of Job and Ecclesiastes—in which the pure
Semitic spirit breathes, uncontrolled by national patriot-
ism or Mosaic traditions. This, however, is a matter
which must be left to the preception of the reader.’ Yet
I cannot but think that in the figurative description of
old age, in the last chapter of Ecclesiastes, I recognise a
tendency to obscure poetical metaphor, which, trans-


90 INTRODUCTION.


mitted through many generations, darkens the work of
the learned Basrian.

How far such a work as the Assemblies is to be
ascribed to any influence of Byzantine scholarship is 9
question of some difficulty. There is no reason to believe
that Hariri took directly any ideas from-the Greeks.
He probably knew no language but his own, and all
that he produced is to be traced to exclusively Arabic,
or, at least, Moslem sources. But indirectly he, and the
rest of his countrymen, could not fail to be influenced by
the pedantry of Constantinople, which came to confirm
and increase their own. In almost every age of the
world we find a certain similarity between the pursuits of
existing nations, as if the same informing spirit possessed
them all, in spite of diversities of race, position, and his-
tory. In the time of Hariri, Greek, Jew, Syrian and Arab
had become grammarians, lexicographers, archeologists ;
the race of translators and commentators abounded in
the east, and to the furthest limits of the Moslem west.
Each race, except perhaps the haughty and exclusive
Greeks, did indeed learn something from the others.
The Syrians took their notions of grammar from the
Greeks. All that the Arabs knew of Greek philosophy
and science was, from translations made into their lan-
guage by Syrians, either from the Greek originals, or from
former Syriac translations. On the other hand the Jews,
in the tenth century, founded or re-cast their grammar
under Arab influence, and even adopted the word
Jsi as their paradigm, though, from its containing a
medial guttural, it insufficiently expresses the changes
of the Hebrew verb.. We find the philologers of the
various languages vying with each other in industry ;


INTRODUCTION. 91


_ we find Maydani, the contemporary of Hariri, collecting
and explaining the national proverbs precisely in the
manner of Suidas. No one can pretend to say that such
an influence as this may not have extended from Con-
stantinople to Basra, but of direct imitation of Greek
authors there is nothing. The work with which the
Assemblies will be most readily ¢ompared is the Cassan-
dra, or Alerandra, of Lycophron. That was a poem com-
posed in an age when the demon of pedantry had entered
into poefs and orators; when even the exquisite genius
of Theocritus did not disdain to produce a poem in the
form of a Syrinx. The Cassandra is an iambic poem of
fourteen hundred and seventy lines, very famous in anti-
quity, though utterly neglected now. It is an almost
unintelligible rhapsody, supposed to be uttered by the
‘prophetical daughter of Priam, who from the top of a
tower, where she is confined by her father’s order, sees
the fleet of Paris depart, and knows that it is to bring
destruction on Troy. In her sacred fury, she pours forth
a torrent of obscure and oracular verse. The epithets are
gigantic and monstrous compounds, the language is ran-
sacked for rare words, metaphor is heaped on metaphor,
every person and every place are described, not by their
ordinary names, but by some accidental relation, or by
allusion to some obscure event ; the prophetess passes
from calamity to calamity with a Pythian enthusiasm
which scorns the distinctions of paragraphs, and ends by
lamenting that mankind will not believe the predictions
she has uttered. This poem, if it can be called so, is but
a linguistic and geographical puzzle. The war of Troy,
the return of the Greek heroes, their dispersion over the
shores of the Mediterranean, the planting of Greek and


92 INTRODUCTION.


Trojan colonies, the settlement of A®neas in Italy, the
foundation of Rome, the wars between Europe and Asia,
the expedition of Xerxes, and the conquests of Alexander,
the descendant of Atacus and Dardanus, give opportunity
for the display of boundless but useless learning. This
production, which gained for the author the epithet of
the “dark” Lycophron from the despairing scholars of
antiquity, was not fully elucidated till the time of the
brothers Tzetzes,’ whose labours on it are a remarkable
proof of the learning and industry of the Byzantines.
Except in the display of erudition, there is no resem-
blance between Lycophron and Hariri, nor do we find
in the latter that impenetrable and perverse obscurity
which distinguished the Greek. But it is possible that
the fame of this work, at which successive generations
of schoolboys had been made to labour, may have
reached Arabic ,writers, and encouraged their tendency
to learned display.

If we allow some share in the formation of a a taste
to the predispositions of race and language, and some-
thing to the influence of foreign culture, we must also
trace some elements of it to the peculiar studies of Islam.
A strange feature in Hartri’s work is the number of com-
positions in which the merit is supposed to consist in the
alternation of pointed and unpointed letters, or the ex-
clusive use of one of these two kinds. It is not difficult
to see how any tendency to these caprices which may
have been innate in the learned Arabs must have been
increased by the long controversies which had been held
on the orthography of the Koran. On the proper use of


* The Commentary is attributed to Isaac, but it is almost certain
that John had a large share in the work.


INTRODUCTION. 93


the diacritical points, on the question whether a letter
should be with or without a point, whether it should be
pointed above or below, depended the meaning of many
passages of God’s word. The early copies of the Koran
were in a character singularly incomplete. There was
hardly a chapter in which doubts were not raised as to the
meaning of important passages. In the lifetime of the
Prophet, when the sacred fragments were read publicly
at Medina by those who knew their purport accurately,
and were committed to memory by numbers of the faith-
ful, these deficiencies were unnoticed ; but as early as the
time of Aba Bekr many of those who knew the Koran
by heart were slain in the campaign against Musaylimeh
the Liar, and ‘Omar counselled the Khali to cause a stan-
dard copy to be written.

This task was executed by Zayd ibn Thabit, who first
collected the Koran into a book. But great varieties of
readings made the sense doubtful, and in the year 30
‘the Khalif ‘Othman undertook the recension which has
ever since been the sacred text of the Moslems. He com-
mitted the work to Zayd ibn Thabit, ‘Abd Allah ibn Az
Zobayr, and other distinguished persons, with orders to
choose the best reading of each passage, and not to give
the various conflicting readings, as appears to have been
done in the first edition. All who could throw any light
on the Prophet’s meaning were consulted, and ‘Ayisheh
in particular had great influence in determining the text ;
her testimony as to the Prophet’s oral recitations being
respectfully received as conclusive. The Koran was
brought more completely into accord with the dialect of
Koraysh, since the Khalif commanded that in doubtful
cases the language of the Prophet’s family and country-


94 INTRODUCTION.


men should be preferred. Hence there remain very few
dialectical peculiarities in the present Koran. But, when
all was done, the text still remained very uncertain ; and
the difficulties of the Moslems were increased by the
sudden corruption of the pure Arabic speech after the
first conquests. Koraysh or Temim might have been
able to detect the precise form and pronunciation of a
word under its obscure orthography, but the settlers of
the conquered lands, who in fifty years after the Hijra had
almost lost the use of the classic desinences, required a
clearer guidance. The efforts of Hajjaj ibn Yusuf to
settle the text of the Koran have been a already referred
to. Ibn Khallikan, in his life of the enlightened tyrant,

says that the people used ‘Othman’s copy for forty years,
but in the days of ‘Abd al Melik ibn Merw4n erroneous
readings had become numerous in Irak, so that Hajjaj
bade his scribes set distinctive marks on the words of
uncertain pronunciation, and Nasr ibn ‘Asim placed
single or double dots to certain words. But as this did
not give sufficient accuracy, the glst » or system of
diacritical pointing now in use, was invented. The
honour of giving fixity of meaning to the Koran belongs
chiefly to Abi ’1 Aswad and Khalil ibn Ahmed, though
the latter is said to have superseded the system of point-
ing adopted by his predecessor, as well as that of the
scribes of Hajjaj... Abdi 1 Aswad is said to have marked
the vowels and the tanwin, Khalil ibn Ahmed the hamzeh
and teshdid, the rowm and ishmam. Thus the science of
pointing, or determining which of two or more letters,
similarly formed in ancient writing, was to be preferred,


¥ See note to McGuckin de Slane’s translation of Ibn Khallikan. -
Vol. I, p. 364.


INTRODUCTION.


became of the highest interest. In out languages such
accuracy is not needed, but in the Arabic, where every
letter has and must have a value, where a change in
a root letter is sufficient to transform one word into
another, and a change in an augmentative letter may
affect gender, number, and the other accidents of the root,
the scholar was obliged to employ himself on the primary
elements of speech. The formation of passives and plurals
by internal vowel change, unexpressed in the usual ortho-
graphy, must have tended still further to promote this
minute scholarship. The compositions of. pointed or
unpointed letters, such as Hariri delights in, may have
been suggested, or at least encouraged, by a desire to
embody the correct orthography of doubtful words. The
author would fix them with their right pointing in a
poem or address, of which the artifice would insure that
they should not be misspelt.

There was, furthermore, a religious sanction for this
careful study of the alphabet. One of the most mysterious
attributes of the Koran was its essential and eternal con-
nection with the Arabic language. In that language it
had not only been revealed, but had existed before the
world and time. “This (the Koran),” said Mohammed,
“is a clear Arab tongue.” Koran xvi. 105 (compare
xxvi. 195). Ifa confirmation of this unity of the sacred
book and the sacred language were needed, it would be
found in the prefixion to some of the Suras of isolated
letters, whose meaning no man knew, but which had un-
doubtedly a divine quality.. If Arabic words, which have
equivalents in foreign tongues, had alone been revealed,
it might be held that there was no essential connection
between the revelation and the language ; but when sepa-


96 INTRODUCTION.


rate letters, having no idea affixed to them, were brought
down from on high, it could not be doubted that the
ineffable sanctity of the Arabic language was thereby
figured. In course of time a mystic interpretation was
given to these letters, which is carried to the extreme
in (the commentary of Baydawi. At the beginning
of the second Sura he comments the letters elif, ldm,
mim, which are prefixed to it, and takes occasion to show
that the presence of these monograms in the Koran is
plainly miraculous. He points out that the letters are used
in such a manner as to indicate a profound knowledge of
scientific grammar. As Mohammed was uninstructed,
such a knowledge could only have come from God him-
self. For instance, there are fourteen letters thus pre-
fixed to Suras of the Koran, and fourteen is just the half
of twenty-eight, the total of the letters when elif is
not distinguished from hamzeh. These fourteen let-
ters, - moreover, ‘are to be found in twenty-nine Suras,
which is just the whole number of letters in the al-
phabet, if ei be reckoned. Again, the half of each
of: the different classes of letters are thus employed. Of
the ten weakly articulated letters, namely those which
make up the words dict USia**, five are to be found
in these monograms; while of the other eighteen, which are
strongly ‘articulated, nine are to be so found. The gram-
matical forms which take an augment never exceed in
length the number of seven letters, hence the Almighty
has introduced into these monograms seven out of the ten
augmentative letters. These are but a few of the dis-
eoveries which in the time of Baydawi had been made
concerning the monograms of the Koran, and which the
orthodox commentator explains with undoubting faith.


INTRODUCTION. 97


In the age of Hariri these interpretations were in high
favour; indeed, Baydawi does little but reproduce the
comments of Zamakhshari in the Keshshaf, who. himself
followed other doctors of an earlier time. Zamakhshari
tells us in his preface that being asked by his admirers to
produce a commentary on the Koran, his first care was to
write something on these monograms, as a specimen of
the loftiness and the difficulty of the enterprise. It will
thus easily be perceived that exercises in the arrange-
ment of letters had not among the Arabs that character
of futility which they bear with us.

The imitations of Hariri have been numerous. Syl-
vestre de Sacy gives, in his edition, a Hebrew version
of the third Assembly by the Rabbin Jehuda, son of
Al Khariji, and mentions in his Introduction that Jehuda
also wrote an independent work in the same style. It is
curious to see the sober majesty of the Hebrew tongue
condescend to such an imitation, and to observe that the
Bible takes the place of the Koran in the allusions with
which the piece abounds. De Sacy also mentions an
imitation in Arabic, composed by Abd ‘t Tahir ibn
Mohammed ibn Yisuf of Cordova. The writer produced
fifty Assemblies to correspond with his model, and in the
title to the work lays stress upon the pains they cost
him (Chrest: Arabe iii. 180). An imitation was also
produced in Syriac towards the close of the thirteenth
century. The limpid, richly vowelled, and graceful
Arabic must, however, have been indifferently repre-
sented in the clumsy and rugged dialect of the north.

Yet the influence of Hariri is not to be measured
merely by the number of professed imitations that have
‘been produced. His style has more or less modified the


a


‘


98 INTRODUCTION.


style of all the more ambitious writing that has appeared
in the Arabic language since his time. (In the Timur of
Tbn “Arabshah, who wrote in the first half of the fifteenth
century, we find the influence of Hariri as strong as it
had been in his own age, and among his own people.
Nor does it even now show any sign of extinction.
Every man in the East who seeks the reputation of a
scholar and a gentleman endeavours to understand. the
Assemblies. Among the few works of merit which men
of Arab tongue have produced in recent times are the
Assemblies of Nasif al Yazaji of Beyrout, which are
here and there cited in my notes. This book is a perfect
imitation of Hariri, whose diction and manner are repro-
duced with surprising skill. Nasif certainly has little
of the poetical power of his great original, but in curious
learning he almost equals him. As, perhaps, the chief
living representative of the ancient culture this author
deserves our notice. He is a native of the Lebanon, has
never quitted his own' country, knows no language but
his own, and asisaid to contemn European knowledge as
worthless. Though a Christian he has devoted his life
to a profound study of the language, history, literature,
and grammar of the Arabs. Many years ago he pub-
lished a letter to De Sacy on some minute faults which
he discovered in that learned orientalist’s Commentary.
on Hariri. Ie is the author of a treatise on grammar
on the model of the Alfiyeh of Ibn Malik. It consists of
more than a thousand verses of rejez muzdawi, in which
the whole system of the Arab grammarians is condensed
with wonderful ability, and it is accompanied by a
commentary written by himself. No more complete
exposition of the subject has ever been brought into a


INTRODUCTION. 99


volume of the same size. The labours of his prede-
cessors during many centuries have given the author
the means of producing a treatise at once comprehensive
and minute, and for the advanced student who has
mastered the commentary of Ibn ‘Akil on Ibn Malik,
there is, I think, no work that might be more profitably
taken in hand than the grammar of Nasif al Yazaji.'
Another work of this author is a concise: treatise on
rhetoric, on the system of the Talkhis al Miftah of Jelal
ad din Mohammed, as commented by Sa‘d at Taftazani.
The work of Nasif seems to be in a great measure an
abstract of the Mukhtasar, or shorter commentary of the
last named author, which has been printed at Calcutta,
and it carries concision to such a point as to be almost un-
intelligible without the help of some more detailed and
explanatory treatise. But asa manual to aid the memory,
it is, no doubt, excellent. The most important work of
Nasif, is, however, undoubtedly the volume of Assemblies.
The hero is called Maymin ibn Khizém and the réwi is
Sohayl ibn “Abbad ; the work itself bears the title Mejma:
al Bahrayn, the confluence of the two seas, an allusion to
an obscure passage at Karan xviii. 59, which it is useless
to discuss here. The Assemblies of Nasif are even more
full of proverbs and traditionary sayings than those of
Hariri, which they have been written to supplement.
The author, living entirely in the past, has brought to-
gether an immense number of phrases illustrative of
Arabic life and language, both before and after Islam.
But the original feature in his compositions is the intro-
duction of Arab art and science, and the treatment of


" The title of this work is \ il wig cr ve il yh
a fanciful appellation which need not he explained here.


100 INTRODUCTION.


every subject with a direct scholastic purpose. It need
hardly be said that the author never profanes his text
by admitting a Frankish idea, or accepts any scientific
principle that is not recommended by the orthodox tradi.
tion of centuries. Thus in the fourth Assembly we have
a tnedical question concerning the proportion of the four
L¥s|, or humours of man, and are told that in properly
constituted bodies the phlegm is a sixth of the blood,
the yellow gall a sixth of the phlegm, and the black gall
three-fourths of the yellow. The sixth Assembly is full
of curious information concerning the special names of
banquets according to their occasion, as a birth, a cireum-
cision, a wedding: the fires that were traditional among
the pagan Arabs, as the fire by which they conjured rain,
the fire by which they swore confederacy, the fire which
they lighted when one hated by them departed as an en-
chantment against his return. It must be remembered
that these compositions are intended to be read with a
master, or to be copiously commented, so that every line
may be made the subject of a lecture on antiquities. The .
traditional names for the hours of the day and night, for
the winds, the epithets applied to horses, according to
their order in a race, are collected in pithy verses intended
to be committed to memory. The eleventh contains an
exposition of the Arabic prosody, the twenty-eighth treats
of astronomy. In the fifteenth is a copy of verses in which
no letter is pointed, and then one in which every letter
is pointed, also verses in which the alternate letters, or
the alternate words, have points. The twentieth has
verses which are the same whether read forward or
backward, and others which when read one way are .
laudatory, but, when read the other way, are satirical.


INTRODUCTION. 101


In short, all Hariri’s artifices are imitated, and even
surpassed, by his laborious imitator. The Assemblies
of Nasif should not be neglected by the Arabic student,
for they are full of instruction ; all that they require is
a fuller commentary to explain their ambiguities and
their references to obscure traditions. This could best
be supplied by the author himself. My best thanks are
due to Professor Ameuney, of King’s College, London,
for calling my attention to the works of this remarkable
contemporary scholar, as well as for many other inesti-
mable services.

From the time of Schultens, versions of parts of Hariri’s
work have been made into Latin or modern European
tongues with more or less success. Schultens translated
six Assemblies; De Sacy in his Chrestomathie has given
two with his usual accuracy. Other partial attempts have
been made by different scholars, but the renderings are
said to be extremely defective. A Latin version of the
greater part of the work was published by C. R. 8S. Peiper,
in 1832, but the translator was either not fully com-
petent for his task, or else did not take the pains to
obtain and study the best edition of the original, for his
book abounds with errors. It is, moreover, written in the
worst style of professorial Latin, and conveys in its form
and spirit no idea of the original. A more worthy
rendering is that of Mr. Preston, Laudian Professor of
Arabic at Cambridge, who has published an English
version of twenty of the Assemblies. Mr. Preston’s trans-
lation is throughout accurate and scholarly, and its only
fault is excessive amplification, in which the rhythm
and diction of Hariri are almost dissipated. The book
which is now offered to the public is, I believe, the


90645


102 INTRODUCTION.


first attempt at a complete translation of Hariri’s
work with such annotations as shall both instruct
the general reader and aid the student to acquire a
knowledge of the original. -How far the object has


been achieved, it is for others than myself to deter-
mine. ;


103


THE PREFACE OF AL HARIRI.


IN THE NAME OF GOD THE MERCIFUL, MOST MERCIFUL.


Sar the Excellent, the Incomparable, Abi Mohammed
al Kasim ibn ‘Ali ibn Mohammed ibn ‘Othman Al Hariri
of Basrah (God cool his resting-place).


O Gop, we praise thee for what perspicuity thou hast
taught, and what enunciation thou hast inspired ; as we
praise thee for what bounty thou hast enlarged, what
mercy thou hast diffused:—And we take refuge with
thee from the vehemence of fluency and the immodera-
tion of talkativeness, as we take refuge with thee from
the vice of inarticulateness and the shame of hesitation.—
And by thee we seek to be kept from temptation through
the flattery of the praiser and the connivance of the
favourer, as we seek to be kept from exposure to the
defaming of the slanderer and the betrayal of the in-
former.—And we ask pardon of thee if our desires carry
us into the region of ambiguities, as we ask pardon if
our steps advance to the domain of errors.—And we ask
of thee succour which shall lead us aright, and a
heart turning with justice, and a tongue adorned with
truth, and a speech strengthened with demonstration,
and accuracy that shall keep us from mistake, and reso-
lution that shall conquer caprice, and perception by


104 PREFACE OF AL HARIRI.


which we may estimate duly:—And that thou wilt help
us by thy guidance to conceive, and enable us by thy as-
sistance to express ;—That thou wilt guard us from error
in narration, and turn us from unseemliness in jesting ;—
That we may be secure from slanders of the tongue;
that we may be free from the ill of tinselled speech ;—
That we walk not in the road of sin, nor stand in the
place of repentance :—That we be not pursued by suit or
censure, nor need to flee from hastiness to excuse.—-O
God, fulfil to us this wish; give us to attain to this
desire: put us not forth of thy large shadow, make us
not a morsel for the devourer.—For now we stretch
forth to thee the hand of entreaty; we are thorough
in humiliation to thee and abasement.—And we call
down thy abundant grace and thy bounty that is over
all, with humbleness of seeking and with the venture
of hope.—Also approaching thee through the merits of
Mohammed, Lord of men, the Intercessor whose inter-
cession shall be received at the congregation of judg-
ment.—By whom thou hast set the seal to the prophets,
and whose degree thou hast exalted to the highest
heaven :—-Whom thou hast described in thy clear-speak-
ing Book, and hast said (and thou art the most truthful
of sayers) : “It is the word of a noble envoy, of him
who is mighty in the presence of the Lord of the throne,
having authority, obeyed, yea, faithful.”—O God, send
thy blessing on him and his House who guide aright,
and his companions who built up the faith; and make
us followers of his guidance and theirs, and profit us all
by the loving of him and them: for thou art Almighty,
and one meet to answer prayer.

And now: In a meeting devoted to that learning


PREFACE OF AL HARIRI. 105


whose breeze has stilled in this age, Whose lights are
nigh gone out—There ran a mention of the Assemblies
which had been invented by Badi' az Zeman, the sage
of Hamadan (God shew him mercy) ;—In which he had
referred the composition to Abid’l Fath of Alexandria and
the relation to ‘isa, son of Hishim.—And both these
are persons obscure, not known; vague, not to be re-
cognized.—Then suggested to mes one whose suggestion
- ig as a decree, and obedience to whom is as a prize,—That
I should compose Assemblies, following in them the
method of Badi (although the lame steed attains not to
outrun like the ‘stout one).—Then I reminded him of
what is said concerning him who joins even two words,
or strings together one or two verses :—And deprecated
this position in which the understanding is bewildered,
and the fancy misses aim, and the depth of the intelli-
gence is probed, and a man’s real value is made mani-
fest:—And in which one is forced to be as a wood-gatherer
by night, or as he who musters footmen and horsemen
together :—Considering, too, that the voluble man is
seldom secure or pardoned if he trips.—But when he.
consented not to forbearance, and freed me not from his
demand, I assented to his invitation with the assenting
of the obedient, and displayed in according with him
all my endeavour ;—And composed, in spite of what I
suffered from frozen genius, and dimmed intelligence,
and failing judgment, and afflicting cares,—Fifty Assem-
blies, comprising what is serious in language and lively,
what is delicate in expression and dignified; the bril-
liancies of eloquence and its pearls, the beauties of
scholarship and its rarities:—Besides ,what I have

adorned them with of verses of the Koran and goodly


106 PREFACE OF AL HARIRI.


metonymies, and studded them with of Arab proverbs,
and scholarly elegancies, and grammatical riddles, and
decisions dependent on the meaning of words, and original
addresses, and ornate orations, and tear-moving exhorta-
tions, and amusing jests:—All of which I have indited
as by thé tongue of Abi Zayd of Serdj, while I have
attributed the relating of them to Al Harith son of
Hammam, of Basra.—s\nd whenever I change the pasture
I have no purpose but to inspirit the reader, and to
increase the number of those who shall seek my book.—
And of the poetry of others I have introduced nothing
but two single verses, on which I have based the fabric
of the Assembly of Holwan; and two others, in a
couplet, which I have inserted at the conclusion of the
Assembly of Kerej.—And, as for the rest, my own mind
is the father of its virginity, the author of its sweet
and its bitter—Yet I acknowledge withal that Badi
(God shew him mercy) is a mighty passer of goals, a
worker of wonders ;—And that he who assays after him
to the composition of an Assembly, even though he be
gifted with the eloquence of Kodimeh,—Does but scoop
up of his overflow, and travels that path only by his
- guidance.—And excellently said one :—

If before it mourned, I had mourned my love for Su'da, then
should I have healed my soul, ndr had afterwards to repent.


But it mourned before me, and its mourning excited mine, and I
said, ‘The superiority is to the one that is first.”


Now I hope I shall not be, in respect of the playful
style that I display, and the source that I repair to, like
the beast that scratched up its death with its hoof, or he
who cut off his nose with his own hand ;—So as to be
joined to those who are “most of all losers in their


PREFACE OF AL HARIRI. 107


works, whose course on earth has been in vain, while
they count that they have done fair deeds.”—Since I
know that although he who is intelligent and liberal
will connive at me, and he who is friendly and partial
may defend me,—I can hardly escape from the simpleton
who is ignorant, or the spiteful man who feigns ignor-
ance;— Who will detract from me on account of this com-
position, and will give out that it is among the things
forbidden of the law.—But yet, whoever scans matters
with the eye of intelligence, and makes good his insight
into principles—Will rank these Assemblies in the order
of useful writings, and class them with the fables that
relate to brutes and lifeless objects. —Now none was ever
heard of whose hearing shrank from such tales, or who
held as sinful those who related them at ordinary times.—
Moreover, since deeds depend on intentions, and in these
lies the effectiveness of religious obligations,—What
fault is there in one who composes stories for instruction
not for display, and whose purpose in them is the educa-
tion and not the fablings ?—Nay, is he not in the posi-
tion of one who assents to doctrine, and “ guides to the
right path ?”

Yet am I content if I may carry my caprice, and then be quit
of it, without any debt against me or to me.

And of God I seek to be helped in what I purpose, ,
and to be kept from that which makes defective, and to
be led to that which leads aright.—For there is no
refuge but to Him, and no seeking of succour but in
Him, and no prospering but from Him, and no sanctuary
but He.—On Him I rely, and to Him I have recourse.


108


THE FIRST ASSEMBLY, CALLED “OF SAN‘A.”


In this Assembly Al Harith arrives in the town of San‘é in
Yemen, in great poverty; and, while seeking relief, encounters a
crowd, which is gathered about a preacher. The discourse is a stern
warning against self-indulgence, and an exhortation to repentance.
Harith, wishing to learn who the preacher is, follows him to a cave,
and there finds him enjoying himself with good food, and even with
wine. He begins to rebuke him, but the preacher, throwing off dis-
guise, extemporizes some lines, confessing that his preaching was
only a device to obtain charity. Harith asks the attendant the name
of the preacher, and is told that he is Aba Zayd, of Serj. This As-
sembly is placed first because in it Harith is represented as un-
acquainted with Aba Zayd, though the first Assembly composed by
Hariri is said to be that called Al Haramiyeh, which is placed forty-
eighth in the collection.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related :—When I
mounted the hump of exile, and misery retnoved me
from my fellows, the shocks of the time cast me to
San‘a of Yemen.—And I entered it with wallets empty,
manifest in my need ; I had not-a meal; I found not in
my sack a mouthful.—Then began I to traverse its ways
like one crazed, and to roam in its depths as roams
the thirsting bird—And wheréver ranged my glances,
wherever ran my goings at. morn or even,—I sought
some generous man before whom I might fray the tissue

_of my countenance, to whom I might be open concerning
my need ;—Or one well bred, whose aspect might dispel
my pain, whose anecdote might relieve my thirsting.—
Until the close of my circuit brought me, and the over-
ture of courtesy guided me, to a wide place of concourse,
in which was a throng and a wailing.—Then I entered
the thicket of the crowd to explore what was drawing


forth tears.—And I saw in the middle of the ring a
‘


FIRST ASSEMBLY. 109


person slender of make ;—Upon him whs the equipment
of pilgrimage, and he had the voice of lamentation.—
And he was studding cadences with the jewels of
his wording, and striking hearings with the reproofs
of his admonition.—And now the medley of the crowds
had surrounded him, as the halo surrounds the moon, or
the shell the fruit.—So I crept towards him, that I
might catch of his profitable sayings, and gather up of
his gems.—And I heard him say, as he coursed along
in his career, and the throat of his improvisation made
utterance :—

O thou reckless in petulance, trailing the garment of
vanity! O thou headstrong in follies, turning aside to
idle tales!—How long wilt thou persevere in thine
error, and eat sweetly of the pasture of thy wrong ?—
How far-wilt thou be extreme in thy pride, and not
abstain from thy wantonness ?—Thou provokest by thy
rebellion the Master of thy forelock ; in the foulness of
thy behaving thou goest boldly against the Knower of
thy secret.—Thou hidest thyself from thy neighbour,
but thou art in the sight of thy Watcher ; thou conceal-
est from thy slave, but no hidden thing is hidden from
thy Ruler.—Thinkest thou that thy state will profit thee
when thy departure draweth near? or that thy wealth
will deliver thee when thy deeds destroy thee? or that
thy repentance will suffice for thee when thy foot slip-
peth? or that thy kindred will lean to thee in the
day that thy judgment place gathereth thee ?—How
is it thou hast not walked in the high-road of guidance,
and hastened the treatment of thy disease, and blunted
the edge of thine iniquity, and restrained thyself—thy
chief enemy? Is not death thy doom? What then


110 FIRST ASSEMBLY.


is thy preparation? Is not grey hair thy warning?
What then is thy excuse? And in the grave’s niche
thy sleeping place? What dost thou say? And to
God thy going? and who shall be thy defender ?—Oft
hath the time awakened thee, but thou hast set thyself
to slumber; and admonition hath drawn thee, but thou
hast strained against it; and warnings have been mani-
fest to thee, but thou hast made thyself blind; and
truth hath been established to thee, but thou hast dis-
puted it ; and death hath bid thee remember, but thou
hast sought to forget; and it hath been in thy power
to impart of good, but thou hast not imparted.—Thou
preferrest money which thou mayest hoard before piety
which thou mayest keep in mind: thou choosest a castle
thou mayest rear rather than bounty thou mayest con-
fer.—Thou inclinest from the guide from whom thou
mightest get guidance, to the pelf thou mayest gain as a
gift; thou lettest the love of the raiment thou covetest
overcome the recompence thou mightest earn.—The
rubies of gifts'cling to thy heart more than the seasons
of prayer ; and the heightening of dowries is preferred
with thee to continuance in almsgivings.—The dishes ©
of many meats are more desired of thee than the leaves
of doctrines: the jesting of comrades is more cheerful to
thee than the reading of the Koran.—Thou commandest
to righteousness, but violatest its sanctuary: thou for-
biddest from deceit, but refrainest not thyself: thou
turnest men from oppression, and then thou drawest near
to it; thou fearest mankind, but God is more worthy
that thou shouldest fear him. Then he recited—


Woe to him who seeks the world, and turns to it his careering :
And recovers not from his greediness for it, and the excess of his
love.


FIRST ASSEMBLY. 111


Oh, if he were wise, but a drop of what he seeks would content
him.


Then he laid his dust, and let his spittle subside ; and
put his bottle on his arm, and his staff under his arm-
pit—And when the company gazed on his uprising,
and saw that he equipped himself to move away from the
midst—Each of them put his hand into his bosom, and
filled for him a bucket from his stream:—And said,
“Use this for thy spending, or divide it among thy
friends.”—And he received it with half-closed eyes, and
turned away from them, giving thanks ;—And began to
take leave of whoever would escort him, that his road
might be hidden from them; and to dismiss whoever
would follow him, that his dwelling might be un-
known.—Said Al Harith, son of Hamman: Now I
went after him, concealing from him my person; and
followed on his track from where he could not see me ;—
Until he came to a cave, and slipped into it suddenly.—
So I waited for him till he put off his sandals and
washed his feet, and then I ran in upon him;—And
found him sitting opposite an attendant, at some white
bread and a roast kid, and over against them was a
jar of date wine.—And I said to him, “Sirrah, was
that thy story, and is this thy reality ?’—But he puffed
the puff of heat and went near to burst with rage; and
ceased not to stare at me till I thought he would leap
upon me.—But when his fire was allayed, and his flame
hid itself, he recited :—


I don the black robe to seek my meal, and I fix my hook in the
hardest prey :

And of my preaching I make a noose, and steal min it against the
chaser and the chased. -

Fortune has forced me to make way even to the lion of the thicket
by the subtlety of my beguiling.


112 SECOND ASSEMBLY.


Yet do I not fear its change, nor does my loin quiver at it:

Nor does a covetous mind lead me to water at any well that will
soil my honour.

Now if Fortune were just in its decree it would not empower the
worthless with authority.


Then he said to me, “‘ Come and eat; or, if thou wilt,
rise! and tell.”—But I turned to his attendant, and said,
“‘T conjure thee, by Him through whom harm is depre-
cated, that thou tell me who is this.”—He said, “ This is
Aba Zayd, of Seraj, the Light of Foreigners, the Crown
of the Learned.”’—Then I turned back to whence I came,
and was extreme in wonder at what I saw.


THE SECOND ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF HOLWAN.”


In this Assembly the author displays more than his usual rhetor-
ical subtlety, and while there is none more admired by those whose
taste has been formed on Eastern models, there is none which
appears more extravagant to the European student. Alliterations,
verbal caprices, far-fetched éxpressions, and the puerile conceits
which were usual among poets of the age, so abound, that we may
almost imagine the author to be desirous of satirizing what he pro-
fesses to imitate. The subject is as follows :—Harith in his passion
for the society of literary persons makes his way to Holw4n, a town
in Irak, on the mountains east of Bagdad, and a resort of the higher
classes from the heat of the capital. Here he meets with-Abi Zayd,
who is purguing his calling of improvisatore and mendicant under
various disguises, and enjoys for a long time his company and liter-
ary guidance. Aba Zayd, however, disappears, and Harith returns
to his native place, Basra, where after a time he again meets Abt .
Zayd in the public library, among a crowd of dilettanti who are
discussing the beauties of the popular poets. The admiration of
one is especially excited by a line in which the teeth of a lady are
compared to pearls and hailstones, and the white petals of a flower ;
and Aba Zayd instantly produces a number of comparisons in the
same style, which give him a high place in the esteem of those
present, when they are assured that he is really the author of them.


SECOND ASSEMBLY. 113


]
They reward him, and the Assembly concludes ‘by his reciting to


Hiarith, who had recognised him, some lines on the fickleness of
fortune.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: Ever since my
amulets were doffed and my turbans were donned, I was
eager to visit learning’s seat and to jade to it the camels
of seeking.—That through it I might cleave to what
would be my ornament among men, my rain-cloud in
thirst.—And through the excess of my longing to kindle
at it, and my desire to robe myself in its raiment,—I
discussed with every one, great and small, and sought
my draught both of the rain-flood and the dew, and
solaced myself with hope and desire.—Now when I de-
scended at Holw4n, and had already tried the brethren,
and tested their values, and proved what was worthless
or fine ;—I found there Abi Zayd of Serdj, shifting
among the varieties of pedigree, beating about in various
courses of gain-getting ;—For at one time he claimed to
be of the race of Sdsin, and at another he made himself
kin to the princes of Ghassan; and now he sallied forth
in the vesture-of poets ; and anon he put on the pride of
nobles.—And yet with all this diversifying of his con-
dition, and this display of contradiction,—He is adorned
with grace and information, and courtesy and knowledge,
and astonishing eloquence, and obedient improvisation,
and excelling accomplishments, and a foot that mounts
the hills of the sciences.—Now, through his goodly at-
tainments he is associated with in spite of his faults; and
through the largeness of his information there is a fond-
ness for the sight of him ; and through the blandishment
of his fair-speaking men are loath to oppose him; and
through the sweetness of his address he is helped to his


8


114 SECOND ASSEMBLY. ~


desire.—Then I clung to his skirts for the sake of his
peculiar accomplishments, and valued highly his affec-
tion by reason of his precious qualities.

With him I wiped away my cares, and beheld my fortune dis-
played to me, open of face, gleaming with light.

looked upon his nearness to me as kinship, his abiding as
wealth, his aspect as a full draught, his life as rain.

Thus we remained a long season ; he produced for me
daily some pleasantness, and drove some doubt from my
heart,—Until the hand of want mixed for him the cup
of parting, and the lack of a meal urged him to abandon
Trak ;—And the failures of supply cast him into desert
regions, and the waving of the banner of distress ranged
him in the line of travellers ;—And he sharpened for
departure the edge of determination, and journeyed
away, drawing my heart with his leading cord.

After he was gone none pleased me who kept by me, none filled
me with affection by urging me to intimacy.

Since he strayed away none has appeared to me his like in excel-
lence ; no friend has gotten the equal of his qualities. :
_ So he was hidden from me a season: I knew not his
lair ; I found none to tell of him ;--But when I had
returned from my wandering to the place where my
branch had sprouted,—I was once present in the town
library, which is the council-hall of scholars, the meet-
ing place of residents and strangers: —Then there entered
one with a thick beard and a squalid aspect,—And he
saluted those who sat, and took seat in the last rows of
the people.—Then began he to produce what was in his
wallet, and to astonish those present by the sagacity of
his judgment.—And he said to the man who was next
him, ‘‘ What is the book into which thou lookest?”—He
said, “‘The poems of Abi ‘Obadeh ; him of whose ex-


SECOND ASSEMBLY, — 115


cellence men bear witness.”—He o “In what thou
hast seen hast thou hit on any fine thing which thou
admirest ?”—He said, “ Yes; the line

As though she smiled from strung pearls or hailstones, or camo-
mile flowers,
For it is original in the use of similitude which it con-
tains.”’—He said to him, ‘ Here is a wonder! here is a
lack of taste,—Sir, thou hast taken for fat what is only
swollen, thou hast blown on that which is no fuel :—
Where art thou in comparison with the rare verse which
unites-the similitudes of the teeth ?


My life a ransom for those teeth whose beauty charms, and which
& purity adorns sufficing thee for all other.


She parts her lips from fresh pearls, and from hail- ies and
from camomile flowers, and from the palm shoot, and from bubbles.

Then each one approved the couplet and admired
it, and bade him repeat it and dictate it—And he was
asked, ‘“‘ Whose is this verse, and is its author living
"or dead ??—He said, “By Allah, Right is most worthy
to be followed, and truth is most fitting to be listened
to:—Know, friends, that it is his who talks with you to-
day..—Said Al Harith: Now it was as though the
company doubted of his fathering, and were unwilling to
give credit to his claim.—And he perceived what had
fallen into their thoughts, and was aware of their inward
unbelief ;—And was afraid that blame might chance to
him, or ill-fame reach him;—So he quoted from the
Koran, “Some suspicions are a sin.””—Then he said, “ O
ye reciters of verse, physicians of sickly phrase !—Truly
the purity of the gem is shown by the testing, and
the hand of truth rends the cloak of doubt.—Now it was
said aforetime that by trial is a man honoured or con-


116 SECOND ASSEMBLY.


temned.—So come! I now expose my hidden store to
the proving, I offer my saddle-bag for comparison.”—
Then hastened one who was there and said: “I know a
verse such that there is no weaving on its beam, such
that no genius can supply one after its image—Now, if
thou wish to draw our hearts to thee, compose after this
style :—


She rained pearls from the daffodil, and watered the rose, and bit
upon the ‘unnab with hailstone.


And it was but the glance of an eye, or less, before he
recited rarely :—

T asked her when she met me to put off her crimson veil, and to
endow my hearing with the sweetest of tidings:

And she removed the ruddy light which covered the brightness
of her moon, and she dropped pearls from a perfumed ring.

Then all present were astonished at his readiness, and
acknowledged his honesty.—And when he perceived that
they approved his diction, and were, hastening into the
path of honouring him,—He looked down the twinkling
of an eye; ‘then he said, “‘ Here are two other verses for

you ;” and recited :—


She came on the day when departure afflicted, in black robes,
biting her fingers like one regretful, confounded :

And night lowered on her morn, and a branch supported them
both, and she bit into crystal with pearls.

Then did the company set high his value, and deem
that his steady rain was a plenteous one ;—And they
made pleasant their-converse with him, and gave him
goodly clothing.—Said the teller of this story: Now
when I saw the blazing of his firebrand, and the gleam
of his unveiled brightness, I fixed a long look to guess
at him, and made my eye to stray over his countenance.
—And lo! he was our Shaykh of Serdj; but now his


THIRD ASSEMBLY. 117


dark night was moon-lit.—Then I congratulated myself
on his coming thither, and hastened to kiss his hand :—
And said to him, “What has changed thy appearance,
so that I could not recognise thee? what has made thy
beard gray, so that I knew not thy countenance ?”—
And he indited and said :—


The stroke of calamities makes us hoary, and fortune to men is a
changer.

If it yields to-day to any, to-morrow it overcomes him.

Trust not the gleam of its lightning, for it is a deceitful gleam.

But be patient if it hounds calamities against thee, and drives them
on.
For there is no disgrace on the pure gold when it is turned about
in the fire.


Then he rose and departed from his place, and carried
away our hearts with him.


THE THIRD ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF KAYLAH.”


Hirith is in a circle of scholars, when a lame man makes his
appearance, and after saluting them describes his former affluence
and present penury in a very poetical and figurative style. Harith
perceiving his genius, and pitying his distress, offers him a denar, on
condition that he will improvise some lines in praise of it. This the
lame man at once does, and on Harith offering him another denar on
condition of his blaming it, he recites another composition in dis-
praise of money. Harith then recognizes in the lame man Abi
Zayd, and rebukes him for his imposture. Abd Zayd defends him-
self in some new verses. The opening address of Abii Zayd is in
imitation of a style said to be common among the Arabs of the desert.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was set with
Some comrades in a company wherein he that made
appeal was never bootless, and the rubbing of the fire-
shafts never failed, and the flame of contention never


118 THIRD ASSEMBLY.


blazed.—_And while we were catching from each other
the cues of recitations, and betaking ourselves to novel-
ties of anecdote,—Behold there stood by us one on
whom was a worn garment, and in whose walk was a
limp. —And he said, O ye best of treasures, joys of your
kindred: Health to you this morning; may ye enjoy
your morning draught.—Look on one who was erewhile
master of guest-room and largess, wealth and bounty,
land and villages, dishes and feasting.—But the frowning
of calamities ceased not from him, and the warrings of
sorrows, and the fire-flakes of the malice of the envious,
and the succession of dark befallings,—-Until the court
‘was empty, and the yard was bare, and the fountain
sank, and the dwelling was desolate, and the hall was
void, and the chamber stone-strewed—And fortune
shifted so that the household wailed; and the stalls
were vacant, ‘so that the rival had compassion; and the
cattle and the goods they perished, so that the envious
and malignant pitied And to such a pass did we come,
through assailing fortune and prostrating need,—That
we were shod with soreness, and fed on choking, and
filled our bellies with ache, and wrapped our entrails
upon hunger, and anointed our eyes with watching, and
made pits our home, and deemed thorns a smooth bed,
and came to forget our saddles, and thought destroying
death to be sweet, and the ordained day to be tardy.—
And now is there any one generous ‘to heal, bountiful
to bestow ?—For by Him who made me to spring from
Kaylah, surely I am now a brother of penury, I have
not a nights’ victual.

Said Al Harith, son of Hammim: Now I pitied his
distresses, and inclined to the eliciting of his rhymes.—


THIRD ASSEMBLY. 119


So I drew forth for him a denar, and said to him, to
prove him, “If thou praise it in verse it is thine, full
surely.”—And he betook himself to recite on the spot,
borrowing nothing :—


How noble is that yellow one, whose yellowness is pure,

Which traverses the regions, and whose journeying is afar.

Told abroad are its fame and repute :

Its lines are set as the secret sign of wealth ;

Its march is coupled with the success of endeavours ;

Its bright look is loved by mankind ;

As though its ore had been molten of their hearts.

By its aid whoever has gotten it in his purse assails boldly,

Though kindred be perished, or tardy to help.

Oh charming are its purity and brightness ;

Charming are its sufficiency and help.

How many a ruler is there whose rule has been perfected by it!

How many a sumptuous one is there whose grief, but for it, would
be endless !

How many a host of cares has one charge of it put to flight!

How many a full moon has a sum of it brought down !

How many a one burning with rage, whose coal is flaming,

Has it been secretly whispered to, and then his anger has softened.

How many a prisoner, whom his kin had yielded,

Has it delivered, so that his gladness has been unmingled,

Now by the Truth of the Lord whose creation brought it forth,

Were it not for His fear, I should say its power is supreme.


Then he stretched forth his hand after his recitation,
and said, ‘The honourable man performs what he
promises, and the rain-cloud pours if it has thundered.”
—So I threw him the denar, and said, “Take it; no
grudging goes with it.”—And he put it in his mouth
and said, “God bless it.”—-Then he girt up his skirts
for departure, after that he had paid his thanks.—But
‘there arose in me, through his pleasantry, a giddiness of
desire which made me ready to incur indebtedness.—So
I bared another denar, and said, ‘Does it suit thee to


120 THIRD ASSEMBLY.


blame this, and then gather it?”—And he recited im-

promptu, and sang with speed :—

Ruin on it for a deceiver and insincere,

The yellow one with two faces like a hypocrite!

It shows forth with two qualities to the eye of him that looks on it,

The adornment of the loved one, the colour of the lover.

Affection for it, think they who judge truly,

Tempts men to commit that which shall anger their Maker.

But for it no thief’s right hand were cut off;

Nor would tyranny be displayed by the impious ;

Nor would the niggard shrink from the night-farer ;

Nor would the delayed claimant mourn the delay of him that with-
holds ;

Nor would men call to God from the envious who casts at them.

Moreover, the worst quality that it possesses

Is that it helps thee not in straits, :

Save by fleeing from thee like a runaway slave.

Well done he who casts it away from a hill-top,

And who, when it whispers to him with the whispering of a lover,

Says to it in the words of the truth-speaking, the veracious,

*¢T have no mind for intimacy with thee,—begone !”


Then said I to him, ‘* How abundant is thy shower !”
He said, “Agreement binds strongest.”—So I -tossed
. him the second denar and said, “Consecrate them both
with the Twice-read Chapter.” —Hecast it into his mouth
and .joined. it with its twin, —And turned away blessing
his morning’s walk, praising the assembly and its bounty.
—Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now my heart
whispered me that he was Abd Zayd, and that his going
lame was for a trick ;—So I called him back and said to
him, “Thou art recognised by thy eloquence, so straighten
thy walk.”—He said, “If thou be the son of Hammam,
be thou greeted with honour and live long among the
honourable.”—I said, “I am Harith; but what is thy
condition amid all thy fortunes.”—He said, “I change
between two conditions, distress and ease; and I veer


FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 121


with two winds, the tempest and the breeze.”—I said,
“And how hast thou pretended lameness? the like of
thee plays not buffoon.”—Then his cheerfulness, which
had shone forth, waned; but he recited as he moved
away :—


T have feigned to be lame, not from love of lameness, but that
I may knock at tho gate of relief.

For my cord is thrown on my neck, and I go as one who ranges
freely.

Now if men blame me I say, “ Excuse me: sure there is no guilt
on the lame.”


THE FOURTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF DAMIETTA.”


Harith is journeying in a caravan to Damietta, and during one of
the night-halts he hears two men conversing on duty towards a
neighbour. ‘The younger being asked for his opinion replies in
a spirit of charity and generosity, upon which the other rebukes
him, and sets forth the fitting conduct of a man to his neighbour
in accordance with the teachings of selfishness and worldly wisdom.
These addresses, especially that of the elder man, are expressed ina
highly rhetorical diction, which captivates the literary Harith, and
the next morning he looks for them, and discovers them to be Aba
Zayd and his son. He invites them to his own quarters, introduces
them to his friends, and procures for them valuable presents. Abé
Zayd then asks permission to go to a neighbouring village and take
a bath, promising to return speedily. They consent, and he goes off
with his son. ‘ After waiting the greater part of the day they find
that he has deceived them, and prepare to continue their journey ;
Harith, when making ready his camel, finds some lines written on the
saddle, which allude to a precept in the Koran in favour of separa-
ting after a meal. The plays on words in this Assembly are exceed-
ingly ingenious and elaborate, and the opening description has much
poetical beauty.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I journeyed to
Damietta in a year of much coming and going,—And in
e


122 FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


those days was I glanced after for my affluence, desired
in friendship :—I trained the bordered robes of wealth
and looked upon the features of joy.—And I was travel-
ling with companions who had broken the staff of dissen-
sion, who were suckled on the milk-flows of concord,—So
that they showed like the teeth of a comb in uniformity,
and like one soul in agreement of desires;—But we
coursed on withal apace, and not one of us but had
saddled a fleet she-camel ;—And if we alighted at a
station or went aside to a spring, we snatched the halt
and lengthened not the staying.

Now it happened that we were urging our camels on a
night youthful in prime, raven-locked of complexion ;—
And we journeyed until the night-season had put off its
prime, and the morning had wiped away the dye of
the dark ;—But when we wearied of the march and
inclined to drowsiness, we came upon a ground with
dew-moistened hillocks, and a faint east breeze :—And
we chose it as a resting-place for the white camels, an
abode for the night-halt.—Now when the caravan had
descended there, and the groan and the roar of the beasts
were still,—-I heard a loud-voiced man say to his talk-
fellow in the camp, ‘ What is the rule of thy conduct
with thy people and neighbours ?”’—The other answered,
I'am duteous to my neighbour though he wrong me;
and give my fellowship even to the violent; and bear
with a partner though he disorder my affairs; and
love my friend even though he drench me with a tepid
draught; and prefer my well-wisher above my brother ;
and fulfil to my comrade even though he requite me not
with a tenth; and think little of much if it be for my
guest ; and whelm my companion with my kindness ;

Pe


FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 123


and put my talk-fellow in the place ¢f my prince; and
hold my intimate to be as my chief; and commit my
gifts to my acquaintance; and confer my comforts on
my associate ; and soften my speech to him that hates
me; and continue to ask after him that disregards me ;,
and am pleased with but the crumbs of my due ; and am
content with but the least portion of my reward; and
complain not of wrong even when I am wronged ; and
revenge not, even though a viper sting me.
Then said his companion to him, Alas! my boy, only
he who clings should be clung to; only he who is
valuable should’ be prized.—As for me I give only to
him who will requite; I distinguish not the insolent by
my regard; nor will I be of pure affection to one who
refuses me fair-dealing ; nor treat as a brother one who
would undo my tethering rope; nor aid one who would
baulk my hopes; nor care for one who would cut my
cords; nor be courteous to him who ignores my value ;
nor give my leading rope to one who breaks my covenant ;
nor be free of my love to my adversaries ; nor lay aside
my menace to the hostile; nor plant my benefits on the
land of my enemies; nor be willing to impart to him
who rejoices at my ills; nor show my regard to him
who will exult at my death ; nor favour with my gifts
any but my friends; nor call to the curing of my sick-
ness any but those who love me; nor confer my friend-
ship on him who will not stop my breach; nor make my
purpose sincere to him who wishes my decease; nor be
earnest in prayer for him who will not fill my wallet;
nor pour out my praise on him who empties my jar.—
For who has adjudged that I should be lavish and thou
shouldest hoard, that I should be soft and thou rough, that
e


124° FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


T should melt and thou freeze, that I should blaze and thou
smoulder ?—No, by Allah, but let us balance in speech
as coin, and match in deed as sandals.—That each to
each we may be safe from fraud and free from hatred.—
For else, why should I give thee full water and thou
stint me ? why should I bear with thee and thou con-
temn me? why should I gain for thee and thou wound
me? why should I advance to thee and thou repel me?
For how should fair-dealing be attracted by injury ? how
can the gun rise clear with cloud ?—And when did love
follow docilely after wrong? and what man of honour
consents to a state of abasement ?—For excellently said
thy father :—


Whoso attaches his affection to me, I repay him as one who
builds on his foundation :

And I mete to a friend as he metes to me, according to the fullness
of his meting or its defect.

I make him not a loser! for the worst of men is he whose to-day
falls short of his yesterday.

Whoever seeks fruit of me gets only the fruit of his own planting.

I seek not to defraud, but I will not come off with the bargain of
one who is weak in his reason.

I hold not truth binding on me towards a man who holds it not
binding on himself. ‘

. There may be some one insincere in love who fancies that I

am true in my friendship for him, while he is false ;

And knows not in his ignorance that I pay my creditor his debt
after jts kind.

Sunder, ‘with the sundering of hate, from one who would make thee
@ fool, and hold him as one entombed in his grave.

And towards him in whose intercourse there is aught doubtful
put on the garb of one who shrinks from his intimacy.

And hope not for affection from any who sees that thou art in
want of his money.


Said Al Harith, son of Hammém: Now, when I had
gathered what passed between them, I longed to know
them in person.—And when the sun shone forth, and


FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 125


robed the sky with light, I went forth before the camels
had risen, and with an earliness beyond the earliness
of the crow,—And began to follow the direction of
that night-voice, and to examine the faces with a search-
ing glance :—Until I caught sight of Abi Zayd and his
son talking together, and upon them were two worn
mantles.—Then I knew that they were my two talkers
of the night, the authors of my recitation—So I ap-
proached them as one enamoured of their refinement,
pitying their shabbiness ;—And offered them a removal
to my lodging, and the disposal of my much and my
little ;—And began to tell abroad their worth among the
travellers, and to shake for them the fruited branches;—
Until they were whelmed with gifts, and taken as
friends.—_Now we were in a night-camp, whence we
could discern the build of the villages, and spy the fires
of hospitality—And when Abi Zayd saw that his purse
was full, and his distress removed, he said to me, “ Truly
my body is dirty, and my filth has caked :—Wilt thou
permit me to go to a village, and bathe, and fulfil this
urgent need?”—I said, “If thou wilt; but quick !
return !”—He said, “Thou shalt find me appear again
to thee, quicker than the glancing of thine eye.”—-Then
he coursed away, as courses the good steed in the train-
ing-ground, and said to his son, ‘‘ Haste ! haste !”’—-And
we imagined not that he was deceiving, or secking to
escape.—So we stayed and watched for him as men
watch for the new moons of feasts, and made search
for him by spies and scouts.—Until the sunlight was
weak with age, and the wasted bank of the day had
nigh crumbled in.—Then, when the term of waiting had
been prolonged, and the sun showed in faded garb—


126 FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


I said to my companions, “We have gone to the
extreme in delay, and have been long in the setting
forth ;—So that we have lost time, and it is plain that
the man was lying.—Now, therefore, prepare for the
journey, and turn not aside to the greenness of dung
heaps.”—Then I rose to equip my camel and lade for the
departure ; and found that Abi Zayd had written on the
pack saddle :—

Oh thou, who wast to me an arm and a helper, above all


mankind!


Reckon not that I have left thee through impatience or ingra-
titude :

For since I was born I have been of those who “when they have
eaten separate. .


Said Al Harith: ‘Then I made the company read the
words of the Koran that were on the pack saddle, so that
he who had blamed him might excuse him.—And they
admired his witticism, but commended themselves from
his mischief.—Then we set forth, nor could we learn
whose company he had gotten in our place.


THE FIFTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED “OF KUFA.”


The following Assembly, remarkable for the poetical beauty of its
language, and the delicacy of its versification, describes an adventure
in which Ab@ Zayd obtains a sum of money from a company of
generous scholars. Harith is engaged with some friends in a night
conversation at Kufa, one of the, chief seats of Arabian learning,
when a stranger knocks at the door, and addresses the inmates in
verses describing his want and weariness, his excellent disposition,
and his gratitude for the favours he may receive. Struck with
his poetical powers the company admit him, and give him a supper.
The lamp being brought, Hirith discovers that the guest is Aba
Zayd, and informs the company of his merits. They then ask him
for a story, and he relates that he had that evening met with a long


FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 127


lost son, whom he would be glad to take cei of, did not his
poverty hinder. him. As he had taken care to mention in the
narrative that he was of thé royal race of Ghassin, the company are
moved by his misfortunes, and at once raise a large sum of money to
enable him to support his boy. Abd Zayd delights them with
-his conversation, but as soon as daylight appears he calls away
Harith, to assist him in cashing the cheques or orders which he had
received. The simple Hirith, who had been delighted with the
verses which the father had put into the mouth of his son, desires to
see 80 eloquent a youth; upon which Aba Zayd laughs heartily,
tells his friend, in some exquisite verses, that such a desire is the
following of a mirage, that he, Aba Zayd, had neither wife nor, son,
and that the story was only a trick to obtain money. He then
departs, leaving Harith mortified at the adventure.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: Iwas convers-
ing at Kufa, in a night whose complexion was of a two-
fold hue, whose moon was as an amulet of silver—With
companions who had been nourished on the milk of
eloquence, who might draw the train of oblivion over
Sahban.—Each was a man to remember from, and not to |
guard against; each was one whom his friend would
incline to, and not avoid.—And the night talk fascinated
us until the moon had set, and the watching overcame
us.—Now when night’s unmingled dark had spread
its awning, and there was nought but nodding among
us—We heard from the gate the faint sound of a way-
farer, rousing the dogs; then followed the knock of
one bidding to open.—We said, ‘‘ Who is it that comes
in the dark night?” Then the traveller answered :—

O people of the mansion, be ye guarded from ill!

Meet not harm as long as ye live!

Lo! the night which glooms has driven

To your abode one dishevelled, dust laden,

A brother of journeying, that has been lengthened, extended,


‘Till he has become bent and yellow
Like the new moon of the horizon when it smiles.


128 FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


And now he approaches your court-yard, begging boldly,

And repairs to you before all people else,

To seek from you food and a lodging.

Ye have in him a guest contented, ingenuous,

One pleased with all, whether sweet or bitter,

One who will withdraw from you, publishing your bounty.

Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now when we were
caught by the sweetness of his utterance, and knew
what was behind his lightning,—We hastened to open
the gate, and met him with welcome ;—And said to the
boy “ Quick, quick! bring what is ready !”—Then said
our guest, ‘‘ Now, by Him who has set me down at your
abode, I will not roll my tongue over your food,—Unless
-ye pledge me that ye will not make me a burden, that ye
will not, for my sake, task yourselves with a meal.—For
sometimes a morsel aches the eater, and forbids him
his repasts.—And the worst of guests is he who imposes
trouble and ‘annoys his host,—And especially with a
harm that affects the body and tends to sickness.—For,
by that proverb, which is widely current, ‘The best
suppers are those that are clearly seen.’—Is only meant
that supper-time should be hastened, and eating by
night, which dims the sight, avoided.—Unless, by Allah,
the fire of hunger kindle and stand in the way of sleep.”
—Said Al Harith: Now it was as though he had got
sight of our desire, and so had shot with the bow of our
conviction.—Accordingly we. gratified him by agreeing
to the condition, and commended him for his easy
temper.—And when the boy brought what was to be
had, and lighted the candle in the midst of us, I looked
close at him, and lo! it was Abi Zayd.—So I said to my
company, ‘Joy to you of the guest who has come! Nay,
but the spoil is lightly won !—For if the moon of Sirius


FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 129


has gone down, truly the moon of pdetry has risen :—
Or if the full moon of the Lion has waned, the full moon
of eloquence shines forth.”—Then ran through them the
wine-glow of joy, and sleep flew away from their eye-
-corners.— And they refused the rest which they had
purposed, and returned to the spreading out of plea-
santry, after they had folded it—But Abi Zayd kept
intent upon plying his hands; however, when what was
before him might be removed—I said to him, “ Present
us with one of the rare stories from thy night talkings,
or some wonder from among the wonders of thy jour-
neys.”—He said, ‘“ Of wonders I have met with such as
no seers have seen, no tellers have told.—But among the
most wondrous was that which I beheld to-night, a little
before my visit to you and my coming to your gate.”—
Then we bade him tell us of this new thing which he
had seen in the field of his night-faring.—He said,
Truly the hurlings of exile have thrown me to this
land:—And I was in hunger and distress, with a scrip
like the heart of the mother of Moses.—Now, as soon as
the dark had settled, I arose, in spite of all my footsoré-
ness, to seek a host or to gain a loaf.—Then the driver. -
hunger, and Fate, which is bye-named the Father of.
Wonders, urged me on, till I stood at the door of a
house, and spoke, improvising :—
Hail people of this dwelling,
May ye live in the ease of a plenteous life!
What have ye for a son of the road, one crushed to the sand,
Worn with journeys, stumbling in the night-dark night,
Aching in entrails, which inclose nought but hunger ?
For two days he has not tasted the savour of a meal :
In your land there is no refuge for him.


And already the van of the drooping darkness has gloomed ;
And through bewilderment he is in restlessness.


9


130 FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


Now in this abode is there any one, sweet of spring,

Who will say me, “Throw away thy staff and enter :

Rejoice in a cheerful welcome and a ready meal ?”

Then came forth to me a lad in a tunic, and an-
swered :—-

Now by the sanctity of the Shaykh who ordained hospitality,

And founded the House of Pilgrimage in the Mother of cities,

We have nought for the night-farer when he visits us

But conversation and a lodging in our hall.

For how should he entertain whom hinders from sleepfulness

Hunger which peels his bones when it assails him ?

Now what thinkest thou of my tale? what thinkest thou ?


I said, ‘‘ What shall I do with an empty house, and a
host the ally of penury ?—But tell me, youth, what is
thy name, for thy understanding has charmed me.””—He
said, ‘“‘My name is Zayd, and my birth-place, Fayd: and
I came to this city yesterday with my mother’s kindred
of the Bend ‘Abs.”—I said to him, “ Show me further,
so mayest thou live and be raised when thou fallest !”—
He said, “My mother Barrah told me (and she is like
her name, ‘ pious’) that she married in the. year of the
foray on Mawan a man of the nobles of Serdj and

‘Ghassan ;—But when he was aware of her pregnancy
(for he was a crafty bird, it is said) he made off from her
by stealth, and away he has stayed,—Nor is it known
whether he is alive and to be looked for, or whether he
has been laid in the lonely tomb.”—Said Abdi Zayd,
“Now I knew by sure signs that he was my child; but
the emptiness of my hand turned me from making
known to him,—-So I parted from him with heart
crushed and tears unsealed.—And now, ye men of un-
derstanding, have ye heard aught more wondrous than
this wonder ?”-——We said, ‘“ No, by Him who has know-

" ledge of the -Book.”—He said, “Record it among the


FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 131


wonders of chance; bid it abide for ever in the hearts
of scrolls; for nothing like it has been told abroad in
the world.””—-Then we bade bring the ink-flask, and its
snake-like reeds, and we wrote the story elegantly as he
worded it ;—After which we sought to draw from him
his wish about receiving his boy.—He said, “If my ©
purse were heavy, then to take charge of my son would
be light.”—We said, “Tf a niséb of money would suffice
thee, we will collect it for thee at once.”—He said,
“‘ And how should a nisab not content me? would any
but a madman despise such a sum ?”——Said the narrator,
Then each of us undertook a share of it, and wrote for
him an order for it.—Whereupon he gave thanks for the
kindness, and exhausted the plenteousness of praise ;
until we thought his speech long, or our merit little.—
And then he spread out such a bright mantle of talk as
might shame the stuffs of Yemen,—Until the dawn ap-
peared and the light-bearing morn went forth.—So we
spent a night of which the mixed hues had departed,
until its hind-locks grew gray in the dawn ;—And whose
lucky stars were sovereign until its branch budded into
light.—But when the limb of the sun peeped forth, he
leaped up as leaps the gazelle,—And said, “Rise up,
that we may take hold on the gifts and draw payment
of the cheques:—For the clefts of my heart are widen-
ing through yearning after my child.”,—So I went with
him, hand in hand, to make easy his success.—But as
soon as he had secured the coin in his purse the marks
of his joy flashed forth,—And he said, “ Be thou re-
warded for the steps of thy feet! be God my substitute
towards thee!?—I said, “I wish to follow thee that I
may behold thy noble child, and speak with him that he


132 SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


may answer eloquently.”’—Then looked he at me as looks
the deceiver on the deceived, and laughed till his eye-
balls gushed with tears; and he recited :—


‘O thou who didst fancy the mirage to be water when I quoted

to thee what I quoted !
| I thought not that my guile would be hidden, or that it would be

doubtful what I meant.

By Allah, I have no Barrah for a spouse; I have no son from
whom to take a bye-name.

Nothing is mine but divers kinds of ‘magic, in which I am original
and copy no one:

They are such as Al Asma‘i tells not of in what he has told; such
as Al Komayt never wove.

These I use when I will to reach whatever my hand would pluck :

And were I to abandon them, changed would be my state, nor
should I gain what I now gain. 4

So allow my excuse; nay, pardon me, if I have done wrong or
crime.


Then he took leave of me and passed away, and
set coals of the ghada in my breast.


THE SIXTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED “OF MERA-
GHAH,” OR “THE DIVERSIFIED.”


. )

This Assembly is the first of a remarkable series of compositions,
which, though they may be set down by Europeans as merely exam-
ples of laborious trifling, are highly esteemed by the Orientals as
works of ingenuity and scholarship, and have found in every suc-
ceeding age numerous imitators. The incident is that Harith,
being once on a visit to Meraghah, in Azerbijan, the north-west
province of the present Persian monarchy, found a number of
literary men lamenting the decline of learning, and depreciating
all contemporary authors in comparison with their predecessors,
Sitting in a humble place in the outskirts of the company was an
elderly man, who showed by his glances and scornful gestures that
he did not value highly the opinions of these critics. When they
paused in their fault-finding he took up the conversation, and declared
that one person, at least, of the present age was capable of rivalling


SIXTH ASSEMBL i 133


any who had gone before in scholarship and the arts of composition.
He is asked who is this genius, and answers that it is himself. The
company are sceptical, but as the stranger persists in asserting his
great ability, they determine to test him, and one of them proposes
to him a most difficult task.. He tells the company that he is a pro-
fessional writer attached to the Governor, who though a man of
generosity, had declared that he would help him no further, till he
had composed an address in which the alternate words should
consist entirely of pointed and unpointed letters; that is, that
the first, third, fifth words, and so forth, should consist of letters
without a point, while the "second, fourth, sixth, and so forth,
should have only pointed letters. He adds that he had been striving
a whole year to produce such a composition, or to find some one who
could produce it. The stranger, on hearing this, accepts the task
with alacrity, and instantly dictates an address in praise of the
Governor, fulfilling the conditions that had been imposed. The
company are delighted, and inquire his family and abode: he an-
swers in some plaintive verses that he is of the tribe of Ghassan,
and the city of Serij. His fame having reached the Governor, he
is offered the place of a public writer, but declines it. Harith, who
had discovered that he was Abii Zayd, asks him the reason of this
unwillingness to accept office. Aba Zayd again replies in verse,
and tells his friend that a life of freedom and poverty is better than
dependence on the great.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related : I was present in
the Court of Supervision at Meraéghah when the talk
ran of eloquence.—Then agreed all who were there of
the knights of the pen, and the lords of genius ; ;—That
there remained no one who could select his diction, or
use himself freely in it as he willed :—And that since the
men of old were gone, there was none now left who could
originate a brilliant method, or open a virgin style.—
And that even one marvellous among the writers of this

‘age, and holding in his grasp the. cords of eloquence,
is but a dependent on the ancients, even though he
possess the fluency of Sahban Wa’il.—Now there was in
the assembly an elderly man, sitting on the outskirts, in


134 SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


the places of the attendants:—And as often as the com-
pany overran in their career, and scattered fruit, good
and bad, from their store,—The side-glance of his eye
and the up-turning of his nose: showed that he was
one silent to spring, one crouching who would extend
his stride:—That he was a twanger of the bow who
shapes his arrows, one who gits in wait desiring the
conflict.—But when the quiverg were empty, and quiet
returned; when the storms had fallen, and the disputer
was stayed,—He turned to the company and said, Ye
have uttered a grievous thing, ye have wandered much
from the way:—For ye have magnified mouldering
bones, ye have been excessive in your leaning to those
who are gone; ye have contemned your generation,
among whom ye were born, and with whom your
friendships are established.—Have ye forgotten, ye skil-
ful in testing, ye sages of loosing and binding,—How
much new springs ‘have given forth ; how the colt has
surpassed the full-grown steed ;—In refined expressions,
and delightful metaphors, and ornate addresses, and
‘admired cadences ?—And, if any pne here will look
diligently, is there in the ancients aught but ideas whose
paths are worn, whose ranges are restricted ; which have
been handed down from them through the priority of
their birth, not from any superiority in him who draws
first at the well over him who comes after?—Now truly
know I one who when he composes colours richly ; and
when he expresses, embellishes ; and when he is lengthy,
finds golden thoughts; and when he is brief, baffles
his imitator ; and when he improvises, astonishes; and
when he creates, cuts the envious.

Then said to him the President of the Court, the Eye


SIXTH ASSEMBLY. 185 -


of those Eyes: “ Who is it that strikes on this rock, that
is the hero of these qualities ?”—He said, “It is the
adversary of this thy skirmish, the partner of thy dispu-
tation: Now, if thou wilt, rein a good steed, call forth
one who will answer, so shalt thou see a wonder.”—He
said to him, “Stranger, the chough in our land is
not taken for an eagle, and with us it is easy to discern
between silver and shingle.—Rare is he who exposes
himself to the conflict, and then escapes the mortal
hurt; or who stirs up the dust of trial, and then catches
not the mote of contempt.—So offer not thy honour
to shame, turn not from the counsel of the counsellor.” —
He answered, “‘ Each man knows best the mark of his
arrow, and be sure the night shall disclose its morn.”—

Then whispered the company as to how his well should
be fathomed, and his proving undertaken.—Said one of
them, “Leave him to my share, that I may pelt him
with the stone of my story; for it is the tightest of
knots, the touch-stone of testing”’—Then they invested
him with the command in this business as the Rebels
invested Abd Na‘dmeh.—Whereupon he turned to the
elder and said) Know that I am attached to this
Governor and maintain my condition by ornamental elo-
quence.—Now, in my country, I could rely for the
straightening of my crookedness on the sufficiency of my
means, coupled with the smallness of my family.—But
when my back was weighted, and my thin rain failed,
I repaired to him from my home with hope, and besought
him to restore my comeliness and my competence.—And
he looked pleasantly on my coming, and was gracious,
and served me morn and even.—But when I sought per-
mission from him to depart to my abode, on the shoulder


. 136 SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


of cheerfulness,—He said, “I have determined that I will
not provide thee with supplies, I will bring together for
thee no scattered means ;—Unless, before thy departure,
thou compose an address, setting in it an exposition
of thy state ;—Such, that the letters of one of every two
words shall all have dots, while the letters of the other
shall not be pointed at all.”—And now have I waited for
my eloquence a twelvemonth, but it has returned me not
a word; and I have roused my wit for a year, but only
my sluggishness has increased.And I have sought
aid among the gathering of the scribes, but each of them
has frowned and drawn back.—Now, if thou hast dis-
closed thy character with accuracy, Come with a sign if
thou be of the truthful.

Then answered the elder, ‘“‘ Thou hast put a good steed
to the pace; thou hast sought water at a full stream ;
thou hast given the bow to him who fashioned it; thou
hast lodged in the house him who built it”’—And
he thought a while till he had let his flow of wit
collect, his tnilch camel fill her udder:—And then he
said: Wool thy ink-flask, and take thy implements and
write :—

Generosity (may God establish the host of thy suc-
cesses), adorns; but meanness (may fortune cast down
the eye-lid of thy enviers), dishonours; the noble re-
wards, but the base disappoints; the princely entertains,
but the niggard frights away ; the liberal nourishes, but
the churl pains ; giving relieves, but deferring torments ;
blessing protects, and praise purifies ; the honourable re-
pays, for repudiation abases ; the rejection of him who
should be respected is error; a denial to the sons of hope
is outrage; and none is miserly but the fool, and none is


SIXTH ASSEMBLY. 137


foolish but the miser ; and none hoards but the wretched :
for the pious clenches not his palms.

But thy promise ceases not to fulfil; thy sentiments
cease not to relieve; nor thy clemency to indulge; nor
thy new moon to illumine; nor thy bounty to enrich ;
nor thy enemies to praise thee ; nor thy blade to destroy ;
nor thy princeship to build up; nor thy suitor to gain ;
nor thy praiser to win ; nor thy kindness to succour; nor
thy heaven to rain; nor thy milk-flow to abound; .nor
thy refusal to be rare.—Now he who hopes in thee is an
old man like a shadow, one to whom nothing remains.—
He seeks thee with a persuasion whose eagerness leaps
onward; he praises thee in choice phrases, whjch merit
their dowries.—His demand is a light one, his claims are
clear; his praise is striven for, his blame is shunned.—
And behind him is a household whom misery has
touched, whom wrong has stripped, whom squalor
involves.—And he is ever in tears that come at call, and
trouble that melts him, and care that is as a guest,
and growing sadness :—On account of hope that has dis-.
appointed him, and loss that has made him hoary, and
the enemy that has fixed tooth in him, and the quiet that
is gone.—And yet his love has not swerved, that there-
should be anger at him; nor is his wood rotten, that he
should be lopped away; nor has his breast spit foulness
that he should be shaken off; nor has his intercourse
been froward that he should be hated.—Now thy honour
admits not the rejection of his claim, so whiten his hope
by the lightening of his distress: then will he publish
thy praise throughout the world.—So mayest thou live to
avert misfortune, and to bestow wealth; to heal grief
and to care for the aged:—Attended by affluence and


138 SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


fresh joyousness; as long as the hall of the rich is
visited, or the delusion of the selfish is feared. And so
Peace.

Now when he had ceased from the dictation of his
address, and showed forth his prowess in the strife of
eloquence—The company gratified him both by word and
deed, and made large to him their courtesy and their
bounty.—Then was he asked from what tribe was his
origin, and in what valley was his lair; and he answered :


Ghassan is my noble kindred, and Serj my ancient land :

There my home was like the sun in splendour and mighty rank ;

And my dwelling was as Paradise in sweetness and pleasantness
and worth.

_ Oh, excellent were the life I led there and the plenteous delights,

In the day that I drew my broidered robe in its meadow, sharp of
purpose.

I walked proudly in the mantle of youth and looked upon goodly
pleasures ;

Fearing not the visitations of time aia its evil haps.

Now if grief could kill, surely I should perish from my abiding
griefs ;
_ Or if past life could be redeemed my good heart’s blood should
redeem it. ' ®

For death is better for a man than to live the life of a beast,

When the ring of subjection leads him'to mighty trouble and
outrage,

And he sees lions whos the paws of assailing hyzenas seize.

But the fault is in the time: but for its ill luck character would
not miss its place :

If the time were upright, then would the conditions of men be
upright in it.


After this his story reached the Governor, who filled
his mouth with pearls,—And bade him join himself to his
followers, and preside over his court of public writing.—
But the. gifts sufficed him, and unwillingness restrained
him from office.—Said the narrator: Now I had recog-
nized the wood of his tree before the ripening of his fruit :


SEVENTH ASSEMBLY. 139


—And I had nigh roused the people to the loftiness of his
worth before that his full moon shone forth.—But he
hinted to me by a twinkle of his eyelid that I should not
bare his sword from its sheath.—And when he was going
forth, full of purse, and parting from us, having gotten
victory,—I escorted him, performing the duty of respect,
and chiding him for his refusal of office ——But he turned
away with a smile and recited with a chant:


-Sure to traverse the lands in poverty is dearer to me than rank :
For in rulers there is caprice and fault-finding, Oh, what fault-
finding !
There is none of them who completes his good work, or who builds
up where has laid foundation.
So let not the glare of the mirage beguile thee; undertake not
that which is doubtful :
For how many a dreamer has his dream made joyful ; but fear has
come upon him when he waked.


THE SEVENTH ASSEMBLY CALLED
“OF BARKA‘ID.”


This Assembly is well known to students, having been published
with a translation and valuable notes by De Sacy in his Chrestomathie
Arabe. Harith is at Barka‘id, a place which is described as the chief
town of the Diyar Rabi‘ah, at the distance of seventeen parasangs from
Mowsil. The feast at the end of Ramadin is approaching, and being
desirous of joining in this solemnity he goes to the public prayer in
his best attire. When the congregation has formed itself into rows,
after the manner of Moslem worship, he espies an old man with his
eyes closed accompanied by an old woman. The man takes out of a
bag a number of papers curiously written or illuminated in variously
coloured inks; and the old woman, going through the rows, presents
them to those whom she guesses from their appearance to be charitably
disposed. One of them falls to the lot of Harith, who finds on it
some strange verses full of alliterations and plays on words. He
keeps it, and when the old woman, being disappointed in her appeal,
returns to reclaim it, he offers her a dirhem on the condition that


140° : SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


she will tell him the name of the author. She informs him that the
old man had composed the verses, and that he was a native of Serdj.
Harith then guesses that he must be Abi Zayd, and is much con-
cerned to find that he has become blind. When the prayer is over
he goes up to him and discovers that he is indeed Abi Zayd, where-
upon he presents him with a garment and invites him to his house.
No sooner are they in private than Abi Zayd opens his eyes, which
are perfectly sound, and Harith discovers that his pretended blind-
ness was a trick to excite pity. Abi Zayd makes a good meal, and
after he has had enough sends Harith to the closet to fetch alkali to
. wash his hands after eating, and a toothpick. When the host returns
the old man and his companion are gone; Abi Zayd having as usual
made his escape, to avoid a lecture on his hypocrisy and the solicita-
tion of his friend that he would abandon his vagrant life.
Al Harith, son of Hamman, related: I had determined
on journeying from Barka‘id; but now I noted the signs
of the coming feast,—And_I disliked to set forth from the
city until I had witnessed there the day of adornment.—
So when it came on with its rites, bounden or of free will,
and brought pp its horsemen and footmen,—I followed the
tradition in new apparel, and went forth with the people
to keep festival—-Now when the congregation of the
prayer court ‘was gathered and ranged, and the crowding
took men’s breath,—There appeared an old man in a pair
of cloaks, and his eyes were'closed :—And he bore on his
arm what was like a horse-bag, and had for a guide an old
woman like a goblin.—Then he stopped, as stops one tot-
tering to sink, and greeted with the greeting of him whose
voice is feeble-——And when he had made an end of his
salutation he circled his five fingers in his wallet,—And
brought forth scraps of paper that had been written on
with colours of dyes in the season of leisure,—And gave
them to his old beldame, bidding her to detect each simple
one.—So whenever she perceived of any that his hand was
moist in bounty, she cast one of the papers before him.


SEVENTH ASSEMBLY. 141


—Said Al Harith: Now cursed faté allotted to me
scrap whereon was written :—

Sure I have become crushed with pains and fears ;

Tried by the proud one, the crafty, the assailer,

By the traitor among my brethren, who hates me for my need,

By jading from those who work to undo my toils.

How oft do I burn through spites and penury and wandering ;

How oft do I tramp in shabby garb, thought of by none.

Oh, would that fortune when it wronged me had slain my babes!

For were not my cubs torments to me and ills,

I would not have addressed my hopes to kin or lord :

Nor would I draw my skirts along the track of abasement.

For my garret would be more seemly for me, and my rags more
honourable.

Now is there a generous man who will see that the lightéaing of
my loads must be by a denar ;

Or will quench the heat of my anxiety by a shirt and trousers.


Said Al Harith, son of Hammam; Now when I had
looked on the garb of the verses, I longed for a, know-
ledge of him who wove it, the broiderer of its pattern.—
And my thought whispered to me that the way to him
was through the old woman, and advised me that a fee
to an informer is lawful—So I watched her, and she was
wending through the rows, row by row, begging a dole
of the hands, hand by hand.—But not at all did the
trouble prosper her; no purse shed aught upon her palm.
—Wherefore when her soliciting was baffled, and her cir-
cuit wearied her,—She commended herself to God with the
‘‘ Return,” and addressed herself to collect the scraps of
paper.—But the Devil made her forget the scrap that I
held,and she turned not aside to my spot :—But went back
to the old man weeping at the denial, complaining of the
oppression of the time.—And he said, “In God’s hands
I am, to God I commit my case; there is no strength or’

power but by God,” then he recited :—


142 SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


There remains not any pure, not any sincere; not a spring,
not a helper:

But of basenesses there is one level; not any is trusty, not any
of worth.


Then said he to her, ‘Cheer thy soul and promise it
good; collect the papers and count them.”—She said,
‘Truly I counted them when I asked them back, and I
found that one of them the hand of loss had seized.”—
He said, “ Perdition on thee, Wretch ; shall we be
hindered, alas, both of the prey and the net, both of
the brand and the wick? surely this is a new handful to
the load.”—Then did the old woman hasten back, re-
. tracing her path to seek her scroll; and when she drew
near to me I put with the paper a dirhem and a mite:
—And said to her, “If thou hast a fondness for the
polished, the engraved (and I pointed to the dirhem)
shew me the secret, the obscure ;—But if thou willest
not to explain, take then the mite and begone.”—Then
she inclined to the getting of that whole full moon,
the bright-faced, the large—So she said, ‘ Quit con-
tention and ask what thou wilt.”—Whereupon I asked
her of the old man and his country, of the poem, and
of him who wove its mantle.—She said, “Truly, the old
man is of the people of Serfj; and he it was who
broidered that woven poem.”—Then she snatched the
dirhem with the snatch of a hawk, and shot away as
shoots the darting arrow.—But it troubled my heart that
perchance it was Abii Zayd who was indicated, and my
grief kindled at his mishap with his eyes——And I should
__ have preferred to have gone suddenly on him and talked
to him, that I might test the quality of my discernment
upon him.—But I was unable to come to him save by
treading on the necks of the congregation, a thing for-:


e


SEVENTH ASSEMBLY. _ 148


bidden in the law :—And, moreover, I was unwilling that
people should be annoyed by me, or that blame should
arrive to me.—So I cleaved to my place, but made his
form the fetter of my sight, until the sermon was ended,
and to leap to him was lawful—Then I went briskly
to him and examined him in spite of the closing of his
eyelids.— And, lo! my shrewdness was as the shrewdness
of Ibn ‘Abbas, and my discernment as the discernment of
Iyas.—So at once I made myself known, and presented
him with one of my tunics, and bade him to my bread.—
And he was joyful at my bounty and recognition, and
acceded to the call to my loaves;—And he set forth,
and my hand was his leading cord, my shadow his
conductor ;—And the old woman was the third prop of
the pot; yes, by the Watcher from whom no secret
is hidden !—Now, when he had taken seat in my nest,
and I had set before him what hasty meal was in my
power, he said, ‘‘ Harith, is there with us a third ?”—
I said, ‘There is none but the old woman.”’—He said,
“From her no secret is withheld.”—Then he opened
his eyes and stared round with the twin balls, and, lo!
the two lights of his face kindled like the Farkadén.—
And I was joyful at the safety of his sight, but mar-
velled at the strangeness of his ways.—Nor did quiet
possess me, nor did patience fit with me, until I asked
him, “‘ What led thee to feign blindness; thou, with
thy journeying in desolate places, and thy traversing
of wildernesses, and thy pushing into far lands? ”—But
he made show as if his mouth were full, and kept as
though busied with his meal :—Until when he had ful-
filled his need, he sharpened his look upon me and
gecited:


144 SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


Since Time (and he is the father of mankind) makes himself
blind to the right in his purposes and aims,

I too have assumed blindness, so as to be called a brother of
it ;—-what wonder that one should match himself with his father!


Then said he to me, Rise, and go to the closet, and
fetch me alkali that may clear the eye, and clean the
hand, and soften the skin, and perfume the breath, and
brace the gums, and strengthen the stomach :—And let
it be clean of box, fragrant of odour, new of pounding,
delicate of powdering ;—So that one touching it shall
count it to be eye paint, and one smelling it shall fancy
it to be camphor.—And join with it a toothpick choice
in material, delightful in use, goodly in shape, that
invites to the repast :—And let it have the slimness of a
lover, and the polish of a sword, and the sharpness of
the lance of -war, and the pliancy of a green bough.—
Said Al Harith: Then I rose to do what he bade that
I might rid him of the trace of his food :—And thought
not that he purposed to deceive by sending me into the
closet ; nor suspected that he was mocking of his mes-
senger when he called for the alkali and toothpick.— But
when I returned with what was asked for, in less than the
drawing of a breath, I found that the hall was empty,
and that the old man and woman had sped away.—Then
was I extreme in anger at his deceit, and I pressed on
his track in search of him ;—But he was as one who
is sunk in the sea, or has been borne aloft to the clouds
of heaven.


EIGHTH ASSEUBLY,. 145


THE EIGHTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF MA‘ARRAH.”


This Assembly, like several others that will be met with in
the course of the work, is so essentially Arabic as almost to forbid
intelligible translation. Two suitors, an old man and a youth,
appear. before the Kadi of Ma‘arrah. The former narrates to the
Kadi that he had possessed a beautiful and attractive, yet obedient
and active, slave girl; that the youth had borrowed her, treated her
roughly, and then returned her in an infirm state. The youth
admits the charge, but declares that he had offered sufficient com-
pensation ; and then complains that the old man detained as a
pledge a male slave of his, who was of good origin and qualities,
and highly serviceable to his master. The Kadi perceives from the
style of these addresses that the language is enigmatical, and bids the
litigants speak plainly. The youth then improvises some verses
to explain that by a slave girl the old man meant a needle which
the youth had borrowed, and the eye of which he had broken by
accident as he was drawing the thread through it; the male slave
which the old man detained was a pencil or stylus for the applica-
tion of kof/, the dark pigment with which Orientals anoint the
eyelid to heighten by contrast the lustre of the eye. The old man ~
in his turn admits the truth of this, but pleads in mournful verse
his poverty and his inability to bear the loss even of a needle. The
Kadi, touched with pity, bestows a trifle on both, and they depart
joyously. But almost immediately he suspects that he has been
deceived, and sends an attendant after them to bring them back.
When they are again in the court, the Kadi charges them with deceit.
The boy is abashed, but the old man steps forward boldly and con-
fesses that he is the noted impostor of Serj, and that, the boy is his
son; that they never had either needle or kohl pencil, but had
devised the story to excite pity. The Kadi, charmed with their
literary skill, pardons their offence and dismisses them with a
caution. The chief feature in the composition is the enigmatical
description of the needle and pencil, which depends on the double
meanings of the words and phrases contained in it. Some of these
are so subtle that even the native commentators are undecided about
them; and we may assume that the double-entente of passages like
this, and the similar address in the Thirteenth Assembly, was among
the lessons which Hariri is said to have taught to his pupils. The
commentators, who are often profuse of interpretation where there


10


146 EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


is no difficulty, are somewhat brief when they have to deal with
these dark compositions. Even the loquacious Sherishi, who some-
times gives whole pages of anecdote and poetical quotation to
illustrate a single word, passes over in silence phrases where there
evidently lurks a second and hidden sense. The present transla-
tion is, it is hoped, an adequate interpretation of the author’s
meaning.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: Among the
wonders of time, I saw that two suitors came before
the Kadi of Ma‘arrat an No‘man:—From the one of them
the two excellencies of life had departed, while the other
was as @ bough of the ben tree.—And the old man said :
God strengthen the judge, as by him He strengthens
whoever seeks judgment.—Behold I had a slave girl,
elegant of shape, smooth of cheek, patient to labour ;—
At one time she ambled like a good steed, at another
she slept quietly in her bed: even in July thou wouldst
feel her touch to be cool.—She had understanding and
discretion, shatpness and wit, 4 hand with fingers, but a
mouth without teeth: yet did she pique as with tongue
of snake, and saunter in training robe; and she was
displayed in blackness and whiteness ; and she drank,
but not from cisterns.—She was now truth-telling now
beguiling ; now hiding, now peeping forth; yet fitted for
employment, obedient in poverty and in wealth: if thou
didst spurn she showed affection, but if thou didst put
her from thee, she remained quietly apart.—Generally
would she serve thee, and be courteous to thee, though
sometimes she might be froward to thee and pain thee,
- and trouble thee.'—Now this youth asked her service of

? The meaning of this passage, when applied to a needle, is as fol-
lows :—I had a needle, straight of shape and smooth of side,


lasting for work ; that sometimes moved quickly in the sewer’s
hands, and sometimes rested in the needle-box; it was sometimes


EIGHTH ASSEMBLY. 147


sy


me for a purpose of his own, and I made her his servant,
without reward ;—On the condition that he should enjoy
the use of her, but not burden her with more than she
could bear.—But he forced on her too hard a work, and
exacted of her long labour ;—Then returned her to me
broken in health, offering a compensation which I accept
not. :

Then said the youth: Sure the old man is more truth-
ful than the Kata: but as for my hurting her it fell out
by mistake.—And now have I pledged to him in pay-
ment of his damage, a slave' of mine, of equal birth


filed in July, it had strength to hold with its rein of thread, it had
sharpness and point: it hemmed the garment by the aid of the
sewer’s fingers; it had a mouth (eye) without teeth ; it sometimes
pricked with its point, as it was driven through the cloth; it carried
a long thread after it; it had sometimes a black and sometimes
a white thread ; it was bedewed only with the sweat of the sewer’s
hand ; it sewed the cloth or lined it; it now hid itself behind the
cloth, and now appeared again; it was adapted for use; it went
easily into any orifice, small or large; if thou didst rend anything
it joined it, but if thou didst lay it aside in the needle-box, it re-
mained where it was put; mostly did it serve thee and adorn thee
by its work, but sometimes it would prick thee, and pain thee and
trouble thee.

? The meaning of this passage, when applied to a kohl pencil, is as
follows: I had a kohl pencil, the same at both ends, tracing its
origin to the cutler, free from rust and defect; often brought near
the apple of the eye; it conferred beauty and produced admiration ;
it fed the pupil of the eye with ointment, but went not near the
tongue; when it was blackened with the ointment it was liberal of
it, when’ it marked the eye it beautified it; when it was supplied with
ointment it supplied the eye with it, and when more was required it
added more. It remained not always in its case, and scjdom anointed
except two eyes at a time; it gave plentifully of the kohl that was on
it, and was lifted up to the eye for the purpose; it was constantly
attached to the kohl case, although the two might be of a different
material (that is, the pencil might be of gold and the case of glass or
silver) ; though it was used for adorning it was not of a soft substance
but of metal.


148 EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


as regards either kin, tracing his lineage to Al Kayn, free
_ from stain and disgrace, whose place was the apple of his

master’s eye.—He shewed forth kindness, and called up
admiration ; he nourished mankind, and set guard on his
tongue.—If he was placed in power he was generous, if
he marked aught for his own he was noble with it; if he
was supplied he gave of his supply, and when he -was
asked for more he added.—He stayed not in the house,
and rarely visited his wives, save two by two.—He was
generous with his possession, he was lofty in his bounty ;
he kept with his spouse although she was not of his own
clay ; and there was pleasure in his comeliness, although
he was not desired for his effeminacy.

Then said to them the Kadi, “‘Now either explain or
depart.” Then pressed forward the lad, and said :


“He lent me a needle to darn my rags, which use has worn and
blackened ; {

And its eye broke in my hand by chance, ad I drew the thread
through it.

‘ But the old man would not forgive me the paying for it when he
saw that it was spoiled ;

But said, “Give me a needle = it, or a price, after thou hast
mended it.”

And he keeps my kohl pencil . him as a pledge: oh, the shame
that he has gotten by so doing :

For my eye is dry through giving hin this pledge; my hand fails
to ransom its anointer.

Now by this statement fess tie depth of my misery and pity
one unused to bear it.


Cd


Then tuyned the Kadi to the old man, and said,
* Come, speak without glozing,” and he said—


‘ I swear by the holy place of sacrifice, and the devout whom the
slope of Mina brings together ;

If the time had been my helper, thou wouldst not have seen me
taking in pledge the pencil which he has pledged to me.


EIGHTH et 149


Nor would I bring myself to seek a substitute for a needle that he
had spoiled, no nor the price of it. ,

But the bow of calamities shoots at ma with deadly arrows from
here and there :

And to know my condition is to know his; misery, and distress,
and exile, and sickness.

Fortune has put us on a level: I am his like in misery, and he is
as I.

He cannot raneom his pencil now that it lies pledged in my hand :

And, through the narrowness of my own means, it is not within-
my bounds to forgive him his offending.

Now this is my tale and his: so look upon us, and judge between
us, and pity us. ‘

Now when the Kadi had learnt their stories, and was
aware of their penury and their distinction,—He took
out for them a denar from under his prayer cushion, and
said, “‘ With this end and decide your contention.” —But
the old man caught it before the youth, and claimed the
whole of it in earnest, not in jest ;—Saying to the youth,
“‘ Half is mine as my share of the bounty, and thy share
is mine, in payment for my needle :—-Nor do I swerve
from justice, so come and take thy pencil.””—Now there
fell on the youth, at the words of the old man, a sadness
at which the heart of the Kadi grew sullen, stirring its
sorrow for the lost denar.—Yet did he cheer the concern
of the youth and his anguish by a few dirhems which he
doled to him.—Then he said to the two, “ Avoid transac-
tions, and put away disputes, and come not before me
with wranglings, for I have no »purse of fine-money for
you.”——And they rose to go out from him, rejoicing at
his gift, fluent in his praise,—But as for the Kadi, his
ill-humour subsided net after his stone had dripped ; his
sad look cleared not away after his rock had oozed.—-But
when he recovered from his fit he turned to his attend-
ants,—And said, ‘‘My perception is imbued with the


150. - EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


thought, and my guess announces to me, that these
are practisers of craft, not suitors in a claim :—But what
is the way to fathom them, and to draw forth their.
secret ?”—-Then said to him the Knowing One of his
- assemblage, the Light of his following :—“ Surely the dis-
covery of what they hide must be through themselves. oo
So he bade an attendant follow them and bring them
back; and when they stood before him he- said to them,
as Tell me truly your camel’s age: sa shall ye be secure
from the consequence of your deceit.”-—Then did the lad
shrink back and ask for. pardon ; ‘but the old matt: stepped
forward and said ;


I am the Serdji-and this is my 800 ; “and the cub at the proving is
‘like the lion.,« «..
Now never has his hand hot fnine. ‘lias wrong in matter of seis
or pencil: «
But only fortune, the harming, the hostile, has s brought us to this,
that wé came forth to heg*
Of each one whose palm i is moist, whose spring is aweet 5 of each
‘whose palm is glose, whose hand is fettered;
’ By every, art, and with opery aim t by ceric, if it Prosper, and
if not, by. jest. *,
, That we may draw forth a arop for our ats lot, om consume
our life in- wretohied viotual, ~.,
*, Andafterward Death is on the. are for “ if ‘s fall hot on us
to-day he will fall to-morrow, es ©. 4
Then, said the Kadi to him, “ On aiet how ‘admirable
‘are the breathings, of thy’ mouth ; well done! should I
say of.thee, were it not for the wails that is in thee.—
Now know that T am of those that warn thee, and will
beware of thee.—-So act not again deceitfully with judges,
but fear the might of those who bear rule.—For not
- every minister will excuse, ‘and not af every season will
speech be' listened to.”—Then the old man promised to
follow his counsel, and to abstain from. disguising his


NINTH ASSEMBLY. 151


character.—And he departed from the Kadi’s presence,
while the guile beamed from his forehead.—Said. Al
Harith, son of Hammam: Now I never saw aught more
wonderful than these things in the changes of my jour-
neys, nor read aught like them in the records of books.


THE NINTH, ASSEMBLY, ‘CALLED.
“QF ALEXANDRIA.”


This is one of the two Assemblies of Hartri which. have been
translated and annotated by De Sacy in his Chrestomathy.” Hirith’
in his wanderings comes to Alexandria, and, in accordance with, his
custom, makes the acquaintance of the Kadi, who, as ‘appears in the
sequel, is & good-natured and benevolent man. (One ‘evening, in
winter, the Kadi is distributing tle public alms, wheh an, ill-looking
old man is brought in by a young and handsome woman who ac-
cuses him of having marvied her on false pretences. . She declares
that he had deceived-her father by giving out-that he had an ex-
cellent trade as a pearl-merchant ; that he had been incautiously
accepted, and. that now, when it. was toa late, she had discovered,
that he had no business ‘af all.. Moreover, he had taken all her’
dress and furniture, piece by piece, and gold it to keep himself in’
idleness, leaving her. and, her child to’ starve. The Kadi is indignant,
and threatens to send the ‘husband .to prison, unless hé ‘can clear
‘himself of. the - -charge.. The defendant: is in, nd way disconcerted,
but at once improvises some elegant verses, in which he admits his
poverty, and that he had sold his wife’s effects, but, denies that he
had deceived her in calling himself a “ pearl-stringer,’ ” for the pearls
which he meant were fhe pearls of: thought, by ‘stringing which into’
elegant poems he had been accustomed to make a large income from -
the liberality of the rich and noble. Now, however, times were
changed; war and trouble had come‘ upon the earth, and a race
of niggards had suceeedled ‘the generous pattons of the old days.
The Kadi accepts the excuse, bids the woman submit herself to her
husband, and gives them some of the alms money; on receiving
which the old man triumphantly carries off hig wife. Harith had
discovered that it was Aba Zayd, but was afraid to tell the Kadi,
because in that case he might have declined to relieve’ such an im-


152 NINTH ASSEMBLY.


‘postor. But when he is gone, Hirith cannot forbear suggesting that
he should be followed and some news of him brought back. A
messenger is sent and returns quickly to say that he found Abii Zayd
dancing and singing in joy at his success. The. Kadi treats the
affair as a good jest ; and declares that if he had known who he was
he would have been still more liberal. This is the first appearance
of Aba Zayd’s young wife, who in the fortieth Assembly is made
to rival her husband i in wit, learning, i and volubility.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: The liveliness of
youth and the desire of gain sped me on until I had tra-
versed all that is between Farghanah and Ghanah.—And
I dived into depths to gather fruits, and plunged into
perils to reach my needs.—Now I had caught from the
lips of the learned, and understood from the command-
ments of the wise—That it behoves the well-bred, the
sagacious, when he enters a strange city, to conciliate its
‘Kadi and possess himself of his favour :—-That his back
may be strengthened in litigation, that he may be secure
in a strange land from the wrong of the powerful.—So I
took this doctrine as my guide and made it the leading-
cord to my ,advantages.—And I entered not a city, I
went not into a lair, but I mingled myself with its judge
as water is mingled with wine, and ‘strengthened myself
by his patronage as bodies are strengthened by souls.—
Now while I was in presence of the judge of Alexandria
one cold evening, and he had brought out the alms-
money to divide it among the needy,—Behold there
entered an ill-looking old man whom a young matron
dragged along.—And she said: God strengthen the Kadi
and through him make concord ‘to be lagting :—Know
that I am a woman of stock the most noble, of root the
most pure, of mother’s and father’s kin the most honour-
able:—My character is moderation, my disposition is


NINTH ASSEMBL Y. 153


contentment ; “my nature is to be a goddly help-meet ; be-
tween me and my. neighbours is a wide difference. —Now
whenever there wooed me’ any whd had built up honour
or were lords -of wealth——My father silenced, and chid
them and misliked their suit and their’ gift Making
plea that he had covenanted with God Most High that
he would not ally himself save with the’ master of a
handicraft—Then did Providence destine for my cala-
mity and pain that this deceiver should present himself
in my father’s hall ;—And swear among his people that
he fulfilled his condition :—Asserting that long time he
had strung pearl to pearl and sold them for great price.
—Then was my father deceived by the gilding of his
falsehood, and married me to him before proving his
condition.—-And when he had drawn me forth from my
covert, and carried me away from my people, and re-
moved me to his habitation, and brought me under his
bond,—-I found him slothful, a sluggard; I discovered
him to be a lie-a-bed, a slumberer.—Now I had come to
him with apparel and goodly show, with furniture and .
affluence.—But he ceased not to sell it in a losing
market and to squander the price in greedy feeding,—
Until he. had altogether destroyed whatever was mine,
and spent my property on his need.—So when he had
made to me to forget the taste of rest and left, my house
cleaner than my hand’s palm ;—I said to him, “Sir, know
that there is no concealment after distress, no perfume
after the wedding.—Rise up then to gain something by’
thy trade, to gather the fruit of thy skill.”—But he de-
clared that his trade had been struck with slackness
through the violence that was abroad in the earth.—
Also I have a boy by him, thin as a toothpick: neither


154 NINTH ASSEMBLY.


of us gets a fill by him, and through hunger our weeping
to him ceases’ not.—So I have brought him to thee and
set him before thee, that thou mayest test the substance
of his assertion, and decide between us as God shall
show thee.

Then turned the Kadi to him and at Thou hast
heard thy wife’s story ; now testify of thyself: else will
I discover thy deceit and bid thy imprisonment.”—But
he looked down as looks the serpent; then girt up his
garment for a long strife, and said:


Hear my story, for it is a wonder ; ‘there i is Jaughter i in its tale,
and there is wailing.

I am a man on whose qualities there is no blame, neither is there
suspicion on his glory.

Serj is my home where I was born, and my stock is Ghassin
when I trate my lineage :

And study is my business ; to dive deep in learning is my pursuit ;
and, oh! how excellent a seeking.

And my capital is the magic of speech, out of which are moulded
both verse and prose.

I dive into the deep of eloquence, and from it I choose the pearls
and select them : '

~ I cull of speech the ripe fruit and the new; while another gathers
but firing of the wood : ;

I take the phrase of silver, and when I have moulded it men say
that it is gold.
, Now formerly I drew forth wealth by the learning I had gotten ;
I milked, by it :

And my foot’s sole in its dignity mounted to ranges above which
were no higher steps.

Oft were the presents brought in pomp to my dwelling, but I
accepted not everyone who gave.

But to-day learning is the chattel of alackest sale in the market of
him on whom hope depends.

The honour of its sons is not respected; neither are relationship
and alliance with them regarded.

It is as though they were corpses in their courtyards, from whose
stench men withdraw and turn aside.


NINTH ASSEMBLY. 155


Now my heart is confounded through my ‘trial by the times ;—
strange is their changing. |
The stretch of my arm is straitened through the ee of my
hand’s means ;- cares and’ grief assail me.-
- And my fortune, the blameworthy, has led me to the paths of that


which honour deems base. « ®
For I sold until theré remained to me not a mat nor household
goods to which I might turn.


So I indebted myself until I had burdened my neck by the carry-
ing of a debt such that ruin had been lighter.
Then five days I wrapped my entrails ape hunger ; but when
the hunger scorched me,
I could see no goods except her outfit, in the selling of which I
might go about 4nd bestir myself.
-. So I went about with it; but my soul was loathing, and my eye
tearful, and my heart saddened. '
But when I made free with ‘it, I passed not the bound of her con-
sent, that her wrath should rise against me.
And if what angers her be her fancying that it was zs fingers that
should make gain by stringing ;
Or that when I purposed to woo her I tinseled my repeecli that
my need might prosper :
I swear by Him to whose Ka‘beh the companies journey when the
fleet camels speed them onward,
That deceit towards chaste ladies is not of my nature, nor are
glozing and lying my badge.
Since I was reared nought has attached to my hand save the
swiftly-moving reeds and the books:
For it is my wit that strings necklaces, not my hand; what is
strung is my poetry and not chaplets.
And this is the craft I meant as that by which I gathered and
gained.
So give ear to my explaining, as thou hast given ear to her; anid
show respect to neither, but judge as is due.


Now when he had completed the structure of his
story and perfected his recitation, the Kadi turned to
the young woman, being heart struck at the verses :—
And said, Know that it is settled among all judges
and those who bear authority—That the race of the
generous is perished, and that the times incline to the


156 NINTH ASSEMBLY.


niggardly.—Now I imagine that thy husband is truthful
in his speech, free from blame.—For lo! he has acknow-
ledged the debt to thee, and spoken the clear truth; he
has given proof that he can string verses, and it is plain
that he is bared to the bone.—Now to vex him who
shows excuse is baseness, to imprison the destitute is
asin: to conceal poverty is self-denial, to await relief
with patience is devotion.So return to thy chamber
and pardon the master of thy virginity :-—Refrain from
thy sharpness of tongue and submit to the will of thy
Lord.—Then in the almsgiving he assigned them a
portion, and of the dirhems he gave them a pinch; and
said to them, ‘‘ Beguile yourselves with this drop,
moisten yourselves with this driblet:—And endure
against the fraud and the trouble of the time, for ‘it
may be that God will bring victory or some ordinance
from himself, ”—Then they arose to go, and on the old
man was the joy of one loosed from the bond, and the
exulting of one who is in affluence after need.

Said the narrator: Now I knew that he was “Aba
Zayd in the hour that his sun peeped forth and his
spouse reviled him:—And I\ went néar to declare his
versatility and the fruiting of his divers branches.—But
then I was afraid that the Kadi would hit on his false-
hood and the lackering of his tongue, and not see
fit, when he knew him, to train him to his bounty.—
So I forebore from speech with the forbearing of one
who doubts, and I folded up mention of him ag the
roll is folded over the writing:—Save that when he
had departed and had come whither he was to come,—
I said, “If there were one who would sef out on his
track, he might bring us the kernel of his story, and


NINTH ASSEMBLY. 157


what tissues he is spreading forth._Then the Kadi sent
one of his trusty ones after him and bade him to spy
out of his tidings.—But he delayed not to return bound-
ing in, and to come back loudly laughing.—Said the
Kadi to him, “ Well; Aba Maryam !|—He said, “I have
seen a wonder; I have heard what gives me a thrill.” —
Said the Kadi to him, “ What hast thou seen, and what
is it thou hast learnt ?”—He said, “Since the old man
went forth he has not ceased to clap with his hands and
to caper with his feet and to sing with the full of his
cheeks :

I was near falling into trouble through an impudent jade ;

And should have gone to prison but for the Kadi of Alexandria.”

Then the Kadi laughed till his hat fell off, and his
composure was lost:—But when he returned to gravity
and had followed excess by prayer for pardon,—He said,
“O God, by the sanctity of thy most honoured servants,
forbid that I should imprison men of letters.””—Then said
he to that trusty one, “ Hither with him !” and he set
forth earnest in the search; but returned after a while,
telling that the man was gone.—Then said the Kadi,
‘Know that if he had been here he should have had
no cause to fear,—For I would have imparted to him
as he deserves ; I would have shown him that ‘the latter
state is better for him than the former.”—Said Al Harith,
son of Hammim, Now, when I saw the leaning of
the Kadi towards him, and that yet the fruit of the
Kadi’s notice was lost to him,—There came on me the
repentance of Al Farazdak when he put away Nawar,
or of Al Kosai when the daylight appeared.


158 TENTH ASSEMBLY.


THE TENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF RAHBAH.”


In this Assembly Aba Zayd is found making gain by his usual
questionable arts. At Rahbah, on the Euphrates, Harith beholds a
crowd following an elderly man who is dragging along a hand-
some youth. The former accuses the boy of having killed his son,
and it is agreed to go before the Governor. The purpose of the
elder, who proves in the end to be Aba Zayd, is simply to induce the
Governor to buy off so handsome a youth from punishment, with the
view of taking him into his own household. When they are in
court the old man makes his charge, and as he has no witnesses
the boy is allowed to clear himself by an oath. But the old man
dictates an oath in which he enumerates all the beauties of the boy,
and invokes destruction on them if truth be not spoken. The boy
refuses to swear by such an oath ; and the Governor, who desires to
take him out of the power of the old man, then makes up a purse to
satisfy the prosecutor. A hundred denars are promised; but as the
whole cannot be collected at once the old man says that he will not give
up the boy, but will watch him all night. The Governor consents, and
soon the two are leftitogether in the courtyard. Harith then accosts
Abt Zayd, and asks who is the boy. Aba Zayd replies, that he is
his son, and his assistant in his tricks; and that they intend to
make their escape garly in the morning, and leave the Governor to
his disappointment. This they do, and before setting forth Abi
Zayd delivers to Harith a sealed paper to be presented to the out-
witted magistrate. Harith, dreading to present it, opens it and finds
. it to contain a copy of satirical verses on the Governor. He tears
the paper to pieces, regardless of his promise to his friend. This
Assembly is exceedingly elaborate in its diction, and the terms of
the oath dictated by Aba Zayd have much poetical beauty. It has
been imitated with great felicity by Riickert, whose version has
almost the spirit of the original. .


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related :—The summon-
ing of desire called me to Rahbah, the city of Malik,
son of Towk,—And I obeyed it, mounted on a fleet
camel, and unsheathing an active purpose.—Now when
I had cast my anchors there, and fastened my ropes,


TENTH ASSEMBLY, 159


and had gone forth from the bath after shaving my
head,—I saw a boy cast in the mould of comeliness, and
clothed by beauty in the garb of perfection;—And an
old man was holding on to his sleeve, asserting that he
had slain his son;—But the boy denied knowledge
of him and was horror-struck at his suspicion ;—And
the contention between them scattered its sparks, and
the crowding upon them was made up of good and
bad.—Now after their quarrelling had been excessive,
they agreed to refer to the Governor of the town ;—
So they hastened to his court with the speed of Sulayk
in his career ;—And when they were there the old man
renewed his charge and claimed help.—So the Governor
made the boy speak, for the boy had already fascinated
him by the graces of his bright brow, and cloven his
understanding by the disposition of his forelocks—And
the boy said, “It is the lie of a great liar against one
who is no blood-shedder, and the slander of a knave
against one who is not an assassin.—Then said the |
Governor to the old man, “If two just Moslems testify
for thee, well ; if not, demand of him the oath.”—Said
the old man, “Surely he struck him down remote
from men, and shed his blood when alone;—And how
can I have a witness, when on the spot there was no
beholder ?—But empower me to dictate an oath that it
may appear to thee whether he speaks true or lies.”—
He said to him,. “Thou hast authority for that; thou
with thy vehement grief for thy slain son.”—Then said
the old man to the boy: Say, I swear by Him who hath
adorned foreheads with forelocks, and eyes with their
black and white, and eyebrows with separation, and
smiling teeth with regularity, and eyelids with languor,


160 TENTH ASSEMBLY.


and noses with straightness, and cheeks with flame, and
mouths with purity, and fingers with softness, and waists
with slenderness, that I have not killed thy son by
negligence, nor of wilfulness, nor made his head a
sheath to my sword;-—If it be otlierwise, may God
strike my eyelid with soreness, and my cheek with
freckles, and my forelocks with dropping, and my palm
shoot with greenness, and my rose with the ox-eye,
and my musk with a foul steam, and my full moon
with waning, and my silver with tarnishing, and my
rays with the dark.

Then said the boy, “The scorching of affliction be
my lot rather than to take such an oath! let me yield
to vengeance rather than swear as no one has ever
sworn !”—-But the old man would nought but make
him swallow the oath which he had framed for him,
and the draughts which he had bittered—And the
dispute ceased not to blaze between them, and the road
of concord to be rugged.—Now the boy, while thus
resisting, captivated the Governor by his motions, and
made him covet that he should belong to him; until
love subdued his heart and fixed in his breast ;—-And
the passion which enslaved him, and the desire which
he had imagined tempted him to liberate the boy and
then get: possession of him, to free him from the noose
of the old man, and then catch him himself—So he
said to the old man, “Hast thou a mind for that which
is more seemly in the-stronger and nearer to god-
fearing ?”—He said, ‘“‘ Whither art thou pointing that
I should follow and not delay?”—He said, “I think
it well that thou cease from altercation and be content

‘with a hundred denars,—On condition that I take on


TENTH ASSEMBLY. 16]


myself part of it, and collect the rest Ky may be.”’—Said
the old man, “TI refuse not; but let there be no failure
to thy promise.”—Then the Governor paid him down
twenty and assigned among his attendants the making
up of fifty—But the robe of evening grew dim, and
from this cause the rain of collection wa’ cut short.
—Then he said, ‘Take what is ready and leave disput-
ing; and on me be it to-morrow to accomplish. that the
rest be doled to thee and reach thee.”—Said the old
man, “TI will do this on the condition that I keep close
to him to-night, that the pupil of my eye guard him,—
Until when on the dawning of the morn he has made
up what remains of the sum of reconciliation,—Shell
may get clear of chick, and he may go guiltless as the
wolf went guiltless of the blood of the son of Jacob.”—
Then said to him the Governor, “I think that thou
dost not impose what is immoderate or ask what is
excessive.”

Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now when I
perceived that the pleadings of the old man were as the
pleadings of Ibn Surayj, I knew him to be the Glory
of the Seriijis:—And I delayed until the stars of the
darkness glittered, and the knots of the crowd dis-
persed :—And then I sought the Governor’s court-yard ;
and lo! the old man guarding the youth—And I
adjured him by God to say whether he was Abi Zayd:
he said, “ Yes, by Him who hath permitted the chase.”—
I said, “‘ Who is this boy, after whom the understanding
darts ?”’—He said, “‘ In kin he is my chick, and in making
gain my springe.”—I said, “Wilt thou not be satisfied |
with the graces of his make, and spare the Governor
temptation by his forelock.”—He said, ‘‘ Were it not that

‘ 7 ll


162 TENTH ASSEMBLY.


his forehead put forth its ringlets, I should not have
snatched the fifty.”—Then he said, “Pass the night
near me that we may quench the fire of grief, and
give enjoyment its turn after separation.—For I have
resolved to slip away at dawn, and to burn the Governor’s
heart with the flame of regret.”—Said Al Harith, Then
I spent the night with him in conversation more
pleasant than a garden of flowers, or a woodland of
trees :—Until when the Wolf’s Tail lighted the horizon,
and the brightening of the day-break came on in its time,
—He mounted the back of the highway, and left the
Governor to taste burning torment.—And he committed
to me, in the hour of his departure a paper firmly
closed,—And said, “‘ Hand it to the Governor when he
has been bereft of composure, when he has convinced
himself of our flight.””—But I broke the seal as one who
would free himself from a letter of Mutelemmis, and
behold there was written in it:

Tell the Governor whom I have left, after my departure, repenting,
grieving, biting his hands,

That the old man has stolen his money and the young one
his heart ; and he is scorched in the flame of a double regret.

He was generous with his coin ( wet) when love blinded his eye

(yee), and he kas ended with losing either .,.c.

Calm thy grief, O afflicted, for it profits not to seek the traces
after the substance is gone.

But if what has befallen thee is terrible to thee as the ill-fate of
Al Hosayn is terrible to the Moslems ;

Yet hast thou gotten in exchange for it understanding and cau-
tion ; and the wise man, the prudent, wishes for these.

So henceforth resist at desires, and know that the chasing of gazelles
is not easy ;

No, nor does every bird enter the springe, even though it be sur-
rounded by silver.

And how many a one who seeks to make a prey becomes a prey
himself, and meets with nought but the shoes of Honayn!


ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY. 163


Now consider well, and forecast not every thundercloud: many
a thundercloud may have in it the bolts of death :

And cast down thine eye, that thou mayest rest from a passion
by which thou wouldest clothe thyself with the garment of infamy
and disgrace.

For the trouble of man is the following of the soul’s desire; and
the seed of desire is the longing look of the eye.


Said the narrator,—But I tore the paper piece-meal,
and cared not whether he blamed or pardoned me.


THE ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF SAWEH. 2


This and the following Assembly are justly reckoned among the
master-pieces of the author. To pass suddenly from the most solemn
subjects to pleasantry, to place in the mouth of a clever impostor
the most serious warnings that can be addressed to mankind may be
morally objectionable ; but in the Moslem world, where religion
is mixed up with all the concerns of life, and pious discourse and
phrases abound, it excites little repugnance. The design of the
author in the present composition was to produce an elaborate sermon
in rhymed prose and in verse, and his genius takes a higher flight
than usual. The incident on which the Assembly is founded is
simple. Hiarith, in a fit of religious zeal, betakes himself to the
public burial ground of the city of Siweh, for the purpose of contem-
plation. He finds a funoral in progress, and when it is over, an old
man, with his face muffled in a cloak, takes his stand on a hillock,
and pours forth a discourse on the certainty of death and judgment ,
rebuking his hearers for their worldly selfishness, and warning them
that wealth and power are of little avail against the general leveller.
He then rises into poetry and declaims a piece which is one of the
noblest productions of Arabic literature. In lofty morality, in reli-
gious fervour, in beauty of language, in power and grace of metre, this
magnificent hymn is unsurpassed. From this, and other similar
compositions of Hartri, a better idea of what is noblest and purest
in Islam will be gained, than from all the works of the most
orthodox doctors. Hirith, like the others who are present, is much
affected ; but he is indignant when he finds that the preacher is re-


164 ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


ceiving abundant alms, and that beyond a doubt he is Abi Zayd.
He taxes him with his hypocrisy, and receives an impudent reply.
They then separate angrily. In this Assembly a view of moral
duties and future judgment is exhibited which differs little from
that of Christians. The enlightened and polished man of letters
of the fifth century was not likely to teach the coarse doctrines of a
sensual paradise, to be secured by hard fighting, which roused the
ignorant warriors of Arabia in the first days of Islam. In all
the work of Hariri, there is not a trace of this theology, which the
West erroneously attributes to every Moslem. Self-denial and bene-
volence are with him the duties of every man; and by them each
may hope to obtain everlasting happiness, but on the nature of both
future rewards and punishments he is discreetly silent.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was aware of
hardness of heart while I sojourned at Saweh.—So I
betook myself to the Tradition handed down, that its cure
is by visiting the tombs.~—And when I had reached
the mansion of the dead, the storehouse of mouldering
remains, I saw an assemblage over a grave that had
been dug, and a corpse that was being buried—So I
drew aside to them, meditating on the end of man,
and calling to mind those of my people who were gone.—
And when they had sepulchred the dead, and the crying
of Alas! was over, an old man stood forth on high,
from a hillock, leaning on a staff— And he had yeiled
his face with his cloak, and disguised his form for crafti-
ness.—And he said: Let those who work, work for an
end like this——Now take thought, O ye negligent,
and gird yourselves, ye slothful, and look well, ye
observers.—How is it with you that the burying of your
fellows grieves you nat, and that the pouring in of the
mould frightens you not; that ye heed not the visita-
tions of misfortune; that ye prepare not for the going
down to your graves; that ye are not moved to tears
at the eye that weeps; that ye take not warning at the


ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY. 165


death-message when it is heard; | that ye are not
affrighted when an intimate is lost; that ye are not
saddened when the mourning assembly is gathered P—
One of you follows home the dead man’s bier, but
his heart is set towards his house ;—And he is present
at the burying of his’kinsman, but his thought is of
securing: his portion.—He leaves his loved friend with
the worms, then retires alone with his pipes and lutes.—.
Ye have sorrowed over your riches, if but a grain were
notched away, yet have ye been forgetful of the cutting
off of your friends:—And ye have been cast down at the
befalling of adversity, but have made little of the perish-
ing of your kindred.—Ye have laughed at a funeral
as ye laughed not in the hour of dancing; ye have
walked wantonly behind biers, as ye walked not in -
the day that ye grasped gifts.—Ye have turned from the
recital of the mourning women to the preparing of
banquets ; and from the anguish of the bereaved to
daintiness in feastings.—Ye care not for him who moul-
ders, and ye move not the thought of death in your
mind.—So that it is as if ye were joined to Death by
clientship, or had gotten security from Time, or were
confident of your own safety, or had made sure of a peace
with the Destroyer of delights —No ! it is an ill thing
that ye imagine.—Again, no! surely ye shall learn.
Then he recited:


O thou who.claimest understanding ; how long, O brother of delu-
sion, wilt thou marshal sin and blame, and err exceeding error ?
* Is not the shame plain to thee? doth not hoariness warn thee?
(and in its counsel there is no Goubsfolnees) 5 ; nor hath thy hear-
ing become deaf.

Is not Death calling thee? doth he not make thee hear his voice?
dost thou not fear thy passing away, so as to bé wary and anxious ?

How long wilt thou be bewildered in carelessness, and walk


166 ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


proudly in vanity, and go eagerly to diversion, as if death were not
for all ?

Till when will last thy swerving, and thy delaying to mend habits
that unite in thee vices whose every sort shall be collected in thee ?

If thou anger thy Master thou art not disquieted at it; but if thy
scheme be bootless thou burnest with vexation.

If the graving of the yellow one gleam to thee thou art joyful ;
but if the bier pass by thee thou feignest grief, and there is no grief.

Thou resistest him who counselleth righteousness; thou art hard
in understanding ; thou swervest aside: but thou followest the guid-
ing of him who deceiveth, who lieth, who defameth.

Thou walkest in the desire of thy soul; thou schemest after
money ; but thou forgettest the darkness of the grave, and remem-
berest not what is there.

But if true happiness had looked upon thee, thy own look would
not have led thee amiss; nor wouldest thou be saddened when the
preaching wipeth away griefs.

- Thou shalt weep blood, not tears, when thou perceivest that no
company can protect thee in the Court of Assembling ; no kinsman
of mother or father.

It is as though I could see thee when thou goest down to the
vault and divest deep; when thy kinsmen have committed thee to a
place narrower than a needle’s eye.

Thore is the body stretched out that the worms may devour it,
until the coffin-wood is bered through and the bones moulder.

And afterward there is no escape from that review of souls $ since
Sirat is prepared; its bridge is stretched over the fire to every one
who cometh thither.

And how many a guide shall go astray! and how many a great
one shall be vile! and how many 4 learned one shall slip and say
*¢The business surpasseth.”

Therefore hasten, O simple one, to that by which the bitter is
made sweet; for thy life is now near to decay and thou hast not
withdrawn thyself from blame.

And rely not on fortune though it be soft, though it be gay: for
so wilt thou be found like one deceived by a viper that spitteth
venom.

And lower thyself from thy loftiness; for death is meeting thee
and reaching at thy collar; and he is one who shrinketh not back
when he hath purposed.

And avoid proud turning away of the cheek if fortune have pros-
pered thee: bridle thy speech if it would run baie Ee ; for how happy
is he who bridleth it! ,


ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY. « 167


And relieve the brother of sorrow, and jbetieve him when he
speaketh; and mend thy ragged conduct; for he hath prospered
who mendeth it. ‘

And plume him whose plumage ‘thath fallen in calamity great or
small; and sorrow not at the loss, and be not covetous in amassing.

And resist thy base nature, and accustom thy hand to liberality,
and listen not to blame for it, and keep thy hand from hoarding.

And make provision of good for thy soul, and leave that which
will bring on ill, and prepare the ship for thy journey, and dread the
deep of the sea.

Thus have I given my precepts, friend, and shown as one who
showeth clearly : and happy the man who walketh by my doctrines
and maketh them his example.

Then he drew back his sleeve from an arm strong of
sinew, on which he had fastened the splints of deceit not
of fracture ;—Presenting himself to beg in the garb of
impudence :—And by it he beguiled those people until
his sleeve was brimmed and full ;—Then he came down
from the hillock merry at the gift—Said the narrator:
But I pulled him from behind by the hem of his cloak ;
and he turned to me submissively, and faced me, salut-
ing me:—And lo! it was our old Abi Zayd, in his
very self, and in all his deceit: and I said to him,

How many, Abi Zayd, will be the varieties of thy cunning to
drive the prey to thy net? and wilt thou not care who censures?

And he answered without shame and without hesi-
tation :


Look well, and leave thy blaming; for, tell me, hast thou ever
known a time when a man would not win of the world when the
game was in his hands.


Then J said to him: Away with thee, Old Shaykh of
Hell, laden with infamy!—For there is nothing like
thee for the fairness of thy seeming and the foulness of
thy purpose ; except silvered dung or a whited sewer.—
Then we parted; and I went away to the right, and he


168 TWELFTH ASSEMBLY.


went away to the left; and I set myself to the quarter of
the south, and he set himself to the quarter of the north.


THE TWELFTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
| “OF DAMASCUS.”


Harith, being in affluence, crosses from Irak to Damascus to enjoy
the luxury of that city. After he has had his fill of pleasure he
bethinks himself of returning homeward, and joins a caravan that is
about to cross the Semaweh, the desert which lies between Syria and
the Euphrates. The travellers are ready to depart, but are delayed
by their inability to find an escort, which they think indispensable
for their protection against robbers. While they are consulting they
are watched by a dervish, who at last announces to them that he has
the means Of keeping them safe from harm ; and, on their inquiring
further, tells them that his safeguard is a magic form of words
revealed to him in a dream. They are at first incredulous, but at
length consent to take him with them, and to use his incantation.
He then repeats it, and it proves to be a prayer full of assonances
and rhymes, beseeching the general protection of the Almighty.
They all learn it by heart and then set forth, repeating it twice a
day on their journey. As they are not molested on the road they
judge the charm to have been successful ; and when they come in
sight of ‘Anah, the first town on the other side of the desert, they
reward him richly with what he likes best, gold and jewels. When
he has taken all he can get, he makes his escapé, and the next thing
they hear of him is that he is drinking in the taverns of ‘Anah, a
city celebrated for its wine. Harith, shocked at this enormity in a
pious dervish, determines to seek him out, and soon finds him revel-
ling amid wine and music in the guest chamber of a wine-shop. He
taxes him with his wickedness, and then the old man improvises a
Bacchanalian chant, which is one of the finest pieces in Hartri’s
work. In form this poem resembles that which is introduced into the
last Assembly, though the metre is more light and lively, as Harfri,
no doubt, desired to display his genius by the contrast. Harith,
charmed with the verses, asks who the old man is; and from his
answer discovers that he is Abi Zayd. He makes an ineffectual
attempt to reclaim him, and then quits the wine-shop, repentant at
having set foot in such a place. This Assembly is one of the most


TWELFTH ASSEMBLY. 169


admired productions of the author, who has lavished on it all the

resources of his marvellous rhetoric. It has been imitated with
great skill by Riickert ; who, however, wanders very far from the
original.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related:—I journeyed
from: Irak to the Ghitah; and then was I master of
haltered steeds and envied wealth.—Freedom of arm
called me to diversion, fullness of store led me to pride.
~—And when I had reached the place after toil of soul,
after making lean my camel,—I found it such as tongues
describe it; and in it was whatever souls long for or
eyes delight in.—So I thanked the bounty of travel and
ran a heat with pleasure :—And began there to break
the seals of desires and gather the clusters of delights.—
- Until some travellers were making ready for the journey
to Irak, and I had so recovered from my drowning, that
regret visited me in calling to mind my home and long-
ing after my fold.—Then I struck the tents of exile and
saddled the steeds of return And when the company
had equipped themselves and agreement was completed,
we shrank from setting forth without taking with us a
guard.—And we sought one from every tribe and used a
thousand devices to obtain him.— But to find him in
the clans failed, so that we thought he was not among
the living—And for the want of such a one the resolves
of the travellers were bewildered, and they assembled at
the gate of Jayrin to take counsel.—And they ceased
not tying and untying, and plaiting and twining, until
suggestion was exhausted and the hoper despaired.—
But opposite them was a person whose demeanour was
as the demeanour of the youthful, and his garb as the
garb of monks, and in his hand was the rosary of women,
and in his eyes the mark of giddiness from watchings.—


170 TWELFTH ASSEMBLY.


And he had fastened his gaze on the assemblage and
sharpened his ear to steal a hearing—And when it was
the time of their turning homeward and their secret
was manifest to him,—He said to them, “O people, let
your care relieve itself, let your mind be tranquil ; for
I will guard you with that which shall put off your fear
and show itself in-accord with you.”—Said the narrator :
Then we asked him to show us concerning his safe con-
duct, and promised him a higher wage for it than for an
embassy.—And he declared it to be some words which
he had been taught in a dream, whereby to guard him-
self from the malice of mankind.—Then began one to
steal a look at another, and to move his eyes between
glances sideward and downward.—So that it was plain
to him that we thought meanly of his story, and conceived
it to be futile_——Whereupon he said, How is it that ye take
my earnest for jest, and treat my gold as dross ?—Now,
by Allah, oft have I gone through fearful tracts and
entered among deadly dangers :—And with this I have
needed not the companying of a guard or to take with
me. a quiver.—Besides, I will remove what gives you
doubt, I will draw away the distrust that has come on
you,—In that I will consent with you in the desert and
accompany you on the Semaweh.—Then, if my promise
has spoken you true, do ye renew my weal and prosper
my fortune :—But if my mouth has lied to you, then
rend my skin and pour out my blood.

Said Al Harith, son of: Hammam: Then we were in-
spired to believe his vision and take as true what he
had related ;— So we ceased from disputing with him
and cast lots for carrying him.—And at his word we cut
the loops of hindrance, and put away fear of harm or


TWELFTH ASSEMBLY. 171


stay ;—And when the pack saddles were fastened on
and the setting forth was near, we sought to learn
from him the magic words that we might make them a
lasting safeguard.—He said: Let each of you repeat the
Mother of the Koran as often as day or night comes pn;
—Then let him say with lowly tongue and humble voice,
—O God! O thou who givest life to the mouldering
dead ! O thou who avertest harms! O thou who guardest
from terrors! O thou generous in rewarding! O thou
the refuge of suppliants ! O thou the Lord of pardon and
protection! Send thy blessing on Mohammed, the Seal
of thy prophets, the Bringer of thy messages, and on
the Lights of his kindred, the Keys of his victory ;—
And give me refuge, O God, from the mischiefs of devils
and the assaults of princes; from the vexing of the
wrongers, and from suffering through the tyrannous ;
from the enmity of transgressors, and from the trans-
gression of enemies; from the conquest of conquerors,
from the spoiling of spoilers, from the crafts of the
crafty, from the treacheries of the treacherous ;—And
deliver me, O God, from the wrongfulness of neighbours
and the neighbourhood of the wrongful ;—And keep
from me the hands of the harmful; bring me forth from
the darkness of the oppressors ; place me by: thy mercy
among thy servants who do aright.—O God, keep me in
"my own land and in my journeying, in my exile and my
coming homeward, in my foraging and my return from
it, in my trafficking and my success from it, in my
adventuring and my withdrawing from it—And guard
me in myself and my property, in my honour and my
goods, in my family and my means, in my household:
and my dwelling, in my strength and my fortune, in


172 TWELFTH ASSEMBLY.


my riches and my death.—Bring not on me reverse;
make not the invader lord over me, but give me from
thyself helping power.—O God, watch over me with thy
eye and thy aid, distinguish me by thy safeguard and
thy bounty, befriend me with thy election and thy good,
and consign me not to the keeping of any but thee.—
But grant to me-health that weareth not away, and
allot to me comfort that perisheth not; and free me from
the terrors of misfortune, and shelter me with the cover-
ings of thy boons; make not the talons of enemies to
prevail against me, for thou art He that heareth prayer.
Then he looked down, and he turned not a glance, he
answered not a word:—So that we said, “A fear has
confounded him or a stupor struck him dumb.”—-Then he
raised his head and drew his breath, and said, I swear
by the heaven with its constellations, and the earth with
its plains, and the pouring flood, and the blazing sun,
and the sounding sea, and the wind and the dust-storm,—
That this is the most sure of charms, one that will best
suffice you for the wearers of the helmet.—He ‘who
repeats it at the smiling of the dawn has no alarm of
danger to the red of eve ;—And he who whispers it to the
vanguard of the dark is safe the night long from plunder.
Said the narrator: So we learned it till we knew it
thoroughly, and rehearsed it together that we might not
forget it.—Then we set forth, urging the beasts by
prayers, not by the song of drivers; and guarding the
loads by words, not by warriors.—And our companion
frequented us evening and morning, but required not
of us our promises :—Till when we spied the house-tops
of ‘Anah, he said to us, “ Now, your help, your help!”—
Then we set before him the exposed and the hidden, and


TWELFTH ASSEMBLY. 173


showed him the corded and the sealed.-And said to him,
“Decide as thou wilt, for thou wilt find among us none
but will consent.”—But nothing enlivened him but the
light, the adorning ; nothing was comely in his eye but
the cdin.—So of those he loaded on his burden, and
rose up with enough to repair his poverty—Then he
dodged us as dodges the cut-purse, and slipped away from
us as slips quicksilver—And his departure saddened us,
his shooting away astonished us :—And we ceased not to
seek him in every assembly, and to ask news of him —
from each that might mislead or guide.—Until it was
said, ‘Since he entered ‘Anah he has not quitted the
tavern.” —Then the foulness of this report set me on to -
test it, and to walk in a path to which I belonged not.—
So I went by night to the wine-hall in disguised habit ;
and there was the old man in a gay-coloured dress
amid. casks and wine vats ;—And about him were’ cup-
bearers surpassing in beauty, and lights that glittered,
and the myrtle and the jasmine, and the pipe and the
lute-—And at one time he bade broach the wine casks,
and at another he called the lutes to give utterance; and
now he inhaled the perfumes, and now he courted the
gazelles.—But when I had thus stumbled on his hypo-
crisy, and the differing of his to-day from his yester-
day ;—I said to him, Woe to thee, accursed! hast
thou forgotten the day at the Jayrin?—But he laughed
heartily, and then indited charmingly:


I cling to journeying, I cross deserts, I loathe pride that I may cull
joy:

And I plunge into floods, and tame steeds that I may draw the
trains of pleasure and delight.

And I throw away staidness, and sell my land, for the sipping of
wine, for the quafiing of cups.


174 TWELFTH ASSEMBLY.


And were it not for longing after aes drinking of wine my mouth
would not utter its elegancies ;

Nor would my craft have lured the otek to the land of Irak,
through my carrying of rosaries.

Now be not angry, nor cry aloud, nor chide, for my excuse is
plain :

And wonder not at an old man who settles himself in a well-
filled house by a wine cask that is brimming.

For truly wine strengthens the bones and heals sickness and
drives away grief. ~—s

And the purest of joy is when the grave man throws off the veils
of shame and flings them aside :

And the sweetest of passion is when the love-crazed ceases from
the concealing of his love, and shows it openly.

Then avow thy love and cool thy heart: or else the fire-staff
of thy grief will rub a spark on it;

And heal thy wounds, and draw out thy cares by the daughter of
the vine, her the desired :

And assign to thy evening draught a cup-bearer who will stir the
torment of desire when she gazes ;

And a singer who will raise such a voice that the mountains
of iron shall thrill at it when she chants.

And rebel against the adviser who will not permit thee td approach
a beauty when she consents. j

And range in thy cunning even to perverseness ; and care not
what is said of thee, and catch what suits thee :

And leave thy, father if he refuse thee, and spread thy nets and
hunt who comes by thee.

Bat be sinceré with thy friend, and avoid the niggardly, and
bestow kindness, and be constant in gifts ;

And take refuge in repentance before thy departure; for whoso
knocks at the door of the Merciful causes it to open. :


Then I said to him, “ O rare thy recitation, but fie on
thy misconduct !—Now, by Allah, tell me from what
thicket is thy root, for thy puzzle vexes me.’’—He said
I love not to disclose myself; yet I will intimate it:


I am the novelty of the time, the wonder of nations ;

I am the wily one, who plays his wiles among Arabs and
foreigners;

But not the less a brother of need, whom fortune vexes and
wrongs,


TWELFTH ASSEMBLY. 175


And the father of children who lie out like meat on the tray :

Now the brother of want, who has a houseliold, is not blamed if
he be wily.

Said the narrator: Then I knew that it was Abia
Zayd, the man of ill-fame and disgrace, he that blackens
the face of his hoariness.—And the greatness of his
vontumacy offended me, and the foulness of the path
of his resorting:—So I said to him with the tongue
of indignation and the confidence of acquaintance: “Is
it not time, old man, that thou withdraw from debauch-
ery?’—But he was angry, and growled, and his coun-
tenance changed, and he thought a while:—And then
he said, “It is a night for merriment, not for rebuke,
an occasion for drinking wine, not for contention; so
leave speaking thy thought until we meet to-morrow.”
—Then I left him, through fear of his drunken hu-
mour, not through dependence on his promise ;—And
I passed my night clothed in the mourning of re-
pentance, at having advanced the steps of my foot to
the daughter of the vine, not of grace——And I made
a vow to God Almighty that I would never again
enter the tavern of a liquor-seller, even that I
might be endowed with the dominion of Bagdad ;—And
that I would not look upon the vats of wine, even that
the season of youth might be restored to me.—Then we
saddled the white camels in the last darkness of night,
and left together those two old ones, Aba Zayd and Iblis.


176
THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


THE THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF BAGDAD.”


is Assembly is remarkable for an enigmatical address, which
is difficult to be understood, even by one acquainted with the
original, Hirith is conversing with some poets, when an old
woman, followed by some lean and feeble children, makes her
appearance. She at once begins to solicit alms, and sets forth her
former prosperity and her present distress in a compogition the
peculiarity of which is that she introduces into it the names of parts
of the human body, each of which is to be taken, and is intelligible
only when taken, in another sense. Thus the word 4 which
means eye-ball, means also he who looks upon one with respect, and
must be understood in this second sense ; the word wel has the
meanings of eye-brow and attendant, the latter of which must be
understood. The -passagé, though not much in accordance with
European tastes, belongs to an order of composition which the Arabs,
seduced by the extraordinary richness of their language, have much
affected. The close of the address introduces, in an equally artificial
manner, the names of colours. The old woman afterwards recites
some charming verses, and obtains alms from the people. She is
followed by Hairith, who discovers her to be Abi Zayd, the im-
postor, who, when alone, is heard to improvise some verses on his
own cleverness.


Al Harith, son of Hasnain: related: I was in com-
pany, on the banks of the Zowra, with some Shaykhs of
the poets—They were such that no rival would keep
up even with their dust, no disputant would run with
them in the training-ground.—And we flowed in a
discourse that shamed the flowers, until we had halved
the day.—Now, when the yield of our thoughts was
failing, and our souls were desiring after their nests,—
We caught sight of an old woman, who approached from
afar, and trotted the trot of a good steed.—And she was
leading behind her some children, thinner than spindles,


THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 177


weaker than the young of doves.—And' when she saw us,
she failed not to make towards us ;—And when she stood
before us, she said: God save the faces present, though
they are not of my acquaintance !—Know, O ye who
are the refuge of the hoping, the stay of the widowed,
that I am of the Princes of the tribes, the ladies that
are kept jealously :—My people and my husband were
wont to settle on the Breast, and to journey at the
Heart, to burden the Back, to advance the Hand ;’
but when Fortune destroyed the Arms; and pained
the Liver by means of the Limbs; and turned about
till Back was Belly; then the Eye-ball grew dim, and‘
the Eye-brow restless, and the Eye went forth, and the
Palm was lost, and the Fore-arm grew dry, and the
Right hand broke, and the Elbows departed, and there
remained to us neither Front tooth nor Eye tooth—
Now, since the Green life has become Dust-coloured, and
the Yellow loved one has been Tarnished, my White day
is made Black, and my Blaek temple is made White, so
that the Blue-eyed enemy:has pitied me, and now
welcome the Red death!' And there follow me those


1 The explanation of this speech is as follows :—

My people and my husband were wont to sit in the first place in
the assembly ; to march at the centre, or head quarters of the army ;
they mounted their friends on the backs of their camels; they con-
ferred favours: but when Fortune destroyed those who helped
them, and afflicted them by taking away their children and servants,
who laboured for them, and brought them gain; and when their
state was completely overthrown; then, whoever looked to them
with respect withdrew; and their attendants were insolent; and
their coin left them; and their quiet was lost; and their fire-staff
gave no spark ; their power was broken; their comforts and conve-
niences were scattered ; there remained not a camel, young or aged.
Now, since the life of plenty has ‘become barren, and the loved gold
coin has turned aside from me, my happy day has been saddened,


12


178 THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY-


of whom ye see that their look is a sufficient examining,
that their yellowness is their interpreter :—The furthest
desire of each is a mess, the extreme of his wish is a
mantle.—Now I had sworn that I would not give my
cheek to shame, except before the generous, even though
I should die of misery.—But the soul that dwells in me
has whispered me that succour will be found with you,
and the discerning of my. heart has announced to me that
‘ye are the fountains of gifts.—Now may God brighten
him who will make my vow sinless, and verify my ob-
serving ;—And who will look on me with an eye into
‘which parsimony sets a mote, while bounty plucks it
out. ;

Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now we were -

* astonished at the excellence of her signifying and at

the beauties of her metaphor.—So we said to her, “Thy
prose has enchanted us, but how is thy versifying ?”—
She said, “Without a boast, it would ‘make a rock to
gush forth.’—-We said, “If thou wilt place us among
thy Reciters, we will not be niggardly in imparting to
thee.”—She said, “I will first show you my worn out
garment, and then give you to recite my poems.” —Then
she put forth the sleeve of a well worn smock, and un-
veiled the look of a crafty old woman, and indited:

I complain to God, with the complaining of the sick, against
the trouble vf the unjust, the hateful time.

O friends, I am of people who prospered long time, while the
eyelid of fortune was cast down before them :


Their glory there was nonesto forbid, and their fame was spread
abroad among men. —


and the black hair of my temples has been whitened, so that the
blue-eyed Greek, my enemy, has pitied me, and now welcome death
in war.


THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY; 179


When foraging failed .in the ashy year they were & goodly
meadow :

Their fires were kindled to the travellers, al they fed the Stet
with fresh meat:

Their neighbour passed not his night in banger nor through fine
did he say, “Choking hinders me.”

But the changes of destruction have made their seas of bounty to
sink away from them, which I thought not would ever sink :

And put away from among them, into the bowels of the earth,
those that were lions of guarding, healers of the sick.

That on which I carry is now my back, after being my beast, and
my home is in the hollow, after being on the height.

My little ones fail not to mourn their misery, of which there i is
some flash every day.

When the pious man prays to his Lord by night, they also call
Him with gushing tears.

O Thou who feedest the young raven in the nest, and settest: the
bone which is broken, and again broken ;

Appoint to us, O God, one whose honour is pure and washed from
the filth of blame ;

Who: will quench for us the fire of hunger, though only with a
mess of the sour milk or the butter milk.

Now is there any who will remove what is come upon us, and
make prize of thanks Jong and large ?

For, by Him to whom the forelocks shall bow down in the day
when the faces of the assemblage shall be black and white,

Were it not for these, my cheek would not expose itself, nor would
J assay to the stringing of verse.


Said the narrator : Now, by Allah, she cleft our hearts
in pieces with her verses, and called forth the gifts of our
bosoms :—So that he gave her alms whose habit was to
beg alms himself, and he was brisk to bestow on her who
we thought would not be so.—And when her bosom was
filled full with gold, and each of us had shown bounty to
her,—She retreated, the little ones following her, and
her mouth was wide with thanks.—But after she was
gone, the company were all a-stretch to fathom her, that ~
they might prove where their bounty had fallen—And I
went surety to them for eliciting the hinted secret, and


180 THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


rose up and followed the track of the old woman.—Until
she came to a street choked with people, exceeding in its
crowd.—Then she plunged into the throng, and slipped
away from the simple children.—And she turned aside,
with unconcern of mind, to a ruined mosque, and threw
away her cloak, and drew off her veil—But I spied
at her through ‘a chink of the door, and watched what
strange thing she would bring to pass.—And when
the gear of modesty fell off, I saw the face of Abd Zayd
dawn out.—And I thought within myself that I would
rush upon him and rebuke him for the course he was
ruoning.—But he threw himself back with the gesture
of the contumacious, and raised the shrill note of singers,
and broke forth, inditing thus :—


Oh! would I knew whether the time had gotten a knowledge


of my power : *
Whether it had learnt or learnt not the real truth how deep I
go in deceiving: |


How many of its sons I have won of by my wile and my fraud :

How oft I have sallied forth upon them in my known form and
in disguise ;

To catch one set by preaching, and others by poetry ; ‘

“To excite one mind by vinegar, and another by wine ;

Being at one time Sakhr, at another time the sister of Sakhr.

Now if I had followed the frequented path all the length of
my life,

My fire and my portion would have failed, my need and my
loss would have lasted.

So say to him who blames, “ This is my excuse—take it.”


Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now when the
clearness of his case appeared to me, and the marvel
of his wickedness, and the excuse which he had tinseled
in his verses,—I knew that his devil was a rebellious
one, who would not listen to rebuke, and would do
nought but what he willed.—So I turned my reins to my


FOURTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 181


companions, and published to them what my eye-witness-
ing had established—-Then they were sullen at the
loss of their presents, and vowed one to another to
deny old women.


THE FOURTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF MECCA.”


This Assembly has little that is remarkable. Harith is on the
pilgrimage to Mecca, and, after having fulfilled the usual rites, he
and his friends are diverting themselves with conversation, in a tent,
during the heat of the day. An old man and a boy make their
appearance, and when they are asked what they want, the old man
utters a complimentary speech, soliciting relief for himself and his
son. They promise it, and he then recites some verses, lamenting
that his camel had broken down,and that he should have to return
from the pilgrimage on foot. They promise him a camel, and desire
to know what is his son’s request. e boy recites some verses,
asking for various kinds of food in use among the ancient Arabs.
Both receive what “they desire from the company, and Harith
then asks whence they come. The old man, who is Abi Zayd,
begins to tell them in verse of Serij, and its destruction ; but his
tears hinder him from proceeding, and he departs abruptly. In this
Assembly Abi Zayd and his son are not represented as practising
any kind of knavery ; and it may be assumed that they were really
in want of a beast and food. This trait is in keeping with the
thirty-first Assembly, which introduces Abi Zayd on the pilgrimage
preaching to the assembled people. On that occasion he would not
ask or even take alms, having made a vow of self-denial. In the
present Assembly, though less strict, he will not commit an un-
worthy action in a sacred place. The lingering religious sentiment
and sense of honour in Abi Zayd’s character are always well.
observed by the author.


Al Harith, son of Hamman, related: I rose up from
the City of Peace for the pilgrimage of Islam :—And
when, by the help of God, I had fulfilled my squalor
and permitted myself perfumes and indulgence, there


182 FOURTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


came tpon the encampment of the Khayf the blaze of
summer ;—And I made a shelter perforce of what might
ward off the mid-day heat.—Now when I was under a
leather tent with a company of the polite; and the
furnace of the gravel was now hot, and the noon blinded
the eye of the chameleon ;—Lo! there broke in upon
us a tottering old man, whom followed a youth in agile
prime.—And the old man greeted with the greeting of
the well-bred, the intelligent, and answered with the
answering of a kinsman, not a stranger.—Then he
pleased us by what he scattered from his chaplet, and
we wondered at his unreserve before we had emboldened
him.—And we said to him, “‘ What art thou? and how
hast thou made way in, and not asked leave ?’—He said,
“As for me, I am a suppliant, a seeker of help; the
secret of my misery is not hidden, and a look at me is
my sufficient intercessor:—And as for my intrusion, to
which suspicion clings, why, it is not wonderful, seeing
there can be no veil. over the generous.”—Then we asked
him how he found his way to us, and by what he got
direction towards us.—He said, “Truly generosity has
a fragrance whose breathings steal forth, whose odours
guide to its meadow ;—And I was led by the exhaling
of your perfume to the brightening of your bounty ;—
And the fragrant waving of your myrtle told me glad-
deningly that the return from your presence would be
happy.”—Then we asked him concerning his want, that
we might undertake to.aid him.—He said, “I have a
need and my boy a request.”—-We said, “ Either wish
shall be fulfilled, and each of you shall surely be con-
tented :—But the elder, the elder:” He said, “Certainly ;
by Him who has spread out the seven earths,”—Then he


FOURTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 183


A
leaped up to speak like the camel loosbd from the foot-
rope, and recited ;


IT am a man whose beast has fallen with soreness of foot and
weariness ;

My distance is a far one, my pace is unequal to it :

With me is not as much as & mustard seed of the stamped gold :

My contriving is closed up, my bewilderment plays with me.

If I set out on foot, I fear destructive haps ;

And if I lag behind the company my way is straitened.

My sighing is on the heights, my tear is on the slopes.

But ye are the foraging ground of him that hopes, the target

of seeking ;

Your grist pours down as pour not down the clouds :

Your neighbour dwells in sanctuary, but your wealth is open
to spoiling :

The terror-stricken does not take shelter with you, and then fear
the tooth of calamities ;

Nor does he that hopes seek the milk-flow of your gifts, and then
fail to be gifted.

So now be ye moved by my story, and prosper my retiring from
you;

For if ye had made trial of my life, in its ‘meat and its drink,

Surely such distress as mine would pain you, distress that gives
me up to sorrows.

And if ye were to learn my distinction, and my a oo and
my path, .

And what my knowledge embraces of choice studies,

No doubt would occur to you but that my breeding is my malady.

Now, would that I had not sucked at the breast of scholarship !

For its ill-luck has fallen on me; and in this thing was my father
unduteous to me. —


' Then we said to him: “ As for thee, thy verses have
now disclosed thy poverty, and the perishing of thy she-
camel ;—So we will mount thee on that which will bring
thee to thy city ; and, now, what is the need of thy son?”
—He said to him, “Rise, my boy, as thy father rose,
and speak what is in thy mind; may thy mouth not be
harmed !’—Then he rose up as rises the hero to the sally-


184 FOURTEENTH ASSEMBEY.


ing forth, and unsheathed a tongue ‘like a cutting blade,
and recited : - ;


O ye Lords, whose dwellings are built up on high places!

Who, when danger befalls, take stand to ward off stratagem ;

To whom is easy the bestowing of stored up treasures ;

I desire of you a piece of roast, and a loaf, and a pudding:

But if that be too dear, then let it be cracknels, in which shall be
hidden some roast lamb ;

Or if there be neither this nor that, then my fill of thartd :

But if these deny themselves altogether, then mere dates with
their sauce.

Bring forth what is easy for you, even though it be but shreddings
of dried meat ;

And make it ready quickly, for my soul is longing for what is
ready. . °

For there is no doing without provision for my far journey ;

And ye are the best of kindred to be called on in necessity ;

Your hands every day are full of new bounties ;

Your palms bestow all useful gifts.

Now my wish will limit itself within the folds of that which ye
shall give.

Through me may reward be gotten ; and estimable i is the conse-
quence of relieving my sorrow ;

And mine are young offsprings of the wit which put to shame
every poem.

|

‘Said Al Harith, son of Hammém: Now when we saw
that the cub was like the lion, we mounted the father
and provisioned the son ;—And they requited the kind-
ness with thanks, which they spread out as robes, and
they paid for it its due.—And when they were intent on
departure, and had fastened for the journey the waist-
folds of the skirt,—I said to the old man, “ Has our pro-
mise been like the promise of ‘Orkdb, or does there re-
main a need in the mind of Jacob ?’—He said, “ God
forbid ! surely not: nay, your kindness has been mighty
and manifest.”—I said to him, “ Reward us as we have


rewarded thee, profit us as we have profited thee !—


FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 185


Where is thy cot? for perplexity has possessed us con-
cerning thee.’—Then he sighed with the sighing of one
who calls to mind his home, and recited, while sobbing
hindered his tongue :


Serj is my dwelling; but how to make way to it!

For enemies have encamped in it, and marred it.

Now by the House to which I have journeyed to lay down my
sins in it,

Nought has pleased my eye since I have left the bounds of Serdj.


Then his eyes were drowned with tears, and his tear-
founts permitted their flowing :—And he was unwilling
-to let them drop, but he could not restrain them.—So he
cut short his sweet reciting, and was brief in his farewell
and withdrew.


THE FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED -
“THE LEGAL.”


This long and elaborate composition has a very slight foundation.
The author, desirous to amuse his readers with a very ordinary
legal puzzle, imagines a long adventure to introduce it. Harith is
passing a sleepless night, and strongly desires a companion to con-
verse with, when a wanderer knocks at the door. He opens, and
when the light is brought he discovers the visitor to be Aba. Zayd.
Rejoicing at so pleasant an encounter he offers him food, but finds
that Abd Zayd will eat nothing. He is offended; but Aba Zayd
proceeds to explain his want of appetite by relating the adventures
of the day. He had been as usual in destitution, and his hunger
had been further excited by the sight of the dates and milk that
were exposed in the market. At last, when almost exhausted, he had
seen a man weeping. He had inquired the cause and found that the
stranger was deploring the decay of learning, inasmuch as no one
was able to solve for him a puzzle which had come into his posses-
sion. This was to explain how a man, dying childless, could leave
a brother perfectly competent to inherit, and yet that his property
should go to his wife’s brother. Aba Zayd at once perceives the


186 FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


answer, but demands a supper before revealing it. The stranger
takes him home and treats him tosdates and cream, which he eats
greedily, and then explains that the deceased man in the puzzle had
had a son by a former wife, who had married the mother of his, the
father’s, second wife and then died, leaving a son who would be
the brother of the second wife, and the grandson of the deceased
whose property was in question. This child would therefore inherit in
preference to the deceased’s brother. Abi Zayd relates that when
he had given the stranger the solution of the puzzle, he had been
turned out in the rain, and had wandered from house to house
seeking shelter, until chance had taken him to Harith. They spend
the night in conversation, and Harith parts with him in the morning
with regret. Sherishi, in his commentary, remarks with justice on
the inordinate length of this Assembly, and gives one by Al
Hamadini, of only a few lines, as a contrast to it, observing that
if Hariri’s had been shorter and Badi‘ az Zemin’s longer, both
would have been better. “Abi Mohammed,” he says, ‘‘is so long
as to weary the hearer.”


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was wakeful
in a certain night, that was black of robe, lowering a
massive cloud, beyond the wakefulness of the lover
who is driven from the door, who is tried by the aversion
of mistresses.—And thoughts ceased not to rouse my
sadness, and make my imagination roam among fantasies.
—Until I formed a wish, through the unease of what
I suffered, that I might be granted a talk-fellow from
among the estimable, who should shorten the tedium
of my night-dark night—Now my wish was not ended,
and I had not closed my eye, when a knocker knocked
at the door, one with an humble voice.—And I said within
myself, “‘ Perchance the plant of wishing has now borne
fruit, and the night of luck is moonlit.”—And I rose up
to him in haste, and said, “ Who is it that now walks by
night ?’—He said, “A stranger, whom the night has
veiled in darkness, whom the rain-flood has caught ;—And
he desires @ sheltering, nothing else ; and when it dawns ~


FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 187


he will advance his journey.”—Said| Al Harith: Now
when his rays indicated his sun, and his title disclosed
the secret of his page,—I knew that night-talking with
him would be a prize, and watching with him a pleasure.
—So I opened the door with smiling, and said, “ Enter
ye into them with peace.”—And there entered a person
whose lance time had bent, and the rain had wet through
his mantle.—And he greeted with a glib tongue, and
a sweet eloquence.—Then he thanked me for responding
to his voice, and excused himself for night-walking out
of season.— But I put near to him the kindled lantern,
and contemplated him as one that examines money.— |
And I found that he was our Shaykh Abi Zayd, without
question, without the guess of doubt.—So I received him
as one who had possessed me of my utmost desire, and
transported me from the vexing of sorrow to the quiet of
joy.—Then he took to complaining of weariness, and I
took to How ? and Where ?—He said, “‘ Let me swallow
down my spittle, for my road has wearied me.”—And
I thought that he had hunger in his belly, and was slug-
gish from this cause.—So I set before him what is set
before the guest who comes sudden in the dark night.—
But he shrank as shrinks the abashed, and declined.
as declines the overeaten.—And I was evil in thought
at his refraining, and the change of his nature angered
me :—Until I was near to be rough to him in speech, and
to sting him with the venom of blame.—Then he
discerned from the glances of my eye what pervaded
my mind:— And he said, “O weak of confidence in
them that love thee! turn from that which thou makest
to stir thy heart and listen to me, O thou base-born !”—I
said, “Go on, brother of empty talk.”—Then he said,


188 FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


Know that I passed yesternight an ally of want, a
communer with fantasy.—And when the night had ful-
filled its vow, and the morn had sunk its stars, I went
forth at the time of sunrise to one of the markets,—To
assay against any prey that might pass by, any generous
man who might show bounty.—And I caught sight of
dates whose ordering in rows was made comely, whose
place of summering had been favourable.—And they united
in proof of their goodness the purity of choice wine, and
the ruddiness of cornelian.—And opposite them was milk
that showed forth like the yellow gold, and disclosed
a, saffron hue,—Which praised him who cooked it with
the tongue of its perfection, and justified the judgment of
the buyer, even though he had paid down his heart’s
core for it.—Then appetite bound me with its cords,
and thirst brought me under its dominion—And I
remained more bewildered than a lizard, more distracted
than a lover;—HavVing no means to bring me to the
reaching of my wish, and the delight of swallowing.—
‘And now my foot obeyed me not for departure through
the ardour of my inflaming.—But greediness and its
violence chid me on, and hunger and its heat, to forage
every land, to be content with a driblet from my water-
ing.—And I ceased not all the length of that day to let
down my bucket into rivers ;—But it came not back even
with a wetting, and drew not up a quenching for my
thirst ;—Until the sun bent to the setting, and my soul
was weak with weariness.—Then’ at eve I went home-
ward with burning stomach: I returned irresolute, ad-
vancing one foot,.drawing back the other.—And while I
thus sped or stayed, while my breeze thus rose or fell,
behold, there met me a Shaykh, who was lamenting with


FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 189


the lamentation of the bereaved, and his eyes were flow-
ing.—Then not even the Wolf’s Disease that I was under,
and the emptiness that melted me, engaged me from the
attempt to become intimate with him, and from the desire
after deceiving him.—So I said to him, “O stranger, in
thy weeping there is surely a secret, and behind thy
passion an ill:—So shew me thy disorder and take me
among thy counsellors:—For thou wilt find in me a
physician te eure or a helper to impart.””—Then he said,
“By Allah! my lamenting is not after livelihood that is.
gone, or fortune that is insolent ;—But for the perishing
of science and its blotting out, for the going down of
its moons and its suns.”—TI said, “‘ And what mishap has
appeared? what question is obscure? so as to excite in
thee grief for the loss of those who are gone.”—Then he
drew forth a serap of paper from his sleeve, and swore
by his father and mother,—That he had already laid
it before the chiefs of the schools, but they could not
distinguish its worn-out way-marks,—And had bidden
the doctors of the ink-flasks to speak on it, but they
were dumb beyorid the dumbness of the tenants of the
tombs.—I said to him, “Let me see it; for perhaps I
shall suffice for it.’—He said, ‘‘ Thou art not extreme
‘in thy request, and oft a shot is without a shooter.”—

Then he handed it to me, and lo! there was written
on it: ,

Ho the learned, the lawyer, who surpassest in acuteness, and there
is none like thee!

Give me a decision on a case which every judge shuns, at which
every lawyer is bewildered :

A man died, leaving a brother, both by father and mother, who
was a Moslem, free, pious ;


And the deceased had a wife who had, O Doctor, a brother, really
her own, without equivocation ;


190 FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


She got her legal share, and her brother took what was left of the
inheritance instead of the deceased’s brother.

Now relieve us by thy answer to what we ask; this is an ordinance
of law, no fault can be found in it.


Now when I had read the verses on the paper and per-
ceived their secret, I said to him, “ Thou hast fallen on
one who is knowing in it, thou hast alighted near one who
is at home in it:—But yet I am burning in the entrails
and have need of a supper; so grant me to sojourn with
thee, then listen to my decision.”—He said, ‘Thou art
just in thy stipulating and hast shrunk from excess ;—
So go with me to my dwelling, that thou mayest get what
thou desirest and come off as is fitting.’— Said Aba
Zayd: Then I accompanied him to his habitation as God
hath commanded.—And he brought me into a house nar-
rower than the ark of Moses, weaker than a spider’s web.
—But not the less did he mend the straitness of his
dwelling by the largeness of his bestowal:—For he
gave me my choice of the entertainment and of all the
delicacies that are bought.—And I said, “I wish for the
proud rider on the desired steed, and for the wholesome
companion with the hurtful one that is companied with.”
—So he thought a long time, and then he said, “Perchance
thou meanest the daughter of the palm-tree with the
first milk that follows the kid.”—TI said to him, “Just
these two I meant, and for their sake I trouble myself.”
—And he rose cheerful, then sat down angry: and
said, ‘God prosper thee! Know.that truth is nobility,
but lying a pest ;—Nor let hunger, which is the gar-
ment of the prophets and the ornament of the saints,
carry thee to join thyself to him who lies, or to put on
the nature of him who swerves from faith-keeping.—For


FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 191


the free-born woman hungers, but will! not eat by her
breasts; and she holds back from baseness even though ©
urged to it by need.—Besides, I am no simpleton for |
thee, nor one to wink at a dupe’s bargain ;—So come! I
warn thee before the veil be rent, and the feud estab-
lished between us;—And neglect not attention to my
warning, and beware false speaking with me, beware !”

—TI said to him, “Now, by Him who has forbidden the

eating of usury, but allowed the eating of milk, I

have not spoken with falsehood, I have not shown thee

deceitfully.—Thou shalt prove the truth of the business,

and approve the giving of the milk and dates.”—Then

he was cheerful with the cheerfulness of one who is

dealt with truly, and went off hastening to the market.

—And nothing could be speedier than his return, bend-

ing under them ; and his face was frowning, and he set

them before me as one who would upbraid me ;—And

said, “Press host on host ; so enjoy the delight of life.”

—Said Aba Zayd, Then I bared a glutton’s arm, and

charged as charges the voracious elephant ;—But he,

he glanced at me as glances the spiteful, and in his rage

he would that I had choked.—Now when I had gulped

down’ either kind, and left them a trace after the sub-

stance, I was speechless through perplexity at the

coming on of night-time, and through thinking on the

answer to the verses.—And he delayed not to rise and

set before me the ink-flask and pens.—And he said,

‘Thou hast filled thy wallet, now dictate the answer.—

Otherwise, prepare, if thou shirk, to own the debt for

what thou hast eaten.”—I said to him, There is nothing

but earnest with me, so write (and the prospering be

from God):


192 FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


Say to him who riddles questions that I am the discloser of their
secret which he hides. ° «. .

Know that the deceased, in whose case the law preferred the
brother of his spouse ‘to the son of his father,

Was a man who, of his free consent, gave his-son in marriage to
his own mother-in-law ; nothing strange in it.

Then the son died, but she was already pregnant by him, and

_ gave birth to a son like him;

And he was the son’s son without dispute, and brother of the
grandfather’s spouse without equivocation.

But the son of the true-born son is nearer to the grandfather, and
takes precedence in the inheritance over the brother ;

And therefore, when he died, the eighth of the inheritance was
adjudged to the wife for her to take possession; —

And the grandson, who was really her brother by her mother,
took the rest;

And the full brother was 5 left out of the inheritance, and we say
thou hast only to bewail him.

This is my decision which every judge who judges will pattern
by, every lawyer.


Said Abi Zayd: Now when he had understood the
answer and verified its correctness, he said to me,
"“ Remember thy family and the night, so gather up thy
skirt and be beforehand with the rain-flood.”—I said,
‘Tam in the house of exile, and in sheltering me lies the
best of offering,—Especially as the van of the darkness
has now drooped, and the thunder is lauding God in the
cloud.”—He said, ‘“‘ Be off (may God keep thee) whither
thou wilt; but desire not to pass the night here.”—I
said, “ Why is that, ‘seeing the emptiness of thy habita-
tion ?”,—He said, “ Because I looked well how thou
didst swallow what was before thee, until thou didst
leave and let alone nothing ;—And I saw that thou dost
not look to thy well-being, nor take care for the keeping
of thy health_—Now, he that exceeds in what thou hast
exceeded, and fills his belly as thou hast filled it, escapes


FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 193


not a weakening surfeit or a killing chblera.—So, by
Allah, leave me alone and go forth from ime while thou
art still kept from harm ;—For by Him who gives life
and death there is no lodging for thee in my house.” —
Now, when I had heard his ‘oath, and made proving
of him, I went forth from his house perforce, and with a
’ victualling of sadness:—And the sky rained upon me,
and the darkness made me to stumble, and the dogs
barked after me, and the doors repulsed me,—Until the
kindness of fate sent me to thee, and thanks to its -
white hand.

Then I said to him, “Charming is this ordained
meeting with thee to my glad heart.”—And he began
to be diverse in his stories, and to mix the laughable
‘with the mournful; until the first of the morning
dawned, and the caller of “ Blessing” made his ery.—.
Whereupon he made ready to respond to the caller, and
then turned to bid me farewell.—But I checked him from
departure and said, “ Hospitality is three days.”—But
he adjured God, and restricted himself by a vow; then
he sought the outlet, and indited as he lingered :


Visit him thou lovest in each month only a oe and exceed not
that upon him ;

For the beholding of the new moon is but one ay in the month,
and afterward eyes look not on it.

Said Al Harith, son of Hammanr: Then I took leave
of him with a heart bleeding of its wound, and wished
that my night had been tardy of its morn.


194 SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


THE-SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF THE. WEST.”


The purpose of this Assembly is to exhibit Abi Zayd in the per-
formance of an extraordinary feat of scholarship, the recitation of some
lines of poetry, each of which may be read forwards or backwards
without change of sense. Hirith theets with four scholars in a
mosque and takes seat with them. The conversation falls upon sen-
tences which preserve their identity when reversed ; and some one pro-
poses that they should try their powers of composing them. This is
agreed to, and the first man produces a sentence of three words, the
next a sentence of four, the next a sentence of five, the next a
sentence of six. It then comes to the turn of Harith to compose a
sentence of seven words, which shall be the same whether read
forwards or backwards. This he is unable to do;. but an old man
who “had joined them not only performs the feat, but actually
improvises five lines of poetry, each of which has the same extra-.
ordinary property. Of course this is Abi Zayd, and when Harith
discovers him, he introduces him to his friends, who invite him to
spend the night with them in conversation. He pleads, that his
hungry children are expecting him; but assures them that if they
will let him go and give them a meal he will return forthwith.
They accede to this, and send a servant with him to carry his wallet.
After some time the servant comes back alone, and relates that Abi
Zayd had refused' to return, and had dismissed him with some
moral verses.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was present
-at the prayer of sunset in one of the mosques of the
West :—And when I had performed it with completeness
and joined to it what was optional, my eye fell on a
company who had set themselves down aside and had-
drawn apart, friends pure in friendship ;—And they were
taking from each other the cup of talk and rubbing the
fire-staves of discussion.—And I desired to converse with
them for the sake of some maxim that might be acquired,
or of scholarship that might be gotten in increase ;—So


SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 195


I advanced to them as one | who would play * Tofayl upon
them,—And said to them, “ Will ye receive a comer
_who seeks to gather of night-talkings, and seeks not the
newly-gathered of fruits; and who. desires the beauties
of dialogue, not the choice of the young camel’s hump?”
—Then they loosed their loops- to me, and said,
‘Welcome, Welcome!”—And I had not sat longer than
the, flash of the blinding lightning or the sip of the
timid bird, when there came upon us a wanderer; on
his shoulder was a wallet ;—And he greeted us with the -
“tivo words, and he greeted the mosque with the two saluta-
tions ;—And he said, ““O ye men of understanding and
choice excellence !—Know ye not that the most precious
of offerings is the relieving of sorrows, and the firmest
eord of salvation is the imparting to: those who have
need ?~—-Now, by Him who hath set me down in your
precinct, and destined to me the asking alms of you,
truly I am the stray of a distant abode, the messenger
of lank-bellied children ;—And is there in the company
any that will cool down for us the heat of hunger ? ”—
Then they said to ‘him, “O stranger, thou hast come
after the even-tide, and there remained over only the
leavings of our supper.—But if thou art content with
these thou wilt find among us none to forbid thee.”—He
said, ‘Surely the brother of afflictions, he is content
with the scraps of tables and the shakings of provision -
-bags.”—Then each of them bade his servant to victual
him with what he had.—And the kindness pleased him
and he thanked for it, and took seat and watched what
was brought him.—And we, we returned to mooting the
beauties of scholarship and its choice points, and drawing
forth its rill from its founts,—Until we engaged in the


196 SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


subject of language which does not become absurd by
being reversed, as the phrase (uf SL (the pourer out
of the cup).—Then we challenged each other. that we
should make our thoughts yield an ‘offspring in if,
that we should originate virgin phrases in it,—On the
condition that he who began should string three beads
on his necklace, and that the additions should advance
by degrees after him 3—So that the man on his right
should place four in his series, and his neighbour of the
left should place seven perforce.

Said the narrator: And we were ranged to the nun-
ber of the hand’s fingers, and we were set together with
the union of the men of the Cave.—Then to the great-
ness of my vexation, hastened he on my right, and
said: Je I ry (Blame him who wearies of thee).—And
the one on his right said: LS, 1 *le5 7S, (Make great
thy hope of the recompense of thy Lord).—Said he who
was next: oy 7 she wm (He who completes the kind-
ness which he renders, gains increase. )—Said the last :
VS Ss Ue WS , (Silence every one who blabs to
thee, and thou wilt be wise.}—Then the turn came to me,
and to string a-seven-beaded thread was incumbent on
me.—And my thought ceased not to mould and break, to
be fertile and barren ; and all the while I seek food and
find none to feed me ;—Until my breeze fell, and my
submission was manifest.—And I said to my companions
“If the Serdji were present here, he would heal this
cureless malady.”—They said, “If this came before Iyas
he would certainly stop in despair.”—Then began we to
be profuse in declaring that it was hard, and that its
door was shut.—But that visitor who had come upon us
glanced at us with the glance of the contemptuous ; and


SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY. ; 197


‘he was joining pearls together, and we khew it not.—
And when he had noticed our ignominy, and the drying
‘up of our pool, he said “O people! truly a great
trouble is it to make the barren bring forth, or to get a
cure by the sick; and ‘there is One learned above all
the learned.’ *»—Then he turned to me and said, I will
take thy place, and free thee from what has fallen on
thee :—Now if thou desire to speak in prose, and yet not
to trip, say, addressing him who blames avarice, and is
large in his reproach, (J3) “SL, Al 1st Joye J& if, (Take
refuge with every trusty patron, who, ‘when he has col-
lected and possesses, gives freely).—But if thou prefer to
versify, say to him whom thou esteemest :


Bestow on the needy when he comes to thee, and show regard
even when a man injures thee.

Have dealings with him that is noble, but put afar from thee the
base.

Withdraw from the side of the unjust, the mischievous, when
he sits by thee.

When contention rouses itself put it off from thee, and cast it
away when it confirms itself.

Be still, and thou shalt grow strong ; for it may be that time that
‘was perverse to thee shall aid thee.


Said Al Harith: Now when he had bewitched us
.with his verses, and fatigued us by the remoteness of
his goals—We praised him until he begged to be spared,
and we gave to him until he said it was enough.—Then
he gathered up his garment, and loaded on his wallet,
and rose to go, reciting:


Excellent are this company, who are true of speech, princes in
bounty.

They surpass mankind in far-famed virtues, they surpass them
in their gifts.

I have talked with them, and found that Sahbin i in their presence
would be as Bakil :


=


198 SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


“" ana I ‘alighted among them begging, and met with a rain that -


poured.


_ swear that if the generous are @ shower they are a flood. -


‘Then he stepped two lances’ space, but returned com-


mending himself. to God from death,—And said, ““O
strength of him that is without kindred, treasure of him’
that is reft of wealth !—The glooming has now set i in,
and the face of the highway is veiled;—And between
me and my house is the dark night and a razed .out
path.—And have ye a lantern that will secure me from
stumbling, and make plain the tracks ?’—Said Al
Harith : And when there was brought what was sought
for, and the light of the brand disclosed men’s faces,—I
saw that he who hunted us was our Abi Zayd; and
I said to my friends, “This is he of whom I indicated
that when he speaks he hits the point, and when he
is asked for ‘rain he pours.” —-And they stretched
towards him their'necks, and they made the blacks
of their eyes surround him.—And they begged him that
he would pass his night in talk with them, on the condi-
tion that they should mend his poverty.—He said, “ My,
desire is yours! Welcome to you sinde' ye have wel-
comed !—Nevertheless when I came to you my children
were writhing with hunger, and calling to me for a
quick return.—And if they find me tardy, distraction
will possess them, and my life will be no more serene.—
Now suffer me to go that I may fill their emptiness, and
relieve their choke; then return to you straightway,
prepared for night-talking till the dawn.”—So we said
to one of the lads, ‘‘ Follow him to his people, that he
may be the quicker to come again.”—And the boy set out
with him, carrying his wallet under his arm, hastening’


SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY. - 199


his return :—But he delayed a delay exceeding bounds ;

then the lad cante back alone.—We said to him, “ What
story hast thon of the knave ?”—-He said: He ‘took me
along wearying ways and branching paths, until we
came to a ruined hut. —Then he said, “Here is my
station, the nest of my chicks.”—And he bade open to
‘him’ the door, and he pulled away from me his wallef,
and baid, “By my life! thou hast lightened a load off
me, and deserved fair treatment from me. —Now here is
a counsel for thee which is among the most precious of
counsels, the seed-plots of advantages ;” then he recited:


When thou hast got the Plucking of the palm, defer it not to the
coming year : '
‘ And if thou lightest on a treading-floor, fill thy crop with
the ears that are there ;

And stay not when thou hast picked them up, lest thou stick in
the net of the snarer ;

And go not far in when thou swimmest, for safety is on the bank.

Accost with “Give now,” and answer with “Bye and byg;” and
sell what is postponed from thee for what comes at once.

And exceed not upon a friend in thy visiting, for no one was ever
wearied of save the clinging guest.


, Then he said, “ Treasure these lines in thy heart, and

follow them in thy conduct.—And now hasten to thy
fellows in the keeping of thy Lord;—And when thou
hast reached them, bring them my greeting, and re-
hearse to them my commandment.—And say to them
from me that full sure night-watching spent in tales
is among fhe greatest of harms; and that I fail not
to care for myself, nor will bring dryness into my head
by vigils.”"—Said the narrator: Now when the argument
‘of his poem had put us in view of his cunning and
fraud, we upbraided each other for leaving him, and for
deceiving ourselves with his lie—Then we separated
with frowning faces and a losing bargain.


200 SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


THE SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“THE REVERSED.”
|


This Assembly closely resembles the last; the difference between
them being that, whereas the feat accomplished in the last consisted
in producing sentences or lines of poetry, the letters of which
should be the same whether read forward or backward, the pecu-
liarity of the present composition is that the words themselves being
reversed produce a perfect sense. The Assembly, in other respects,

“shows no feature that requires notice.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: In one of the
places whither my journeying cast me, to whose fairness
my eye was lifted up, I beheld some youths, on whom
was the mark of understanding, and the beauty of the
stars of the dark.—And they were in a debate that was
strong of blast, and a contention that exceeded in its
heat.—Then was I roused to make towards them by the
love of disputation, and by deeniing the fruits of, dis-
cussion to be sweet.—And when I had joined myself
to their company, and strung myself on their thread,
they said, “ Art thou one who will prove himself in the
strife and cast in his bucket among the buckets ?”—I
said, “Nay, I am but of the lookers on at war, not of
the sons of the stab and the stroke.”—Then they broke
off from arguing with me, and gave themselves to put-
ting forth riddles.—And there was in the midst of their
ring, and in the circlet of their company, an old man
whom cares had made lean, whom the hot wind had
scorched ;—So that he had come to be thinner than
a reed, dryer than the shears.—And yet was he uttering
wonders whenever he answered, and causing Sahban


SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 201


to be forgotten as often as he expounded.—And I
admired the judgment he was gifted with, and his sur-
passing that assemblage.—And he ceased not to make
clear every puzzle, and to lay low all he aimed at,
until the quivers were empty, and the asking and the
answering were exhausted.—Now when he saw that the
company had consumed their store, and were forced to
fasting, he hinted at, a colloquy, and asked leave for
an argument.—They said, “ Excellent, but who will be
our surety for it?”’—He said, “Do ye know a com:
position whose earth is its heaven, and whose morn is its
even; which is woven on two beams, and shows with
two colours, and prays towards two points, and’ goes
forth with two faces ?—If it rises out from its east excel-
lent is its splendour, and if it mounts from its west, then
Oh its marvel !”

Said Al Harith: Then it was as though the company
were struck with speechlessness, or the word “ Silence”
were incumbent upon them.—And no man said word,
and the tongue of none uttered aught ;—But when he
saw them.dumb as cattle, and speechless as statues, he
said to them, “I have now conceded to you the term of
grace, and made slack to you the tether of delay:—And
here is the camp of gathering, the station of decision.—
Now if your minds yield freely I will praise, but if your
fire-staves be barren I will rub the spark.”—They said
to him, “ By Allah, there is no swimming for us in
the deep of this sea, no wandering on its shore; so
give rest to our thoughts from travail, and make grateful
thy: gift by readiness—And take us as brethren who
will leap when thou leapest, and will recompense when
thou seekest recompensing.”—And he looked down a


202 SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


. space; then he said, I hear you and obey.—Take now
this dictation from me and hand it down of me: :

Man is the creature of kindness; and the perfecting
of a benefit is the deed of the liberal; and the disposi-
tion of the generous is a treasure of praise; and the
“gain of thanks isa gathering of happiness; and the
index of generosity is the light of cheerfulness; and -
the practice of courtesy leads of needs to affection ;
and the bond of friendship demands sincere counsel ;
dnd truth of narrative is the ornament of the tongue;
and eloquence in speech is witchcraft to hearts; and the
net of desire is the bane of souls; and impatience of
disposition is a dishonour to mortals; and evil desire
consists not with self-restraint; and the clinging to
prudence is the’ leading-cord of safety; and to seek
occasions for blaming is the worst of faults; and the
dwelling upon failings overthrows friendships; and
sincerity of purpose is the cream of a gift; and un-
grudgingness in conferring is the price due to asking;
and the undertaking of labours lays the way for re-
compence; and faith in God’s protection makes it easy
to bestow; and the excellence of the prince is large-
ness of breast; and the ornament of rulers is hatred
of defamers; and the reward of praiseworthy deeds is
a bestowing of gifts; and the dowry of conciliation
is the obtaining of requests; and the cause of error is
extravagance of aim; and to overstep bounds blunts
vigour; and transgression of politeness nullifies ser-
vices ; and the forgetting of rights provokes resistance ;
and to shun doubtful deeds raises men’s rank; and
elevation of dignities is by rushing into dangers; and
the exalting of positions is by the favour of Providence ;


SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 208


and loftiness in actions is through the limiting of desires ;
and the lengthening of thought makes precision of
judgment ; and the crown of princeliness is the refine-
ment of courtliness; and by contentiousness is lost what
is sought for; and in perils is shown the difference
among men; and in the superiority of plans lies the
distinction of men’s values; and by the exaggeration of
the envoy policy is weakened ; and through laxness of
powers do terrors appear; and by the task of patience
is the fruit of victory ; and the merit to be praiseworthy
is in proportion to diligence; and to repay regard is
necessary to consideration ; and affection in servants is
shown in visiting their masters ; and the adornment of.
manliness is the guarding of trusts ; and the proving
of brethren is in their lightening one’s griefs; and
the repulse of enemies is by defence on the part of
friends; and the testing of the intelligent is by as-
sociating them with the ignorant; and the looking to
consequences gives security from fatalities; and the
keeping from baseness spreads reputation ; and the vice
of boorishness consists not with excellence; and the
essence of the noble is the guarding of secrets.

Then he said: These are two hundred words com-
prising culture and admonition.—If one move them in
this direction, there is no debate, no contention; but
if one desire the reversing of their mould, and the
turning of them backwards, -let him say, ‘Secrets
are trusted to the noble; and the nature of excellence
consists not with boorishness ; and foulness of reputa-
tion spreads disgrace ;”—And so on this track let him
trail them and not fear error in them, until there shall
come the close of their couplets and the last of their


204 , SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


. pearls, namely, “and to perfect kindness is a good deed
of man.”

Said the narrator: Now when he had uttered his
unique address, and his elegancy that was perfect of
meaning, we knew how much composition may be
diverse. in merit, and that excellence is in the hand of
God; He gives it to whom he will.—Then clung each
of us to his skirt, each cut off for him a portion from
what he possessed.—But he declined to receive mine,
and said, “TI do not take forfeit of my pupils.””—I said,
“Be Abi Zayd, even with all this embrowning of thy
figure and this failure of the water of thy cheek.”—He
said, “T am he, even with all my leanness and wither-
ing, and the squalor of my drought.”—Then I took to
chiding him for this gadding east and west.—But he.
declared the Power of God and our return to Him,
then he indited with an aching heart:


Time hath drawn his sword upon me to fright me, and hath
sharpened his blade ;

And hath stolen'away from mine eyelid its slumber, like an
adversary ; 3 and hath made its tear flow down;

And caused me to roam the world ; to go about its east, to traverse
its west :

And day after day there is for me in each valley but a single
rising and setting.

And so the exile’s figure is changed and his destination is afar.


Then he went away trailing his gait and swinging his
arms ;—And we were divided between turning to gaze
on him and hastening after him.—Then we delayed not
to loose our loops, and we went asunder like the bands
of Saba.


The following is Aba Zayd’s composition read back-
. wards: Secrets are trusted to the noble; and the


SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 205


nature of excellence consists not with boorishness; and
foulness of reputation spreads"disgrace ; and the guard-
ing against fatalities secures from ill consequences; and
the discerning of the foolish is by associating them with
the intelligent; and the proving of friends is in the
repelling of enemies; and the driving away of sorrows
is by the cheering of brethren; and the proof of re-
ligious beliefs is in the observance of virtue; and the
grace of subjects is the visiting their masters; and
sincerity of regard consists in the repaying of considera-
tion; and the necessity of exertion is in proportion to
reputation ; and the meriting of success is the fruit of
patience ; and in the duress of terrors is strength shown ;
and by looseness of policy the envoy is weakened ; and
through increase of rank do purposes differ ; and accord-
ing to the eminence of men is the magnitude of their
perils; and in poverty contention is useless; and with
courtliness comes the refinement of rule; and the first
thing in knowledge is clearness of thought; and to
defer men’s hopes is a failure in duties ; and loftiness of
authority is by the favour of Providence; and exaltation
in dignities is by rushing into dangers; and the raising
of rank raises distrusts; and the shunning of contu-
macy produces regard for rights; and forgetfulness of
services destroys courtesy ; and to overstep bounds blunts
vigour ; and to go beyond the mark is an excess of error;
and the obtaining of requests is by the interceding of
conciliation ; and the dowry of givers is the spreading
of their praiseworthy deeds; and the reward of adminis-
trators is the hatred of rulers; and the ornament of the
_ prince is largeness of breast ; and the virtue of bestowing
brings with it God’s protection ; and faith in recompense


206 EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


makes labours easy; and the hatefulness of begging is
' the price paid for. conferring; and ungrudgingness in a
gift is the cream of intention ; and sincerity in affection
makes nought of failings ; and the dwelling upon men’s
vices is the worst of faults; and the seeking after safety
is the leading-cord of prudence; and the clinging to self-
restraint keeps from desire; and evil of disposition is
the dishonour of mortals; and the weariness of souls is
the bane of love; and the witchcraft of speech is a net
to hearts; and the eloquence of the tongue is the
grace of narrative; and truthfulness of advice demands
friendship; and the bond of affection leads of needs to
courtesy ; and the habit of cheerfulness is an earnest of
nobility ; and the index of happiness is the gathering of
thanks;. and a gain of praise is the treasure of the
generous ; and the nature of the liberal is the doing of
goodness; and the perfecting of kindness is a good
deed of man.


THE EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF SINJAR.”


In this Assembly Abi Zayd is represented as gaining a splendid
present by the narrative of an alleged misfortune. We are left in
doubt whether his story be true or only one of his usual artifices to ob-
tain the bounty of his friends. In a journey from Damascus to Bagdad,
the caravan, in which are Harith and Abi Zayd, halts at Sinjar, a
city of the Diyar Rabi‘ah, which lies on the northern route between
Syria and Irak. There a merchant was giving a wedding feast, to
which, according to the hospitable custom of the East, all classes
were invited. After the more substantial viands have been consumed,
a glass vase of sweetmeats is produced, at the sight of which Aba
Zayd starts up and quits the circle of guests. On being asked the
reason of this conduct he declares that he is bound by an gath not


EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 207


to remain in the vicinity of anything that is transparent and betrays
what, is inside it. The company unwillingly send away the sweet-
meats, and Abi Zayd then tells his story, which is that, being
possessed of a beautiful and accomplished slave girl, he had revealed
the secret to a false friend, who had betrayed it to the Governor.
This officer being desirous to obtain such a paragon as a present to
his Prince, had taken the girl from him by force; on which Abi
Zayd had vowed that he would never remain in company with any
thing that could not keep a secret: and as glass has this defect ho
must decline to sit opposite to a glass vase. The host respects this
somewhat fanciful scruple, and in the end orders sweetmeats to be
brought in silver vases, and presents Abi Zayd, not only with the
contents of the vessels, but the vessels themselves. Though the
conceit on which this composition is founded is puerilé enough, the
Assembly is one of the most poetical in Hariri’s work, and a choice
_specimen of his rich and elaborate diction. Whatever merits it
may possess are, however, diminished by the circumstance that it is
a close imitation, and in parts almost a literal copy, of one by Al
Hamadini.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was once on
the return journey from Damascus, on my way to the ~
City of Peace,—With travellers of the Bent Nomayr, a
company of wealth and worth.—And with us was Abi
Zayd, of Serdj, he that is an enchainment to the hasty,
and a beguiling to the bereaved, the wonder of the time,
the pointed at with the finger for his eloquence.—Now
our halting at Sinjar fell on a time when one of the mer-
chants there was making a marriage feast:—And he
bade to his banquet the whole commonalty, both of
settled land and of desert; so that, his bidding extended
to the caravan, and he comprised in it both the important
and those of no account.—Now when we had responded
to his bidder, and arrived at his hall, he set before us
viands of one hand and two, whatever is sweet in the
mouth or fair to the eye—And after this he brought
forth a vase, which was as though it had been congealed


208 EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


of air, or condensed of sunbeam motes, or moulded of the
light of the open plain, or peeled from the white pearl:
—And it had been furnished with assortments of comfits,
and affused with a pervading perfume, and there had
been, poured into it a draught from Tesnim, and it
disclosed a fair aspect, and the fragrance of a gentle
breeze.—Now when our appetites were kindled at its
presence, and our palates were eager for the trial of
it; and it was imminent that the squadrons should be
sent forth against its train, and that we should cry at
the spoiling of it, Revenge !—Lo Aba Zayd sprang up
like a madman, and sundered from it as far as the lizard
is sundered from the fish.—Then we sought of him that
he should return, and not be as was Kodaér among
Thamid.—But he said, “By Him who raises the dead
from their sepulchres, I will not return except the vase
be taken away.—So we found no escape from humouring
him, and acquitting him of his vow.—And we bade
carry it away, and our minds were carried after it and
our tears flowed concerning it—-And when he had
returned to-his seat, and was free from guilt, we asked
him wherefore he rose, and for’ what reason he bade take
away the vase.—He said, “ Because that glass is a be- .
trayer ; and for years I have had an oath that the same
place should not hold me and one who betrays.”—We
said to him, “ What is the cause of thy strict oath and
thy binding vow ?”—He said: I had a neighbour whose
tongue cajoled, while his heart was a scorpion; whose
speech was a honeycomb to refresh, while his hidden
thought was a concentred venom:—And through his
living near me I was led to converse with him, and
by his false smiling I was deluded into consorting with


EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY. 209


him :—And the fairness of his seeming infatuated me to
companying with him, and the guile of his character
drew me on to intimacy with him.—And I associated
with him in the thought that he would be to me as
a most close neighbour; but it was made manifest that
he was a swooping eagle :—And I was familiar with him
in the belief that he was a familiar friend, but he showed
that he was a treacherous serpent.—And I ate my salt
with him, and knew not that at the testing he would be
of those whose loss is rejoiced at:—And I drank my
wine with him, and understood not that on trial he
would be of those whose departure is a delight.

Now in my house was a maiden to whom no rival could
be found in perfection.—If she unveiled, the two lights
of heaven were shamed, and each heart was burned with
the fires of love.—If she smiled, she made the beads of
silver to be despised, and pearls would be sold for what is
worthless.—If she gazed, she roused love-fancies; she
realized the witchcraft of Babylon.—If she spoke, she en-
chained the heart of the wise, and called down the wild
goats from the crags.—If she read the Koran, she
would heal the heart-sick, she would give life to one
‘buried alive; so that thou wouldest think her gifted
with the pipes. of David.—If she sang, Ma‘bad would
become as a slave to her, and to Isaac it would be
said, ‘Away! begone!’’—If she piped, Zoném would
appear an impostor beside her; although he was a leader
in his generation, one confident in his charming.—
If she danced, she dislodged the turbans from men’s
heads; she would make thee forget the dance of the
bubbles in the cups.—And possessed of her I despised
the red camels; and with the enjoyment of her I

14


210 EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


adorned the neck of my prosperity.—And I veiled her
face from the sun and moon; I excluded the mention of her
from the paths of my night-talk;—Yet withal was I
fearful lest a breeze by night might bear her fragrance,
or a Satih divine of her, or the flashing lightning betray
her.—And it came to pass, through the decay of my
minished fortune, and the malignness of my unlucky
star, that the heat of wine caused me to describe her
to my blabbing neighbour.—Then understanding re-
turned after the arrow had been shot, and I felt trouble
and vexation, knowing that the thing was lost which
was committed to such a sieve.—But yet I stipulated
with him to keep close what I had uttered, and to guard
my secret even though I should anger him.—And he
declared that he treasured secrets as the miser treasures
the denar; and that he would not rend veils of con-
fidence even were he exposed to be cast into fire.

But not more than a day or two had passed when it
occurred to the ruler of that town, and its Governor
having authority,—That he would repair to the court
of his Prince to make a new display of his horsemen,
and pray a rain from the cloud of his bounty ;—And he
wished for a present to take with him, such as should
accord with the Prince’s desire; that he might offer it in
the course of his interview.—Whereon he began to be
liberal in rewards to his scouts, and to heighten the
inducements to whoso should possess him of his wish.—
Then stooped that treacherous neighbour his flight to the
largess, and, putting on the breast-plate of infamy, re-
belled against the blame of the blamer.—And he came to
the Governor, stretching his ears, and published what I
had told him as a secret.—And I had no alarm till his de-


EIGHTEENTH cic 211


pendants rushed in to me and his servants swarmed upon

“me, urging me to prefer him with my peerless pearl,
on the condition that I should dictate to him her price.
—Then sorrow overwhelmed me as the sea overwhelmed
Pharaoh and his host.—And I ceased not to defend
her, but defence availed not; and to intercede with
him, but intercession profited not.—And as often as he
saw in me an increase of: evasion and the desire of
escape, he shouted, he burned with rage, he gnashed
upon me with his teeth..-But yet my soul consented not
to part from its full moon, nor that I should tear the
heart from my breast.—But when threatening turned to
assault, and invective to beating, the fear of death led
me to barter the black of my eye for the yellow of
coin; but the informer gained nought but guilt and
ignominy.—And since then I have had a vow to God
Most High that I would never again keep in presence of
a betrayer.—Now glass is distinguished by this base
quality; nay, its name has been made a proverb for
treachery ;—So that the tenour of my oath extends
to it, and that is the reason that my hand stretches
not forth to it.


Now, since I have explained, blame me not that ye ‘have been
hindered in the vintage of the cates ; :

For my excuse in what I have done is plain; and I will repair
the rent I have made by my resources, old or new ;

So that the pleasantry that I will supply you with shall be more
delicious than sweetmeats in the judgment of all the intelligent.

_ Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Then we accepted
his excusing, and kissed his cheek,—And said to -him,
“Long since treachery vexed the Best of Mankind, so
that there was declared concerning the woman that


carried firewood that which was declared.””—After this


a " EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY.’


we asked’ him of the, behaviour of this tell-tale. neigh-
bour, this unregandful intimate: —After he had feathered
against him the arrow of. delation, and cut the cord of
observance, —He said, He took, to submission and humil-
‘iation, anil to inforeeding with, me by people of degree.
—But Thad sttaitly charged myself that my’ familiarity
should not’ seek a ‘return to him ‘until * my yesterday
should retum to-me. —And she gained ‘nothing from: ‘me
but refusal and persistence in, aversion ; 1; yet was ‘he not
disheartened by, repulse, 1 nor shained ‘from his ‘rhpudenice
of face ; put persevered in overtures . and was urgent in °
requests ;—And nought freed me from his annoying and“
‘made hopeless t to him the gaining of his desire, save some
verses in which breathed the vengeful ‘breast. and the:
wounded spirit. —And these proved a driving forth to his
sdevjl, an imprisoning of him in his’ ‘dwelling. +And on
their publication’ he made an irrevocable ‘divorce with
joy, and cried, Alas! Perdition And despaired of the
resurrection of my buried friendship as the infidels
“despair of the tenants of the tombs.t~Then we conjured .
him to recite them, and give ys to smell their fragrance,
‘—He said, “Be it so: man-is made up of impatience.”
So’ he’ recited, and no bashfulness hindered no:
timidity / restrained him : : .


’ There was a compafiion to whom I gave the pure mules of my
love’s truth when I fancied him true and afriend;.» ,

But to whom I showed the estrangement of him that hates when
I found him to be foul as the matter of a sore or as tepid water.

I fancied him, before he was tried, a familar and dutiful; but he
has shown himself a churl, one to be censured :

I chose him as one to converse with me, but my heart is now
wounded by his wronging ;

I thought him to be a helper and compassionate, but I have dis-
covered him to be an accursed one, a devil to be driven away with
stones ;


EIGHTEENTH perme 213-


I looked upon him as one ae te me, but ‘ny testing of him
has disclosed him as a fiend perverse and vile + ee si
And I judged that he would bw a gentle ‘breeze, put he would
blow nought but'a simoom.
-From hig serpent-bite which tata the enchant t lay sounded ;
but he bad no hurt from me.’
On the morning of, one si ‘his condition was _erect, but my
body’ was sitk ;'
He ‘was not ies ‘and abutdant + ‘me’; ; nay, by Be evil-
doing he was terrible to me, aud an adversiry, ° = a
I said, when I had made trial of hin, ‘ sé ; Would ‘that he Ssisted not,
that he had not been ‘a ‘companion to me.’
_ By his betrayal he made hateful the morning ta my heart, ainee
“the morning is found to be'a’ betrayery . .
* And.he has ‘brought me to the love of the night, since as aac m
’ darkness is 4 watcher that conceals > .
And enough of guilt and blame has the informer in his work, even
“though he speak the trath. «,


Said Al Harith : “Now'when thé master ‘of. the house
heard his verse .and his - -eadence, and ‘admired hig
encomium: and his satire,—He set him on the couch of
his respect; and gave him the first place on his cushion of
honour 5—Then he bade bring ten dishes of silver, on
_ which en sweetmeats of candy and honey,—And said
. to him, “ The people of the Fire are not as the people of
the Garden ; nor is it lawful that the innocent should be .
--made as the suspected. —Now . these yessels take, rank
-among the sinless in the keeping of secréts; so show
them not aversion, nor count Hid with ‘Ad.s-Thein he
bade his servant carry them to his lodging that he might
do with them as he would—And Aba Zayd turned to
us and said, “ Reeite the Chapter of Victory, and be
gladsome at the healing of your wound ;—For now God
hath repaired your bereavement and permitted your
meal, and gathered you together to sweetmeats; and
it may be that ye mislike a thing, and yet it is your


*914 NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY.


good.” —And when he was thinking of departure he
inclined to beg the dishes as a present,—And said to the
entertainer, ‘‘Truly it is among the marks of good
breeding that he who gives aught should give the vessel
that holds it.”—Said the host, ‘ Both of them and the
boy; so speak no more, but rise in peace.’—And he
leaped up to the reply, and thanked the host as the
meadow thanks the rain-cloud—Then did Abi Zayd
lead us to his tent and give us to dispose of his sweet-
meats, and began to pass round the dishes, and to divide
their contents among the company ;—And he said: I
know not whether I should complain of that betrayer or
thank him; whether I should forget his act or remember
it—For though he was aggressive in his wrong and
tinseled his treacherous tale, yet from his cloud did
this plenteous rain pour down, and from his sword did
this spoil come in to me.—And now it is moving in my -
mind that I should return to my cubs, and be content
with what has come thus easily, and not weary myself
nor my camels.—So I will take leave of you as one that
is regardful, and commend you to the Best of Guardians.
—Then he mounted his beast to return on his track, to
bend his course. to his people—And when his strong
camel coursed along and his sociableness quitted us,
he left us as an assembly whose president is gone, or
a night whose moon has set.


THE NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF NASIBIN.”


Tn this composition Hariri displays his knowledge of the Tofayli
jargon. Among the fancies of his age it was the custom to give to —


NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY. 215


various kinds of food names compounded with qh and \, such as are
attached to a great number of animals and inanimate objects. As the
Arabs of the desert called a bird sly ys and a she-hysena pte e\ ;
and as the milky way was called ‘luuJ| @\, so the Euphuists of
the polished cities of Irak called a dish of rice by one kinyeh, or
bye-name, and a dish of meat by another. To know these seems to
have been considered a mark of good breeding; and the learned
author did not think them unworthy of a place in his work, as one
of the characteristics of the Arabic language. In the same spirit he
introduces into the 30th Assembly a number of the cant terms used
by the beggars of the time, or as they were called “the people of
Sasin.” The story of the Assembly is of the usual simplicity... Abi
Zayd is pursuing his ordinary course of life at Nasibin, in the Diyar
Rabitah, when he is taken with a serious illness, His friends, hear-
ing of it, hasten to his house in alarm, but are informed that he is
better and will receive them. They find him prostrate, but as
talkative as ever; and after he has entertained them with his con-
versation for some time he tells his son, in the enigmatical language.
of Tofayl, to bring a repast for them. They partake of it, and leave
him rejoicing in his recovery, and grateful for his hospitality.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related : Irak was barren
in a certain year through the failure of the stars that
bring the rain-cloud;—And the travellers told of the
tract of Nastbin, and the comfort of its wealthy people.
—Then I mounted a camel of Mahrah, and fixed a lance
of Samhar,—And journeyed, land sending me on to land,
and hill drawing me up from dale, uyjtil I reached it,
worn man on worn beast.—Now when I had halted in
its fertile dwelling-place, and won a portion in its
pasture, I purposed that I would lay down my neck
in it, and take its people for my neighbours,—Until the
dried year should revive, and the spring-rain visit the
land of my family—Now, by Allah, my eye-ball had
not tasted of its sleep, my night had not travailed of its
day, ere I found Abi Zayd, the Serfji, roaming the
quarters of Nasibin, now stumbling with the crazed,


216 NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY.


now winning with the fortunate—And from his mouth
was he scattering pearls, and he milked the milk-flow
with both his hands.—Then I found that my campaign
had now gathered a booty, and my single lot had become
two-fold ;—And I ceased not to follow his shadow where-
ever he sped, and to glean his utterance as often as he
spoke,—Until there came on him a sickness whose term
was prolonged, whose sharp knives bared his bone; so
that it went near to tob him of the robe of life, to give
up to Abi Yahya.—Then did I feel through the loss of ©
his presence and the interruption of his teaching, as ©
he feels that is put far from his desire, or the suckling at
the weaning.— After this it was rumoured that his
pledge was already forfeit, that the talon of death was
fixed in him.—And his comrades were disturbed at the
rumouring of the rumourers, and they’ swarmed to me
courtyard, hurrying in: «

Bewildered, their grief making them to reels as if they had been
sucking the old wine ;

They poured forth their tears, and they ‘rent their bosoms, and.
they beat their cheeks, and they wounded their heads ;

And they had been willing that fate had made a peace with him,
and had seized their possessions and themselves.

Said the narrator: Now I was of those who joined to
his comrades and hastened to his gate——And when we
had arrived at his court-yard and assayed to scent the
news of him, his boy came forth to us, his lips parted
with a smile-—And we inquired concerning the Shaykh
as regarded his complaints, and the truth of the strength
of his disorders.—He said, ‘‘ He was lately in the grasp
of the sickness and the wearing of the fever; until the
lingering disease wasted him, and the killing disease
exhausted him.—But afterward God was gracious in


NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY. 217


strengthening his last gasp, and he/recovered from his
trance.—So return on your paths and put off your dis-
quietude ;—For he is now one to go out and in, and to
pledge you in wine.”—Then we made much of his glad
’ news, and urged that we might see him ; and he entered
announcing us, then came out permitting us:—And we
found Abi Zayd a prostrate, but his tongue going freely.
—Then we took seat about his bed, gazing on his linea-
ments—And he turned his eye round the assemblage ;
then said, Look on this, the offspring of the moment:

God has saved me, thanks be to Him, from a sickness that went
near to blot me out ;

And has granted me recovery; though it must needs be that death
will one day waste me.

Death forgets me not; yet he gives me a delay before the end of
my feeding.

If it be decreed, then will no friend avail, nay, not even the —
guarded domain of Kolayb, to guard me from him.

Nor care I if*his day be near, or if death be put off for a season.

For what boast is there in life, in which I behold afflictions, nay,
they wear me out?


Said Al Harith: Then we saluted him with wishes
for the lengthening of his term and the withdrawal of his
fear ;—And invited each other to rise through fear of
annoying him.—But he said, “ Nay, but stay with me
during the light of to-day that by your pleasantry ye
may heal my sadness ;—For your conversation is the food
of my soul, the magnet of my friendliness.’—Then we
aimed at contenting him and guarded from disobeying
him; and turned to discourse, gathering its cream,
throwing away its froth ;—Until the time of the day-
sleep came on and the tongues were weary with talking.
—And it was a day hot with a fervent heat, ripening the
orchard.—So he said, ‘ Surely drowsiness is now bending


218 NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY.


. down your necks and seeking your eye-corners; and
he is a strenuous adversary, a suitor not to be repulsed.
—So make alliance with him by a day-sleep, and pattern
in this by the Traditions handed down.”—Said the nar-
rator: Then we followed what he said, and we slept and
he slept ; and God smote upon the ears, and poured out
slumber on the eyelids,—Until we passed from the
domain of Being, and by sleep were hindered from
prayer.—And we waked not until the heat was now
abated and the day was old.—Whereupon we washed
hand and foot for the two mute prayers, and performed
what loosed us of our debt.—Then we stirred for de-
parture to the place of our camel-saddles.—But Abi
Zayd turted to his cub, who was after his likeness and
_ make, and said:-I fancy that the Father of Indwelling
has now lighted a coal in their stomachs ;—So call for
the Father of Assembling, for he is glad rfews for every
hungry one :—And follow with the Father of Pleasant-
ness, him who is patient at every wrong;—Then re-
inforce by the Father of Lovingness, the loved of every
one that is wise; him that is turned about between
burning and torment ;—And on! with the Father of
Acuteness, for excellent is he as a companion ;—And
ho! with the Father of Help, for there ‘is no attendant
like him ;—And if thou bring on the Father of Comeli-
ness, how comely will he make his comeliness ;—And
haste with the Mother of Hospitality, her who may
remind thee of Chosroes ;—And forget not the Mother of
Strengthening, for how many are those who tell of her;
—And call to the Mother of Joyfulness; then assault
her; it is no crime;—And end with the Father’ of
Dignity, the consoler of every sorrowful one ;—And if


NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY. 219


thou join with him the Father of Loftiness thou will blot
out thy name from among tke niggardly.—And beware of
summoning the Two Rumourers before the rising of the
camels of departure.—And when the company have
ceased from their hand-washing, and have handled the
Father of Softness—Then carry round to them the
Father of Generosity, for he is the sign of the generous.

Said Al Harith: Then his son understood the deli-
cacies of his hinting by the subtlety of his discernment. '
—And he went round among us with viands and’ per-
fume, until the sun gave notice of the setting—Now
when we. had resolved on departure, we said to him,
“Seest thou not this marvellous day, how its morn
showed gloomy, but its even is brilliant?”—And he
prostrated himself long in prayer; then raised his head
and said :


Despair not in calamities of a gladdening that shall wipe away
thy sorrows ;

For how many a simoom blows, then turns to a gentle breeze and
is changed !

How many a hateful cloud arises, then passes away and pours
not forth !

And the smoke of the wood, fear is conceived of it, yet no blaze
appears from it ;

And oft sorrow rises, and straightway sets again.

So be patient when fear assails, for time is the father of wondars ;

And hope from the peace of God blessings not to be reckoned.


Said Al Harith: Then we noted down his excellent
verses and kept giving thanks to God Most High: and


we took leave of him, glad at his recovery, overwhelmed
by his bounty.


220 " {TWENTIETH ASSEMBLY.


THE TWENTIETH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
' «OF MAYYAFARIKIN.”


In ithig Assembly Abi Zayd laments the decay of his strength,
and his advaricing age, under the semblance of a mighty and valiant
hero, to provide a shroud for whom he asks the bounty of the
company.


-


Al Harith, sop of Hammam, related: I was making
towards Mayyafarikin with a company of the well suited,
men who disputed not in familiar talk, who knew not
the taste of dissembled hatred.—And with them I was
as one who quits not his abode, who travels not from his
friend and neighbour ;—And. when we had brought to
their knees the camels of journeying, and had passed
from our saddles to our nests, we commanded each
other to bear in mind companionship, and we forbade
separation in a strange land.—And we took a chamber
that we might frequent it at the two ends of day and
present each other with the choice of the news.—Now
while we were there on a certain day, and had strung
ourselves on the thread of uhion,—Lo! there stood by
us one with a bold tongue and a loud voice ;—And he
gueeted with the greeting of a wizard who blows on
knots; of one who hunts all, from the lion to the sheep.
—Then he said:


Habeo, amici, miram narrationem, 4 qua exemplum sibi sumat
auditor peritus et intelligens.

Vidi in flore etatis mex juvenem fortissimum, cui gladii erat acies
penetrantis : ‘ ‘

In certamen irruit perinde ac si certus esset aliqud audendi, et
non pertimuit.

His preliis usque eo angustias dilatavit ut id quod obstructum
fuerat pateret.


TWENTIETH ASSEMBLY. 221


Ubi provocavit adversarios nunquam redift 3 & pugnss contentione
sine spiculo sanguine imbuto :

Nec unquam instituit arcem oppugnare arduam, occlusam, formi-
dabilem, timendam,

Quin clamatum sit, chm id instituisset : Victoria & coslo et presi-
dium appropinqguat.

’ Preeterea, quot noctes egit vestibus adolescentis tectus nitidis ;

Molles puelle et dabant ei et receperunt ab eo oScula; et ille
ubique gratus fuit et jucundus.

Sed tempus non desiit fortitudinem illius et vires eripere ;

Donec anni ita eum afflixerint ut ab illo conjunctissimi amici dece-
derent. .

Debilis fuit magus, nec morbum ejus sanare potuit, et tumultuatus
fuit medicus :

Ita ut discesserit & candidis puellis, et discesserint ab eo, postea
quam et ab eis responsum accepisset, eisque respondisset.

Evasitque incurvus form4, nam quicunque vivit miseriis  Senectutis
est obnoxius.

Ecce illum hodié veste funebri involutum! Et quis mortui pere-
grini curat reliquias.*

Then he broke openly into wailing, and wept with the
weeping of the lover over his beloved.—And when his
tear was stanched and his passion cooled, he said, O ye,
who are as a pasture to the forage-scouts,. an example to
the generous ; by Allah, I have not spoken with false-
hood, I have not told you save from behoiding.—Now if
there were a thong to my staff, or a thin shower to my
cloud, I would myself have done that to which I call
you; I would not stand as one who directs to it.—But
how can there be flying without a wing, or is it a crime
on one that he is poor?

Said the narrator: Then began the company to con-
sult of what they should advise, and to whisper of what
they should do;—And he suspected that they were in
purpose to dismiss him with refusal, or to importune him


1 The above translation is that of Sir William Jones, with some
slight alterations.


222 TWENTIETH ASSEMBLY.


for proofi—And it escaped him to say, O mirages of
the plain, white shingle of the hollow! What is this
taking of thought which shame revolts at?—It is as
though ye were tasked with a heavy labour, not with a
rag; or had been asked the gift of a province, not of
a mantle; or had been urged to the clothing of the
Ka‘beh, not to the shrouding of a corpse.—Fie on him
whose rock is not moist, whose gravel oozes not !

Now when the company had perceived his glibness
and the saltness of his savour, each one made him whole
by a gift, and bore with his light rain through fear of
his flood.—Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Now this
beggar was standing behind me, hidden by my back
from my eye.—But when the company had contented
him by their out-pouring, and it was incumbent on me
to take example by them, I drew the ring from my
little finger and turned to him my gaze,—And lo! he
was our Shaykh, the Serdji, without deception, without
dispute.-—Then I was sure it was a lying tale he had
lied, and a net that he had laid.—But not the less
did I fold his cloth over its rent and keep his splayness
of tooth from inspection,—And threw him the ring,
and said, “Use it for the cost of the mourning as-
sembly.”—He said, ‘‘ Well done! how burns thy flame!
how noble is thy deed!’—Then he went off, running
straight forward and trotting his trot as of old—But
I longed for a knowledge of his dead man, and to
examine his pretence to pious duty ;—So I struck my
leg and kindled the ardour of my running, until I
reached him a bow-shot off, and beheld him clearly
in an empty place.—Then I caught him by the joining
of his sleeves and stopped him from the career of his


“TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY. 223


race-course,—And said to him, “ By Allah, thou hast
no refuge from me, and no escape, until thou show me thy
shrouded corpse.—Whereupon he pointed to himself;
and I said, “ God fight against thee; how playful art thou
in craft, how wily after the grist!”—Then I returned
to my companions as returns the scout who lies not
to his people, who embellishes not his speech.—And I
told them what I had seen; I disguised not, nor did
I dissemble—And they parse into laughter at the
' matter, and cursed that dead man.


THE TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY, oe
“OF RAYY.”


Al Hirith, being at Rayy, in Persia, finds the people flocking
to hear a preacher of great eloquence and sanctity, and following
them to the place of assembling, listens to a discourse from an
aged man in ecclesiastical costume. When the sermon is over, a
suppliant, who cannot prevail on the Governor to listen to his
complaint against an official who had wronged him, calls upon
the preacher to aid him by his admonitions, on which the preacher
at once indites another discourse in reproof of the Governor. The
latter is moved to repentance, hastens to do justice, rewards the
preacher, and solicits acquaintance with him. The preacher, who
is no other than Aba Zayd, goes off rejoicing in the success
of his day’s work, having previously given Harith some moral
counsel.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: Ever since I
perfected my forethought and knew right from wrong,
I gave care to incline to admonishings and eschew
angering words,—That I might be adorned with graces
of disposition, and be free from what brands with
shamelessness ;—-And I ceased not to keep myself to
this discipline, and to allay by it the coals of wrath,


224 IWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


until habituation in it became nature, and application.
to it a desire willingly obeyed.—Now when I de-
scended at Rayy (and I had now loosed the loops of
error, and knew good from evil), I saw there one
morning crowd on the track of crowd ;—And they
were spreading with the spread of feos, and running
with the running of steeds,—And describing one to
another a preacher to whom they were tending, and
they set Ibn Sam‘in below him.—Then it hindered
me not from hearkening to the preachings, and making
trial of the preacher, that I must endure the clamorous
and bear the pushing;—So I followed as follow the
obedient, and slipped into the thread of the throng,—
Until we came to a meeting-place, which had united
the ruler and the ruled, and gathered the eminent and
the obscure ;—And in the midst of its halo, and among
its full moons, was an old man, bowed and with a
breast-hunch, and he wore the cap and the cloak ;—
And he was breaking forth into a sermon to heal breasts
and to soften rocks; and [ heard him say, and men’s
minds were oharined b

Son of man, how thou ak to that which deceives
thee, and clingest to that which harms thee!—How
thou art given to that which seduces thee; how thou
art gladdened at him who flatters thee !—Thou art
troubled about that which wearies thee, but art careless
of that which concerns thee.—Thou drawest wide the
bow of thy transgression; thou robest thyself with
covetousness which will destroy thee !—Thou art not
content with what is enough; thou abstainest not from
the forbidden !—Thou hearkenest not to admonishings ;
thou art not deterred by threatening !—It is thy habit


TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY. 225


to veer with desires; thou stumblest, with the stumbling
of the purblind beast!—It is thy care to labour in
making gain, and to gather an inheritance for thine heirs !
~—It pleases thee to increase what belongs to thee, but
thou rememberest not what is before thee !—Thou art
ever intent on thy two caves; thou carest not whether
the account shall be in thy favour or against thee !—
Dost thou think that thou shalt be left at large, or
that thou shalt not be reckoned with to-morrow ?—Or.
dost thou count that Death will take bribes; that he
will distinguish between the lion and the fawn ?—No,
by Allah, nor wealth nor children shall ward off death;
and nought profits the people of the tombs save the
accepted work.—Then blessing to him who hears and
retains and makes good what he claims; and with-
holds his soul from desire, and knows that he who
turns from evil is a gainer;—Axgd that man shall have
nought save his own work; and that this work surely
it shall be shown.—Then he recited as one who is
fearful, but with a high-pitched voice :


By thy life! mansions and wealth will not avail when the rich
man dwells in the ground and abides in it; -

So be liberal with thy wealth in things pleasing to God, content
with what thou gainest of His hire and reward ;

And anticipate by it the change of Time, for he seizes with his
crooked talon and his tooth ;

And trust not treacherous fortune and its deceit, for how many a
lowly one has it marred, how many a noble!

But resist the desire of the soul, which no erring one ever obeyed
but he fell from his high places.

And keep to the fear of God, and the dread of Him, that thou
mayest escape from his punishment which is to be feared.

Neglect not to call to mind thy sin, but weep for it with tears
that shall be like the rain-flood at its pouring ;
* And figure to thy mind Death and his stroke, and the terror of
his meeting, and the taste of his wormwood cup ! :

16


226 TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


For the end of the dwelling of the living is a pit, to which he
shall descend, brought down from his towers.

Then well-done! the servant whom the evil of his deed grieves,
and who shows amendment before the shutting of his gate.


Said Al Harith: Then the assembly remained amid
tears that they shed, and repentance that they showed ;
until the sun declined, and the day’s duties pressed
upon us.—Now when the voices were low, and silence
had gathered, and the tears and the preachings had gone
to rest,—One crying for help cried to the Prince who
was present, and began to wail to him of his tyrannous
agent.—-But the Prince leaned to the adversary,
and was careless of discovering his wrong.—And. when
the suppliant despaired of redress from him, he called up
the preacher to admonish him ;—Who rose as rises the’
prompt, and recited, referring to the Prince :


Wonderful! a man hoping to attain to rule; and then when
he attains to his desjre he wrongs ;

He weaves warp and woof in tyrannies; now Japping at their
well, now bidding others to lap.

Nor cares he, when he is following his desires in them, whether he
maintains his religion or destroys it:

“Oh woe to him! if he knew well that there is no state but
changes, surely he would not transgress;

Or if he saw clearly what is the repentance of him who inclines
his hearing to the lie of informers, he would not incline it.

But obey thou him in whose hand is the leading-cord; cast down
thine eye if he neglect observance or speak vainly :

And graze on bitter pasture when he calls thee to the grazing on
it, and water at the salt well when he forbids thee the sweet.

And bear his injury even though its touch afflicts thee, and pours
out the flow of thy tears, nay exhausts it ;

For fortune shall give thee the laugh of him when it departs from
him, and kindles for the ambush against him the fire of war. *

And it shall bring down on him exultation, when he appears
vacant of his office, emptied of it ;

And thou shalt be pitiful to him when his cheek lies soiled on thee
dust of shame.


TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY. 227


This is his fate: and then surely he shall pne day stand in the
place where even the master of eloquence shall be found a lisper:

And he shall be gathered to judgment viler than the toad-stool of
the plain; he shall be reckoned with for his shortcoming and
excess :

And he shall be chastised for that which he has committed,
and for him whom he has chosen ; he shall be demanded of for what
he sipped and what he supped.

And he shall be reckoned exactly with concerning small things,
as he was wont to do with mankind, but more thoroughly.

So that he shall bite his hand at his governing, and wish that he
had not, sought from it what he sought.


Then he said: O thou who art belted with authority,
and trained to rule!—Put away wantonness ‘at thy
dominion, and vain trusting in thy might :—For domi-
nion is a breeze that changes and power is a lightning
that deceives.—And truly the happiest of rulers is he
whose people are happy in him, and the most wretched
in both worlds is he whose ruling is' ill.—Then be thou
not as one who neglects the life to come and disregards
it, who loves the fleeting life and seeks it, who wrongs
the people and afflicts them, and who, when he bears rule,
walks in the earth to do violence in it.—For, by Allah,
the Judge shall not be unregarding; thou shalt not be
left at large, O man: but the balance shall be set for
thee, and as thou rewardest thou shalt be rewarded.—
Said Al Harith: Then the Governor was sullen at what
he heard, and his colour changed and changed :—And he
began to groan concerning his rule, and to follow sigh
with sigh.—Then he attended to the complainer, and rid
him of his complaint, and to him that was complained
of, and rebuked him.—And he was courteous to the
preacher, and gave him gifts, and urged him to visit him.
—And the wronged man departed victorious, and the
wronger checked.—Then the preacher went forth swag-

4


228 TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


gering among. his comrades, glorying in the success of .
his bargain,—But I followed him up, and stepped
crouching, and showed him a sharp glance.—And when
he discerned what I hid from him, and was aware
of the turning of my face to him, he said, “The better
of two guides ig he who leads aright.”—Then he came
near me, and recited :


I am he whom thou knowest, Harith,
The talker with kings, the wit, the intimate.
I charm as charm not the triple-twisted strings,
At times a brother of earnest, at times a jester.
* Events have not changed me since I met thee,
Nor has vexing calamity peeled my branch ;

. Nor has any splitting edge cloven my tooth ;
But my claw is fixed in every prey :
On each herd that roams my wolf is ravaging ;

_ So that it is as though I were the heir of all mankind,
Their Shem, their Ham, and their Japhet.

Said Al Harith, son of Hammam: Then I said, “ By
Allah, now tho art surely Abi Zayd; yet thou hast
been godly beyond ‘Amr Ibn ‘Obayd.”—Then. he was
cheerful with the cheerfulness of the hospitable when he
is visited, and said; Listen, my brother:

Keep to truth, although it scorch thee with the fire of threatening :

And seek to please God; for the. most foolish of mankind is he
who angers the master and pleases the slave.


Then he took leave of his fellows and departed,
trailing his sleeves.—And we searched for him after-
wards in Rayy, and sought to get news of him by the
rolls of folding.—But there was none of us who knew of
his abode, or could learn what locust had gone off with
him.


TWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY. 229


THE TWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“QF THE EUPHRATES.” ;


Al Harith, accompanied by some official writers, is in a boat
on the Euphrates; the party being engaged in an inspection of
the land for the purpose of fixing the taxation. They meet with
@ person in shabby garb, whom they treat with much lack of
courtesy; until the conversation falling on the comparative merits
of secretaries and accountants, the stranger, who is Abi Zayd,
shows his eloquence by a rhetorical address on the subject. They
then seek to conciliate him; but he quits them in anger, after ‘re-
citing some verses on the folly and injustice of judging by
appearances. This difficult Assembly exhibits a species of composi-
tion much in favour among the Arabs, in which the poet or orator
first praises and then blames, or first exalts the one of two rivals
and then the other. Compare the Third Assembly, in which a gold
denar is thus treated; and the addresses of Sheddad and Sahil ibn
Hardin, on gold and glass, Ar. Prov. II. p. 780. The speech of
Abi Zayd on the two orders of scribes is, throughout, an elaborate |
display of paronomasia.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I betook my-
self, during a time of quiet, to the water-lands of the
Euphrates ;—And there I met with scribes, more ex-
cellent than the sons of Al Furat, more pleasant in
manners than the sweet waters.—And I joined myself
to them for their culture; not for their gold, and I com-
panied with them for their scholarship, not for their ban-
quets.—And among them I sat with equals of Al Kaka’,
son of Showr, and with them I attained to plenty after
want.—Until they made me sharer in food and dwelling, -
and set me above themselves, as the finger-top is above
the finger :—And they took me as the son of their in-
timacy in time of office and of leisure, and the treasurer
of their secret in earnest and jest.—Now it happened on


a certain time that they were called to visit in their


230 TWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


order the corn lands of the villages:—Then they chose
of the lofty-sailed boats one black, of unmixed hue :—
Thou wouldst think it immovable, yet it fleeted as fleet
the clouds and glided on the deep as a serpent.—Then
they called me to consenting, and invited me to com-
panying.—And when we had mounted our sable beast,
and set ourselves in our cushion-saddle that moved
on the water,—We found there an old man, on whom
was a thread-bare coat and a worn turban.—Then the
company loathed his presence, and found fault with
whoever had brought him ; and would have purposed to
put him forth of the ship, but that their calmness re-
turned to them.—And when he spied that we deemed
his shadow to be heavy, and his shower cold, he assayed
to converse, but was silenced, and he praised God after
sneezing, but no one blessed him.—Then was he speech-
less, looking at the pass he had reached, and waiting for
the help which comes to the wronged.—And we, we’
roamed through the bye-paths of the serious and the
gay ;—Until there occurred a mention of the two kinds
of official writing, and their excellence, and a distin-
guishing of the more excellent.—And one said that the
scribes of Composition were the noblest of scribes, while
another leaned to the preferring of Accountants :—And
the arguing grew sharp, and the dispute grew. long.—
Until, when there remained no longer an arena for the
contention, or a field for the debate,—Said the old man:
My friends, ye have made much clamour, and adduced
the true and the mistaken.—But the clear decision rests
with me, so be content with my coin, and consult no one
after me.—Know that the art of Composition is the more
lofty, though the art of Account may be the more useful.


TWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY. 231


—The pen of correspondence is a chojce orator, but the
pen of account-keeping picks up phrases carelessly :—
And the fablings of eloquence are copied to be studied,
but the ledgers of accounts are soon blotted out and
razed.—And the Composer is the Johayneh for inform-
ation, and the post-bag of secrets, and the confidant of
the mighty, and great among guests.—And his pen
is the tongue of sovereignty, and the knight of the
skirmish; a Lokman of wisdom, and the interpreter of
purpose: it carries glad news, and it warns, it is the
intercessor and the envoy.—By it fortresses are won, and
foes are vanquished, and the rebel is made obedient, and
the distant is brought near ;—And its master is free
from suits, secure from the malice of accusers, praised
in the assemblies, not exposed to the Sng up of
registers.

Now when, in his judgment, he had arrived at this
point, he saw from the glances of the company that
he had sowed love and hatred, that he had pleased a part
and angered a part.—So he followed up his discourse by
saying: Not but that the art of Account is based on
verification, and the art of Composing is founded on
fabrication.—For the pen of the Accountant holds ‘firm,
but the pen of the Composer stumbles:—And between
taking tribute by the impost on transactions and the
reading of the leaves of volumes, is a difference to which
comparison cannot apply, into which doubt cannot enter :
—For tribute fills purses, but reading empties the head ;
and the tax of the ‘memorandum-book enriches the over-
seer, but the interpretation of rolls wearies the eye.-—
And then also the Accountants are the guardians of
wealth, the bearers of burdens, the truthful relators, the


e


232 IWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


trustworthy envoys, the guides in doing justice and
obtaining it, the sufficing witnesses in breach of contract.
—And of their number is the Minister of Finance, who
is the Hand of the Prince, the Pivot of the Council, the
Balance of business, the overseer of the agents—To
him is the reference in peace and war; on him is the
management in revenue and expenditure; by him hang
evil and advantage; in his hand is the rein of giving
and denying.—And were it not for the pen of Ac-
countants the fruit of earning would perish, and fraud
would endure to the Day of Judgment; the order of ©
transactions would be loosened; the wound of wrongs
would be unavenged; the neck of just-dealing would
be fettered ; the sword of wrong-dealing would be
drawn.—Moreover, the pen of composition fables, but
the pen of accounting interprets; the Accountant is a
close scrutinizer; the Composer is an Abd Barakish ;
—yYet each, when he rises high, has his venom until
he be met and charmed; and in what each produces
there is vexing until he be visited and bribed; save
those that believe and work Tease how
few are they! eee

Said Al Harith, son of Hammam : :. “Now when he
had thus supplied our, hearings with ‘what was. pure
and good, we asked him of his lineage; but he. was
suspicious, and shrank from telling it ; and if he had
found a place of escaping he would’ Lave escaped,—
Then from his secrecy was I in sortow; but aftet-a
time I recollected him,—And I said, “Now by ‘Him
who controls the rolling heaven and the voyaging ships,
surely I catch the breeze of Abi ‘Zayd, though once
I knew him lord of comeliness and vigour.”—And he


PWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY. 283


smiled, laughing at my speech, and said, “I am he,

though with a change in state and strength.”—Where-
upon I said to my companions, “This is he, after
whosé fashioning none can fashion, whose sprite is not
to be vied with.’—Then they courted his friendship,
and offered him wealth ; but he declined from intimacy,
and leaned not to the gift—And he said, “Since ye
have hurt my honour on account of my worn garment,
atid cast a shadow on my soul for the threadbareness of
my coat,—I will look upon you only with a heated
eye; ye shall have from me only a ship’s companion:
ship.—Then he recited:


Hear, my brother, commandment from a counsellor who mingles
not the purity of his counsel with deceit:

Hasten not with a decisive judgment in the praise of him whom
thou hast not tried, nor in the rebuke of him ;

But stay thy judgment on him until thou hast had a view of his
two characters in his two conditions of content and anger ;

And until his deceiving flash be distinguished from his truthful
one by those who watch it, and his flood from his light rain ;

And then if thou perceive what dishonours him, hide it gene-
rously ; but if thou see what becomes him, publish it:

And whoso deserves to he exalted, exalt him; and whoso
deserves abasement, abase him to the sewer.

Know.that™ the‘pure gold in the vein of the earth is hidden until
it is brought;out.by the digging : i oe

And ‘the -warth' of, ‘the denax, its secret appears by scratching it,
‘and not from the beauty of the graving.

It is folly that thou shouldat magnify the ignorant by reason of
the brightness of his'dress or the splendour of his adorning ; ;

Or that thou showldst make little of the man who is refined in
soul on account of thethreadbareness of his ‘farb, or the shabbiness
bs his furniture. ,

’ For how many an owner of two torn mantles is reverenced for
‘bis worth, and he that*is striped in his garments has ill-fame
through his baseness. «# .

+ For, when a man approaches not to ‘infamy, then are his rags only
the steps to his throne.


234 TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


It hurts not the sword that its sheath be wom, nor the hawk that
its nest be mean.


Then he delayed not to bid the sailors stop, and he’
ascended from the boat and made off.—But each of us
repented in that he had been incautious towards him,
and ‘drooped his eyelid over his mote,—And we vowed
that we would never slight a man for the raggedness
of his garment; that we would not despise the sword
while hidden in the sheath.


THE TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF THE PRECINCT.” —


In this Assembly Abi Zayd is represented as showing his skill in
artificial composition. He carries his son before the Governor or
criminal judge of Bagdad, and accuses him of theft, in having stolen
two-thirds of a copy of verses. The boy had, he said, taken two-
thirds of each of several verses, and thus made a poem of his own.
The Governor asks how this can be, and bids him repeat both poems,
when it appears that Aba Zayd had constructed a poem with a
double rhyme, one rhyme at the end of the verse, and one at the end
of the fourth foot, so that by striking off the last two feet of each
verse a new poem could be formed. The boy, however, declares
that he had not taken his father’s verses, and that the coincidence
was merely fortuitous. The Governor then, to test this, bids them
repeat alternate verses on a subject which he should give them; if
the boy could extemporize as well as his father, it would be evident
that his defence was a just one. This serves to introduce a most
elaborate set of verses, full of paronomasia on the subject of a cruel
and disdainful beauty. The Governor then bids them be reconciled ;
and on the old man pleading -poverty as a reason for refusing to
support his son, the Governor relieves their necessities. He soon dis-
covers that he has been duped, and binds Harith, who, as usual, had
witnessed the incident, to profound secrecy.


Al Harith, son of Hamman, related :—My wonted
home was irksome to me in the prime of my time,


TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY. 235


through a dreaded calamity, through a fear that came
upon me :—And I poured out the cup of drowsiness, and
put to their pace the camels of the night-march.—And I
traversed in my journey rough places which no steps had _
smoothed, to which the Kata would not find its way ;—
Until I came to the domain of the Khalifate, and, the
sanctuary which guards from fear.—Then I put off
the sense of dread and its conception, and robed myself
in the raiment of security and its vest ;—And limited
my care to the culling of delight, and the looking upon
pleasure.—Now I went forth one day to the Precinct
to exercise my good steed, and to circle my eye among
its beauties—And behold! horsemen who followed each
other, and men on foot who swarmed :—And eke an old
man long of tongue but short of cloak, who held by the
collar a lad fresh in youth but worn of tunic—So I
spurred on the track of the spectators until we arrived
at the gate of the Prefecture—And there was the
Master of Protection sitting squarely on his cushion,
awing by his deportment.—Then said the old man to
him: “God magnify the Governory and set his foot on
high !—Know that I bred this youth from a weanling,
and brought him up from an orphan ; and then failed not
in instructing him.—But when he now was, shrewd and
strong, he bared and brandished’the sword of enmity.—,
Though I imagined not that he would be perverse to me,
and insolent, since by me was he watered and made
fruitful.”—Said the lad to him: “On what offence
of mine hast thou hit, ‘that thou publishest this foul
thing of me ?—For, by Allah, T have not covered the face
of thy kindness ; I have not rent the veil of thy secret ;
I have not broken the staff of thy estate; I have not


disregarded the rehearsing of thanks to thee,”—Then


236 TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


1


said to him the old man, “ Woe to thee, what guilt
is fouler than thine, what vice more base than thy vice ?
—For thou hast claimed my magic and appropriated it ;
thou hast arrogated my poetry and stolen it.—Now
amoug poets the stealing of poetry is more shameful
than the stealing of the white and yellow; and their


" jealousy over the daughters of their wits is as their


jealousy over virgin daughters.”

Said the Governor to the old man, ‘ When he stole,
did he flay, or transform, or copy ?’—Said he, “ Now by
Him who made poetry the register of the Arabs and
the interpreter of scholarship, he did nought less than
dock the completeness of its exposition, and make foray
on two, thirds of its flock.” Said the Governor, “ Re-
cite the verses altogether, that it may appear what he
took from the sum of them.”—Then he recited :


O thou who courtest the base world, know that it is a net of
destruction, a pool of impurities ;

A habitation which, when it makes thee laugh to-day, makes thee
weep to-morrow: away with such a habitation !

When its clouds overshadow no thirst is refreshed by them ; for
they are a dry cloud that deceives.

Its forays cease not, nor is its prisoner ransomed even by the .
mightiest of stakes.

Towards how many a one made wanton by false confidence in it,
until he has shown himself contumacious, one overstepping his
power, ,

Has it turned the back of the shield, and made its blades to lap of
his blood, and leaped to the taking of revenge !

So keep guard on thy life, lest it pass away lost in the world,
left astray without any protection. ,

And cut the bonds of thy love for the world and thy seeking
of it; so shalt thou find right guidance and comfort of the inner
parts. aa

And when it makes a truce from its stratagem, be thou on thy


TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY. 237


watch against the warring of enemies, and th assault of the
treacherous : |

And know that its calamities come suddenly, even though the goal
be far, and the journeys of the fates be tardy.


Then said the Governor: “And now what did this
lad ?”Said the old man, “ Of his meanness in recom-
pensing he made an attack on my six-feet verses, and
cut off two feet, and diminished from their measures two
measures, so that the loss in them is a double loss.”—
Said the Governor, “‘Shew what he took and whence he
cut.”—He said, “‘ Let thy hearing feed of me; give thy
heart to understand me ;—That thou mayest perceive
well how he drew the sword upon me; that thou mayest
estimate the greatness of his transgression towards me.”
Then he recited, and his sighs ascended :

O thou who courtest the base world, know that it is a net of
destruction ;

A habitation which, when it kee thee laugh to-day, makes thee
weep to-morrow;

When its clouds overshadow no thirst is refreshed by them.

Its forays cease not, nor is its prisoner ransomed.

‘Towards how many & one made wanton by false confidence in it,
until he has shown himself contumacious,

Has it turned the back of the shield, and made its blades to lap of
his blood!

So keep guard on thy life lest it pass away, lost in the world, left
astray ;

And cut the bonds of thy love for the world, and thy seeking of
it, so shalt thou find right guidance.

And when it makes a truce from its stratagem, be thou on thy
watch against the warring of enemies:


And know that its calamities come suddenly even though the goal
be far.


Then turned the Governor to the boy and said, “ Per-
dition on thee for a rebellious disciple and, a thieving
pupil!”—But the lad said, “‘ May I remain aloof from
scholarship and its sons! may I be joined to whoever


238 TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


is adverse to it, and breaks down its edifices! if ever
‘his verses came to my knowledge before I connected
my own chaplet,—For it is only that our thoughts
have chanced to draw at the.same source as the hoof
oft falls on the hoof-print.”

Said Al Harith: Now it was as though the Governor
allowed the truth of his assertion and repented of the
hastiness of his blaming—And he kept thinking on
what means would disclose to him the truth, and how
he might distinguish the genius from the fool ;—And
he saw no way but to set them to a contest, and to
bind them together with the cord of rivalry.—So he
said to them, “If ye wish for the exposure of him

"that lacks, and for the manifesting of the true from
the false, do ye now alternate in versifying and con-
tend, wheel in the race of verse-completing and run
together :—-That through clear proof he who perishes
may perish, he who lives may live.”—-They said to
him with one tongue and an agreeing answer, “‘ We
are content with thy testing, so give us thy command.”
—He said, “Of all the kinds of eloquence I am fondest
of tejnis, atid I look upon it as the ‘chief of them.—
So string now ten verses, weaving them with its colour-
ing, broidering them with its ornament ;—And put in
them the tale of my condition in respect to a mistress
of mine, who is rare of form, dark red of lip, graceful
in undulation, but full of pride and fault-finding, given
to feign forgetfulness of agreement, and to prolong
denial, and to break promise, while I am as her slave.”
—Then started forth the old man as the winning steed,
while the youth followed him like the second in the
course.— And they raced together verse by verse in


TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY. 239


this order, until the series of verses was perfected and


made up:

Old Man. There is a ruddy-lipped one who has compassed my
enslaving by the delicacy of her utterance, and left me the com-
panion of sleeplessness through her perfidy.

Youth. She has assayed to slay me by her aversion: truly I
am in her bond, since she has gotten my heart altogether.

Old Man. I give faith to her falsehood for fear of her turning
from me; I am. content to listen to her folly through dread that
she should fly me.

Youth. I deem her tormenting to be sweet; and as often as she
renews my torment the love of being pindly to her is renewed
in me.

Old Man. She is forgetful of duty, and és forget is a fault; she
angers my heart—the heart which guards her secret.

Youth. What is most wonderful in her is the glorying of her
vanity ; ‘yet do I make too much of her for me to speak to her
of her pride. ,

Old Man. From me she has praise sweet of fragrance; but my
lot from her is a folding up of love after its out-spreading..

Youth. Oh! if she were just she would not be fault-finding ; but
* she wrongs me; another, and not I, gathers the dew of her mouth.

Old Man. Were it not for -her graceful motion J would turn my
rein in haste to another, the light of whose full moon I: might
look upon.

Youth. But notwithstanding the discordance between her and me,
T hold the bitter as sweet through my docility to her command.


Now when in alternation they had recited these
verses to the Governor, he was amazed at the wit of
two so justly balanced,—And said, “TI testify before
God that ye are the Farkadan of heaven, and like a pair
of fire-staves in their case-——Now surely this youth,
he spends of what God has given him; through his
own wealth he is.independent of another.—So, old man,
repent of thy suspicion of him, and turn again to
honouring him.”—Said the old man, “Far be it that
my love should return to him, or my confidence cleave
to him ;—For I have proved his ingratitude for kind-


240 IWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


ness; I have been tried by him with shameful revolt.” .
—But the lad interrupted him and said, “O friend,
know that contention is ill luck, and spite meanness ;
to hold suspicion as truth is a sin; to vex the innocent
is a wrong.—And granted that I have. committed an
offence and wrought a crime, rememberest thou not
what thou didst thyself recite to me in the season of
thy familiarity ?

Pardon thy brother when he mingles his right aiming with error ;

And shrink from rebuking him if he swerve or decline ;

Keep to thy kind dealing towards him whether he thank the
kindness or slight it:

Be thou obedient when he revolts; be thou lowly when he magni-
fies himself; draw near to him when he goes from thee:

Keep faith with him even though he fail in what thou and he
have stipulated ;

And know that if thou seek a perfect man thou desirest beyond
bounds.

Who is there who has never done ill? Who is there whose deed
is always fair ?

Dost thou not see the loved and the bated linked together in one
class,

As the thorn comes forth on the branches with the fruit that is
gathered.

And the delight of long life, lo! there —— with it the trouble
of hoariness.

If thou examine well the sons of the time divx wilt find the most
of them but refuse.


Then began the old man to dart his tongue as darts
the serpent, and to gaze with the gazing of the towering
hawk.—And he said, “ By Him who hath adorned. the
heaven with its fires, and sent down the water from the
clouds, truly my declining from reconciliation is but
from fear of ignominy.—For this lad was accustomed
that I should victual him, and have regard to his affairs.
—And erewhile fortune poured plenteously, and I was
not a niggard.—But as for now, the time is frowning,


TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY. 241


the contents of life are misery: so that this my garb is
a loan, and my house not a mouse approaches it.”—
Then the heart of the Governor grew tender at their
speech, and he was pitiful to them because of the
changes of their nights.—And he inclined to distinguish
them by his help, and he bade the lookers-on to with-
draw.—Said the narrator: Now I had been gazing at
the face of the old man, that perchance I might get
a knowledge of him when I should spy his features.—
But the crowding would not discover him, nor open -
to me that I might approach him.—But when the rows
were broken, and the bystanders sped off, I marked
him, and behold he was Abdi Zayd, and the lad was
his lad, and I knew then his purpose in what he had
done.—And I was near swooping down on him, to make
myself known to him, but he threw me off with a glance
of his eye, and stopped me witha sign of his hand.—S8o
I kept my place, and delayed my departing: and the
Governor said, “‘ What is thy wish, and wherefore is thy
staying ?’—Quickly the old man took him up, and said,
“He is my friend, the owner of my clothes.”—Then the
Governor was pleased to be friendly with me, and per-
mitted me to take seat.—And he made largess to them
of two robes of honour and presented them with a sum
in coin.—And stipulated. with them that they should
live together in kindness until the coming on of the Day
of Fear.—Then they rose up from his hall, lifting their
voices in thanks for his benefits—But I followed them
that I might know their abode, that I might supply
myself of their talk.—And when we had traversed the
domain of the Governor, and had come to the empty
plain, one of his guards overtook me, recalling me to his
16


249 TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


court.—So I said to Abd Zayd, “I think he does not
send for me save that he may question me: now what
shall I say, and in what valley shall I roam with him ?”
—He said, “‘ Shew him the folly of his heart, and how I
have Played with his understanding, that he may know
that his breeze, has met with a whirlwind, that his
streamlet has encountered the deep.”—I said, “I fear
that his anger will be kindled, and so his blaze scorch
thee ; or that his caprice will quicken, and so his vio-
lence come upon thee.”—He said, “I am now setting
off for Roha, and how should Sohayl and Soha meet
together ?” |

Now when I was in presence of the Governor, whose
hall was by this time empty, and whose austerity had
cleared away, he took to describing Abi Zayd and his
worth, and blaming his evil fortune.—Then he said, “I
conjure thee by God, art thou not he who lent him the
suit ?”’ (dast)—I said, “‘No, by Him who has set thee on
that cushion, (dast) I am not the owner of the suit,
(dast) but thou art he against whom the game (dast) has
gone.”—Then his eye-balls went askante, and his cheeks
reddened.—‘And_ he said, “By ‘Allah, it never baffled
me yet to expose a suspicious person, or to discover a
knave.—But I never heard of a Shaykh who cheated
after he donned the saintly cloak; yet, as for this one,
he has deceived to the last—Now how call you that
monkey.”—I said, “ Abi Zayd.” He said, “ Aba Kayd
is more fitting for him than Abi Zayd: and dost thou
know where the villain is strolling to ?’—I said, “He
dreaded thee on account of having overstepped his
bound, and he journeyed away from Bagdad at once.””—
He said, “May God not shorten his journey, or keep


TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 2438


him where he sojourns: for I never dealt; with aught
sharper than his cunning, or tasted aught more bitter
than his fraud:—And were it not for the sacredness
of his scholarship, I would urge on in search of him,
until he came in sight for me to fall foul of him.—
And now do I, loathe that what be has done should be
spread abroad in the City of Peace; so should I be dis-
honoured among men, and my dignity come to nought be-
fore the Imam, and I be made a laughing-stock to gentle
and mean.”—Then he stipulated with me that I should
not speak of what Abi Zayd had done as long as I
remained a sojourner in this city.—Said Al Harith, ‘son
of Hammam, And I stipulated with him as one who does
not equivocate, and I kept faith with him as Samuel
kept it.


THE TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF THE PORTION.”


This Assembly contains the “grammatical riddles” of which the
author speaks in his freface» Abi Zayd, falling into the company
of some refined persons who are amusing themselves in the suburbs
of Bagdad, is at first despised by them for the shabbiness of his garb.
But the recitation of a singer causes the conversation to turn upon the
famous and never-ending controversy concerning the use of the raf*
and the nasb, or, in European terminology, the nominative and accu-
sative case, in certain Arabic phrases. The company plunge into
the dispute with all the ardour which never failed to be kindled by
grammatical disquisitions; and when they can come to no agree-
ment, Aba Zayd interposes, and gives his opinion. As they do uot
accept it readily, and attempt to argue with him, he at once reduces
them to submission by proposing twelve enigmas, invdlving abstruse
and technical points of Arabic grammar. No one can solve them ;
and Aba Zayd refuses to gratify their curiosity by giving an expla-
‘nation until each one of them has made him a present. Then he
leaves them, refusing to drink with them on the ground that in his


244 IWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


declining age he had made a vow against wine. The answers are
briefly given in an appendix from the pen of Hariri himself.

Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was in company
in the portion of Ar Rabi’, in the season of spring, with
youths whose faces were brighter than its lights, whose
dispositions were more goodly than its flowers, whose
utterances were more delicate than the air of its dawns,
—aAnd through them I looked upon what would shame
the flowering spring and suffice for the sounds of lutes.—
And we had taken oath together for the guarding of
affection and the forbidding of self-seeking ; and that
no one of us should hold aloof in enjoyment, or keep
to himself even the smallest pleasure-—Now we had
agreed together on a day whose mist had risen, whose
beauty was growing, whose light cloud bade to the
morning draught,—That we would amuse ourselves by
going forth to one of the meadows, to pasture our eyes
on the shining plots, and polish our minds by a fore-
casting of the rains ;—So we sallied forth, and we were
as the months in number, and as the two boon-com-
panions of Jathimeh in affection,—To a garden which
had assumed its gilding and’ adorned itself, whose
flowers were various in their kinds and hues ;—And
with us were the headstrong ruddy wine, and cupbearers
like suns ;'and the singer who charms the hearer and
delights him, who feasts each hearing with what it
covets—Now when we had fully taken seat, and the
cups were circling to us, there intruded on us a sharp
fellow, on him was an old coat:—And we frowned
on him as frown the soft damsels on the gray-heads,
and we felt that the purity of our day was now troubled.
—But he greeted with the greeting of the intelligent;


TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 245


and taking seat he opened perfume-vials of prose and
verse ;—But we shrank from his expansion, and hastened
to roll up what he spread out; until chanted our rare
singer, our charming ,modulator :


How long, Su‘ad, wilt thou not join my cord, nor pity me for
what I meet with? ;

I have been patient with thee until my patience is overcome, until
my spirit has almdst reached my throat,

But come! I am résolved to do myself right, drinking thereby to
my mistress as she drinks te me ;


For if union (icy) please her—then union ( Bae) ; but if rupture
—then rupture like a very divorce. ,

Said Al Harith: Then we asked the player on the
double-twisted strings why he nasbed the first key and
raf‘ed the second.—And he swore by the tomb of his
parents that he had ‘spoken as Sibawayh preferred.—
But the opinions of the company were divided as to
the admissibility of the nasb and raf‘.—And a section
said, The raf* of both, that is correct;” and a part
said, ‘‘ Nothing is lawful but the state of nasb ;” while to
the rest the answer was impracticable, and the claniour-
ing kindled among therh.—But that intruder showed the
smilingness of one who knows a matter, though he
spoke not a single word.—However, when the cries
were still, and the scolded and the scolder were silent,
he said, ‘“‘O ‘people, I will announce to you its inter-
pretation, I will distinguish the sound phrase from
the sick.—Verily the raf‘ and the nasb of each de,
are lawful, and an interchange of the inflection be-
tween them;—And that is according to what is left
understood, and to the virtyal signification which is
elided in this puzzle.”—Then was the company reck-
less in hastening to dispute with him, and in gliding


246 TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


into contention with him.—But he said: Well, since
ye call to me to “ Come down,” and ye gird yourselves
for the war:
" What is the word which, as ye.will, is a particle that
is loved, or the name of that which contains the slender
milch-camel ?

And what is the noun which alternates between a
singular that binds, and a plural that clings?

And what is the.s which, when it attaches itself,
takes away heaviness and loosens the bound ?

And where does the .~ enter and depose the regent
without courtesy ?

' And what is that which is always mansib as a term of
circumstance, while only a particle makes it makhftd ?

And what is the annexed noun which lacks one of the
handles of annexion, and whose power varies between
evening and morning ?

And what is the regent whose last joins his first, and
whose reverse effects what he effects ?

And what is the'regent whose deputy is more spacious
than he in abode, and greater in eraft, end more fre-
quent in mention of God Most High ?

And in what place do males put on the veils of
women, and the ladies of the alcoves go forth with the
turbans of men ?

And where is the keeping of ranks necessary to the
struck and the striker ?

And what is the noun which gives no sense except by
the addition to it of two words, or the shortening of it
to two letters; and in the first case there is adhesion,
and. in the coon compulsion ?

And what is the epithet which, when it is followed


TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 247


by ., he to whom it is applied lessens inj men’s eyes,
and is set low in reputation, and is reckoned among -the
simpletons, and exposes himself to dishonour ?

Now these are twelve questions to match your num-
ber, to balance your disputatiousness; if ye add, I add;
if ye return, I return.

Said the teller of this story: Now from these his
riddles, which terrified as they poured, there came on
our thoughts bewilderment and barrenness.—And when
it baffled us to swim in his sea, and our talismans had
yielded to his enchantment,—We changed from weari-
ness in looking at him to the seeking of instruction from
him, and from the wrong of being annoyed by him
to the desire of learning of him.—But he said, “ Now
by Him who has sent down grammar into speech to be
as salt in food, and has veiled its risings from the per-
ceptions of the vulgar,—I will not give you a wish,
I will not heal for you a pain, unless every hand endow
me, and each of you distinguish me by a gift.”—Then re-
mained not one in the company but was obedient to his
command, and cast to him the hidden treasure of his
sleeve.—And when he had got it under his wallet-string
he kindled the flame of his genius.—And then did he
disclose of the secrets of his riddles and of the wonders
of his puzzling, that wherewith he cleared away the
rust from our understandings, that whose rising he
manifested by. the light of proofi—And we were aston-
ished when we understood, and we wondered when we
were answered, and we repented over what had escaped
from us.—And we began to excuse ourselves with the
excusing of the sagacious; and we offered to him the
quaffing of the wine-cup.—But he said, ‘Need is not


248 TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


courtesy; and as for drinking, there remains in it no
sweetness for me.”—Then he turned up his face mo-
rosely, and plucked away his side scornfully, and recited :


Gray hair forbids me that wherein are my joys; how’then should
I bring together the wine and my hands’, » palms 2 2

Is the {morning draught of the old wine lawful, now that the
hoariness of my head lights up my morning ?

I swear that wine shall never again blend with me as long as my
breath cleaves to my body, and my words to my speech;

That my hand shall not deck itself with the cups of must; that I
will not turn round my lot among the goblets ;

That I will not set my thought to the mixed drink; that I will
not go joyfully to the wine ;

That I will not gather myself to the wine cooled of the north
wind; that I will choose no companion, save the sober.

Hoariness blots out my merriment when he writes upon my head ;
hated be he for a blotting scribe !

He shines forth to blame my turning the reins to pleasure; away
with him for one who shines forth but to blame! ,

Now were I wanton while my temple is hoary, then would my
lamp be put out among the lamps of Ghassan,

A people whose disposition is the honouring of their guests; and
gray hair is a guest to whom honour is due, my friend.


Said Al Harith: Then he slipped away as slips the
serpent, and sped with the speeding of the cloud.—And °
I knew then that he was the light of Serdj; the full
moon of scholarship that passes through the signs of
heaven.—And our end was grief at his departure and
separation after he was gone.


Explanation of the Arabic subtleties and grammatical
riddles which are contained in this Assembly.

_ As for the firet part of the last verse of the song, namely——
es 4 al Ay wt Gf union Dae her, _ union), it is like


the phrase a3 Ks wh por i wi dee ye gS (Man is
rewarded according to his work; if good, good, if evil, evil.) Now


TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 249


Sibawayh introduced this question into his aa and allowed
four modes of inflecting it. The first and best is that you should
nasb the first , and raf* the second, nasb the first ~~ and raf‘ the
second. Then would the virtual meaning be, “If his work be good
then his reward is good; and if his work be evil, then his reward
is evil;” for the first is nasbed through being the predicate of
wos ané the second is raf‘ed through being the predicate of aa
elided inchoative. And in this mode, wiS and its noun are elided,
because the conditional particle ..,\ (if) points to their virtual pre-
sence; and the inchoative is also elided, because the 3, which is the
answer to the condition, points to it; and that is by reason that an
inchoative commonly follows —3. The second mode is that you should
nasb both ; and then the virtual meaning of the sentence is, “ If his
wish be good, then he is rewarded good; and if his wish be evil,
then he is rewarded evil.” Here the first is nasbed, because it is the
predicate of ow; and the second is nasbed as the object of the verb’s
action. The third mode is that you should raf” both ; then the
virtual sense of the sentence is, “If there be good in his work,
then his reward is good; and the first > is raf “ed because it is the
noun of ws; and the second is raf‘ed because it is the predicate of
an elided inchoative; as was shown in the exposition of the first
mode. And it may be that the first .> is raf e@ through being the
agent of wif ; and that the Wl, which receives a virtual power here,
is the complete attributive verb, with the meaning “exists,” or
“occurs ;” which would need no predicate, as in the phrase of God
Most High, “If he be one in difficulty.” Then the virtual mean-
ing in the example would be, “If good be, then the reward is
good :” that is, “If good exists, then the reward is good.” The
fourth and weakest mode is that, you should raf the first on the
principle explained in the third case, and nasb the second on that
which was mentioned in the second case. Then the virtual meaning
will be, “If there be good in his work, then he is rewarded good.”
According to this interpretation, and by the use of the virtually
understood words which are here elided, runs the inflection of the
verse sung in the Assembly. And among expressions of the same
kind is the sentence, “The man was killed by what ho killed with ;
if a sword, a sword ; if a knife, a knife.” ,


250 TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


Now as to the word which is a particle that is loved, or the name
of that which contains the slender milch camel ; it is ev. If you
use it to admit the truth of what is told you, or to promise in
answer to a request, then it is a particle; but if you mean by it
“camels,” then it is a noun : and »«) is masculine and feminine, and
is a general name for camels, and for all cattle (in which last defini-
tion camels are comprised.) And among camels is comprised the |
und 25> ; which means a slender she-camel. She is called hs
from being likened to the —5,> (edge) of a sword. But it is also
said that the word means a stout she-camel; through the likening
of her to the .5,> (ridge) of a mountain.

As for the noun which alternates between a singular that binds
and a plural that clings, it is es! Vj (trowsers or drawers). Some
say that this is a singular form, and that its plural is las! 5 and
according to this opinion, it is a singular; and from its being
gathered round the waist, he gives it the epithet of “binding.”
Others say, “ Nay, it is a plural, and its singular form is (Jl, ps ;”
and, according to this opinion, it is a plural; and the meaning
of the expression “clings” is, that it is not fully declined. Now, the
reason that this kind of plural is not fully declined (and it con-
sists of every plural whose third letter is an elif followed by a
strengthened letter, or by two letters, or by three letters, the middle
one of which is quiescent), is on account of its heaviness, and its
divergence from the other plurals, inasmuch as there is no form like
it among the singular nouns. And in this riddle he gives the
epithet “clinging ” to that which is not fully declined.

As for the s, which, when it attaches itself, takes away heaviness,
and loosens the bound; it is the s which is affixed to the form
of plural above mentioned ; as in 43,0 (bankers), djl. (polishers) ;
for this form of plural becomes fully declined when the » is affixed
to it; because the » changes it to the form of singular nouns like
dali 3) and dal S ; and it is thus lightened, and becomes declinable.
And in this riddle he gives to that which is not fully declined
the epithet of “bound,” as in the former he gave it the epithet
of “ clinging.”

As for the (w, which deposes the regent without courtesy, it
is that which is prefixed to the future verb, and divides it from ,.,',


4


TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY. 251


which, before the prefixion, was one of the dnstruments of nasbing.
The verb is then raf‘ ed, and the wii is changed from being a nasber to
the verb, to being the lightened a used in the place of the heavy.
Thus, in the sentence of God, Praise be to Him, wie ei pe
wert phan (He knows that there shall be sick among you), the
virtual reading is ySau0 4)

Now as to that which is mages, as a term of circumstance, while
only a particle khafds it, it is one, which is never jerred in choice
speech, except by .ye; for the ) Yulger expression, sda 3 bad,
is a mistake. :

As to the annexed noun, which is deprived of one of the handles of
annexion, and whose power varies between evening and morning ;
it is .oJ. For this is one of the nouns which necessarily require
annexion, and whatever noun follows it is jerred by it, except
3,a¢; for the Arabs make this manséb after (oJ, through the fre-
quency with which they use it in discourse: they also nunnate
it, that it may fully appear that it is manséb, and that it is not one of
the class of jerred nouns which are not fully declinable. Among
some of the grammarians, ws has the same meaning as X.c ; but the
correct view is that there is a delicate difference between them ;
namely that the meaning of ss applies to whatever is in your
possession or power, ‘whether it be near to you or at a distance,
while wy applies only to what is in your presence and close to you.

And as for the regent, whose last joins his first, and whose
reverse effects what he effects ; it is L, the reverse of which is Vs\;
and both are among the particles of calling; and the effect of
both upon the noun of the person called to is the same, although
u circulates more in discourse, and is of more frequent usage. Some,
however, prefer that a person who is near should be called to with
us| only, as he is called to with hamzeh.

As for the regent whose deputy is more spacious than he in abode,
and greater in craft, and more frequent in mention of God Most
High, it is the W of swearing. This \» is the original particle
of swearing; a8 is shown by its being used, when the verb of
swearing is expressed, as when you say aly 3\ (I swear by God) ;
and by its being prefixed also to the pronoun; as when you
say yd ¥ 2S), (By Thee, I will do it.) Afterwards the 5 was


252 TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


substituted for- it in the oath, because they are both labial letters,
and also on account of the relationship of their meanings; since the
5 gives the sense of union, and the \ that of adhesion, and the two
meanings approach each other. Then the «, which was substituted for
the WW», became more common in speech, and was more largely
applied in forms of-swearing ; and for this reason he riddles that
it is more frequent. in mention of God Most High. Also the
3 is larger in dwelling than the \, because the C~ is prefixed only
to the noun, and effects nothing but the jerr ; while the , is prefixed
to the noun, and the verb, and the particle, and Sometimes it
Jerrs with the oath, and sometimes by understanding ra 2s and it is
also ranked with the nasbers of the verb, and with the instruments of
conjunction, and for this reason he describes it by spaciousness of
abode, and greatness of cunning.

And as for the place where males put on the veils of women, and
the ladies of the alcoves go forth with the turbans of men; it is the
first degree of the numeral, when in the state of annexion; namely,
the numerals between three and ten, for they have § in the masculine,
and are without it in the feminine, as in the phrase of Him Most


High, Vo gun ell bile, Ju ‘oe eel lps (He compelled it


upon them seven nights and “eight days consecutively) ; while every-
where else the 3,is one of the distinctives of the feminine, You
see how the rule of masculine and feminine is reversed in this case ;
so that each turns to a form that is not its, own, and goes forth
in the garb of the other.

As to the place where the keeping of ranks is necessary to the
struck and the striker; it is when there is ambiguity between
the agent and the patient, through the sign of inflection failing to be
openly expressed in both or one of them. This takes place when
they are both maksdr, like .sye or | wat ; or belong to the nouns
of indication, like GN and\as. ‘In such cases it is necessary, for
the avoiding of ambiguity, that each of the two nouns should be
kept in its proper order; so that the agent may be known by
its coming first, and the patient by its following after.

As for the noun which gives no sense except by the addition to it
of two words, or the shortening of it to two letters, it is Layee (what-
ever). About this word there are two opinions: one that it is com-


TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 253


pounded of 40 which means “ stop,” and of le ;| the second, and the
correct one, is that the root of the word is ‘ to which another
lL. was added augmentively, as it is to me so that the utterance
became le le. But the succession of two words with the same utter-
ance became troublesome to people, and they substituted » for the first
elif, so that the two became lage. This word is one of the
instruments of condition and compensation, and when you utter it
the sentence is not completed, and the meaning is not seized,
except by the addition of two words after it, as, “Whatever you
do I will do,” so that it necessarily “adheres” to a verb. But
if you shorten it to the two letters 4», meaning “ stop,” then the
meaning is intelligible, and in that case you “compel” him you are
addressing to stop.

And as for the epithet which, when it is followed by ,.,, he to whom
it is applied lessens in men’s eyes, and is set low, and is reckoned
among the simpletons, and exposes himself to dishonour; it is
wins (a guest), which, when .., is added to it, changes to jaws,
which means one who intrusively follows the guest, and who
is set down as base coin when he is tested.


THE TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“OF KEREJ.”


There is nothihg remarkable in this Assembly. arith, being in
the town of Kercj, during a severe winter, sees one day an old man
naked and shivering, who, crouches on the ground. He is sur-
rounded by a crowd, and recites to them some verses’ on his un-
happy state. The wealthy, who are standing around, pity him, and
give him their furs and cloaks; and among them Harith parts with
a useful garment. In his speech the old man had used the phrase
“the Kdfs of winter ;” and Harith, when he discovers that he is Aba
Zayd, follows him, requesting to know its meaning. Abi Zayd
reminds him of a verse of Ibn Sukkereh, in which seven things—all
beginning with the letter Kéf—are spoken of as necessary in order
that a winter may be passed in comfort.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I was wintering
at Kerej, by reason of a debt that I was demanding, and


254 TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


a needful business I was performing.—And I experienced
of its fierce winter and its scorching cold, that which
acquainted me with sorest torment, and kept me ever
‘seeking warmth.—So that I quitted not my lair, and the


kindling-place of my fire, except through some necessity


that I was urged to, or that I might give attendance
at the congregation.—Now on a day whose sky was
frowning, whose mist was darkling, I was forced to sally
from my shelter, through a business that troubled me:
—When lo! an old man, bare of skin, showing his
nakedness ; and he was turbaned with a kerchief, and
breeched with a napkin.—And around him was a crowd,
dense in its throngings; and he was reciting, and heeded
nought :


O people,’ nothing can announce to you my poverty

More truly than this, my nakedness in the season of cold.

So from my outward misery, judge ye

The inward of my condition, and what is hidden of my state.

And beware a change in the truce of fortune:

For know that once I was illustrious in rank,

I had command of plenty, and of a blade that severed ; i

. My yellow coins served my friends, my lances destroyed my foes ;

My humped camels mourned the morning that I made the feast.

But afterward the time bared the swords of perfidy,

And spread forth the squadrons of dark afflictions,

And ceased not to tear and wear me; ,

Until my habitation was razed, and my milk-flow decayed,

And my price and my song went down among men,

And I became the lean beast of poverty and need,

Naked of back, stripped of my covering,

As though I were a spindle in nakedness.

No warming is mine in Sinn and Sinnabar,

Save to stand in the sun, or get a heat at the coals.

Now is there any who is a deep sea of bounty, lord of an ample
robe,

Who will cloak me either with embroidered garment or ragged
coat, $ ;

Seeking the face of God, and not my thanks ?


TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 255


Then he said: O ye lords of wealth who trail in
furred robes, he that is endowed with good let him
expend; he that is able to bestow, let him bestow.—For
the world is treacherous and fortune trips; ability is the
visit of a vision, and opportunity a summer cloud.—For,
by Allah, oft have I met winter with its Kas, and
prepared its necessaries before its coming :—But to-day,
Sirs, my arm is my pillow, my skin is my garment, the
hollow of my hand is my dish.—So let him that is
wise consider my estate, and be beforehand with the
changing of the nights.—For the happy man is he who
takes warning by his fellow, and makes preparation
for his journey.

Thereupon it was said to him, “ Thou hast displayed
to us thy scholarship, now disclose to us thy pedi-
gree.’’—He said, ‘‘ A curse on him who boasts of monld-
ering bones! there is no glory but in piety and choice
scholarship.” Then he recited :-—

By thy life, man is but the son of his own day, according as
that day displays itself; he is not the son of his yesterday.

There is no boast in rotten bones ; there is only the glory of him
who seeks glory through himself.

Then he sat down, bowed together, and shrank shiver-
ing.—And said, “*O God, thou who whelmest with thy
bounty, and hast bidden us to ask of thee, send thy
blessing on Mohammed and his House, and help me
against the cold and its terrors;—And appoint to me
some generous man who prefers others even from his
straitness, who shares even though it be but a scrap.”
Said the narrator : Now when he had thus disclosed a
soul like “Isam’s, and elegancies like Asmai’s, the
glances of my eye began to test him, and the darts of


256 TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


my side-looks to strike on him, until I perceived well
that he was Abi Zayd, and that his going naked was but
a noose for the prey.—But he saw secretly that my
recognition had overtaken him, and he mistrusted that it
would expose him.—So he said, ‘‘I swear ‘by the shade
of night and the moon, by the stars and the new moon-
light, that none shall cloak me save one whose disposi-
tion is goodly, whose face is imbued with the dew of be-
nevolence.”—Then I understood what he meant, although
the company knew not his meaning.—And I was grieved |
at the shivering that he suffered, and at the bristling
of his skin.—So I took hold on a fur coat that was
my plumage by day and my bed by night; and I
stripped it off me, and said “ Receive it from me.”—And
he failed not to draw it on while my eye still looked
at it.—Then he recited :


Well done he who has clothed me with a fur coat, which shall be
my protection from shivering !

He has clothed me with it, preserving my heart’s blood ; may he
be preserved from the harm of men and Jinn!

To-day he shall deck himself with my praise; to-morrow he shall
be decked with the silk of Paradise.


Said Al Harith: Now when he had fascinated the
hearts of the company by his diversity in excellence,—
They cast to him of the lined furs and the parti-coloured
coats, so many that their weight oppressed him, and
scarce could he lift them.—And he departed glad of
countenance in his joy, invoking a rain on Kerej.—
But I followed him to a point where his mistrust dis-
appeared, and the heaven showed clear; and I said
to him, “A sharp cold was that which froze thee!
But go not naked again.”—He said, “Fie on thee!
swiftness to blame belongs not to the just; haste not


TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY. 257


in censuring, for it is a wrong; prosebute not that of
which thou hast no knowledge,—For by Him who has
given the light of hoariness, and made sweet the tomb
of Taybeh, had I not stripped myself I should have
gone home in failure, and in emptiness of wardrobe.”
—Then was he restive to take flight, and veiled himself
in frowning, and said, ‘“ Knowest thou not that my
nature is to pass from prey to prey, and to turn from
‘Amr to Zayd?—Yet I see thou now checkest me and
resistest me; thou makest me to lose double of what
thou didst profit me.—Then spare me (God save thee), from.
thy vain talk; shut on me the door of thy earnest and
jest.”—But I pulled him with the pulling of playful-
ness, and held him fast to-joke with him,—And said
to him, “ By Allah, had I not concealed thee and
covered thy imposture, thou wouldst not have gotten
a gift; thou wouldst not have come off more coated
than an onion.—So now recompense me for my good-
ness, and for the covering that I gave thee, and put
over thee, either by being kind enough to restore my
fur, or by making known to me the Kafs of winter.”
—Then he looked at me with the look of one who
wonders, and frowned with the frowning of the angry,
—And said, “As for restoring. the fur it is-a thing
as impossible as the restoring of yesterday that is
past, or the dead man who is gone ;—But as for the
Kafs of winter, glory to God who,rusted thy mind
and rent the bottle of thy storing,—Since thou hast
let thyself forget what I recited to thee at Deskereh
of the lines of Ibn Sukkereh :


= Winter comes and its needs to me are seven, when the rain
confines me from business ;


17


258 TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


A home, a purse, a stove, a cup of wine after the roast meat,
and a pleasant wife, and clothing.


Then he said, ‘Sure an answer that heals is better
than a cloak that warms; so be content with what
thou hast learnt and depart.”—So I parted from him ;
and now my fur coat was gone to my sorrow, and I
was in a state of shivering all the winter.


THE TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY, CALLED
“THE SPOTTED.”


This Assembly presents another of those exercises of ingenuity
in which the author delights. Al Harith, being in the town or
district of Ahwaz in a state of great poverty, determines to seek his
fortune elsewhere. On the road he comes upon a tent whose
wealthy owner, attended by his slaves, is reposing during a halt.
The stranger invites him to rest himself, and Al Harith soon dis-
covers that he is Abi Zayd. He inquires the cause of this sudden
prosperity, and is informed that it was produced by the improvisa-
tion of an elegant address or composition, the merits of which a
great personage had thus munificently rewarded. Al Harith, with
his usual literary curiosity, desires to hear it; but Abi Zayd will
consent only on condition that his friend shall first accompany him
to Sis, the ancient Susa, which is distant:a day’s journey from
Ahwiz. Al Harith consents, and Abfi Zayd detains him in the city
for 4 month on various pretences. At last, when Al Harith will no
longer stay, the adventurer tells how he had been oppressed with
debt, and been delivered from it, and loaded with presents, by the
Governor of Tis, in Khorasan, in reward for an eulogistic compo-
sition, in which the alternate letters were pointed and unpointed.
He asks Al Harith whether he would prefer a sum of money or 2
copy of this “spotted” composition. His friend chooses the latter,
and Abi Zayd dictates it, not failing to accompany it with q present
to relieve his necessities.


Al Harith, son of Hammam, related: I descended at
the two markets of Ahwaz, clothed in the garb of need.
—And I delayed there a space enduring adversity,


TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY, 259


passing sombre days,—Until I looked upon the length-
ening .of my stay as if it were one of the hurts of
vengeance,—And I viewed the city with the eye of him
that hates, and I parted from it as one parts from the
motldering camp-ruin.—And I set forth from its stream-
let, girded up of skirt, spurring to the abundant waters ;
—Until when I had journeyed from it two stations, and
was distant the march of two nights, theré came to my
sight a pitched tent and a kindled fire—Then I said, “T.
will go to them ; perchance I may quench thirst or find
guidance at the fire.”’—And when I had arrived at the
shadow of the tent I saw some fair boy-servants, and
furniture which thou wouldest gaze at, and an old man;
on him was noble apparel, and by him was newly
plucked fruit,—-And I greeted him and then went aside
from him.—But he laughed to me and made kindly
his answer towards me, and said, ‘“ Wilt thou not take
seat by one whose fruit is choice, whose pleasantry
charms ?”—Then I took my seat to get the prize of
conversing with him, not to swallow down what was
before him.—And as soon as he unveiled his accom-
plishments and bared his teeth, I knew that he was
Abi Zayd by the beauty of his choice sayings, and the
ugliness of those yellow teeth—And we knew each
other then, and two joys compassed me in that hour.—
Nor could I learn by which I was purer in rejoicing
and more perfect of delight;—Whether it was at his
dawning forth from the. darkness of his journeys, or at
the plenty of his dwelling after its dearth.—Then my
soul yearned that I should break the seal of his secret
and enter into the cause of his prosperity.—So I said
to him, ‘“‘ Whence is thy returning, and whither is thy


260 - TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


going onward, and how have thy wardrobes been filled?”
—He said, “As for my coming it is from Tis; and as
for my destination, it is Sis; and as for the wealth
which I have reached, it is from an Address which I
improvised.”—Then I begged him that he would lay
before me his secret, and rehearse his Address to me.—
He said, “The war of Al Basis was a less thing than
what thou desirest, unless, indeed, thou wilt accompany.
me to Sis.” ‘

So I followed him thither perforce, and I attached
myself to him there a month.—And he, he watered
me to the full with the cups of beguiling ‘and made
me to bear the bridle of expectation ;—Until when
my breast was straitened and my patience overcome,
I said to him, *‘ There remains to thee no pretext, nor
to me aught that can divert me.—To-morrow I shall
take omen of! the raven of separation, and saddle
away from thee with the shoes of Honayn.”——He said,
“God forbid, that I should break promise with thee
or thwart thee! I have not deferred to relate to thee
save that I might make thee stay.—But since thou hast
doubted concerning my promise, and the suspicion of
ill treatment urges thee to depart from me,—Listen to
the story of my lengthened journey, and add it to the
Tales of Pleasure after Pain.’—I said, “Go on, how
long is thy tether! how various are thy wiles !”—He
said: Know that the. frowning time cast me to Tas,
and then was I poor and laden; I had not the sprout or
the split of a date-stone.—So the bareness of my hands
made me resort to haltering myself with debt ;—And
T took credjt by evil chance from one who was hard
of nature ;—For I fancied it would be easy to find


TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY. 261


a market for my poetry, and I enlarged in spend-
ing ;—And recovered not until that debt burdened me,
whose due attached to me, whose claimant beset me.—
Then was I bewildered at my state, and showed my
creditor my difficulty ;—But he believed not my poverty
and drew not off from worrying me;—Nay, he was
instant in demanding and obstinate in carrying me to
the Kadi;—And as often as I humbled myself to him
in speech, and besought of him the grace of the gene-
rous,—And would dispose him to show mercy to me:
by lenity, or to wait for me till competence,—He said,
“Set not thy desire on being waited for while thou
holdest fast the bright gold;—For, by thy existence,
thou seest not the paths of deliverance ere thou show
me the meltings of the pure ore.”—And when I saw
the sharpening of his contention, and that there was
no refuge to me from his hand, I made a quarrel with
him, and then I assaulted him,—That he might carry
me up to the Governor having authority over offences,
not to the Judge of civil wrongs.—And this was by reason
of what had reached me of the eminence of the Governor
and his virtue, and the severity of the Kadi and his
meanness.—Now when we were present at the gate’ of
the ruler of Tis, I perceived that I shoyld have nor
hurt nor harm.—So I called for ink-flask and paper,
and composed for him a Spotted Address, and this it it:

The qualities of our Lord are loved, and at his court-
yard there is abiding ;—And nearness to him is as gifts,
and farness from him as destruction ;—And his friend-
ship is as pedigree, and his estrangement as calamity ;—
His sword’s edge is sharp, and the stars of his virtue
gleam.—His continence adorns, and the rectitude of


262 TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


his road is: plain.—His understanding turns and tries,
and his fame goes east and west.


The ruler, the intelligent ; surpassing, excelling ; understanding,
ingenious; impatient of baseness, loathing it ;

Replacing, consuming; distinguished, incomparable ; illustrious,
virtuous ; quick-witted, fastidious ;

Marvellous when he discourses ; able when the stir of ill befals,
and the dreaded calamity grows mighty.

The chaplets of his honour are self-strung, and the
rain-storm of his largess showers ;—The gift of his hand
flows freely, while avarice from his heart sinks away.—
The teat of his liberality is milked, and the gold of his
chests is spoiled—He whom his band gathers to itself
prospers and overcomes ; the merchant of his gate makes
gain by beguiling him.—He refrains from wronging the
innocent, and is free from the foulness of the transgressor.
—He unites his gentleness with dignity, and turns aside
from the path of the niggardly.—He is not given to leap
at the opportunity of evil, but abstains with the abstain-
ing of the righteous.


And therefore is he loved, and his continence merits the infatuation
he inspires, since its pure essence beguiles all.

His qualities are bright, and gleam ; and his arrow is an arrow
which overcomes when thou shootest against it.

He is gentle, he is cheerful ; one who makes good when his friend
slips, nor is there any doubt of his desert.

Not miserly, nay, but bountiful; open when he is solicited; one
who goes forth, his gate keeps him not close.

When want bites, he breaks the edge of its biting by his succour,
and its tooth falls out. .


And it is fitting that whoever is wise and under-
standing, whoever is near and far, should submit himself
to the hero of the time, the restorer of the palsied.—For
since he sucked the breast of his fostering, he has been
distinguished by the abundance of his shower.—He


TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY. . 268


raises the fallen, and comforts him; if he helps he
gladdens ; if he contends in honour, he routs his ad-
versary, and returns with a clear right.—He prepares
fatigue for him who shall rule after him ; he is lauded
as often as men ntove him to kindness, or prove him
in deed; he crowns his virtues with the love of his
suppliants.


May he never become void of gladness, may the shadow of his
prosperity be lengthened.

For he is virtuous in the sight of whoever contemplates the
shining of his stars.

He adorns the graces of his culture by clothing hiniself with the
fear of his Lord.

And may there prosper my Lord his gain of Padi
firmly rooted and large, and his excelling in benefits that
are perfect, that publish themselves:—And may the
helping of his servant with a portion from his abundance
accord with the pious offerings of His Honour :—For his
- servant is a child of the noble, though a wanderer from
dearth ; one wounded by calamities that have scarred
him, who strings chaplets that voyage afar.—When he
surges to the harangue there is found none to speak like
him; for Koss would then be as Bakil—For when he
embellishes thou wouldst say, ‘‘ Garments of Yemen have
been embroidered,” thou wouldst think that a garden
had sprouted.—This is so, and then also his draught
is but a draining, and his food is borrowed ; his dawn is
the glooming, and his cloak is worn out.—And now does
he quake at the raging of a tyrannous creditor, who
harasses him because of a debt that attaches to him.—
But if my Lord will mercifully avert him from me by
the gifts of his hand, he will belt himself with glory
that surpasses, and come off with the reward of loosing


264 TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


me from the chain.—May the qualities of his disposition
never fail to aid whoever watches the promise of his
lightning-cloud.—By the grace of the Lord, who is
without beginning, who liveth now, and is without end. |

Said Abt Zayd: Now when the Governor had dis-
cerned the pearls of my Address, and caught a glance
of the secret contmitted to it,—He made sign at once for
the paying of my debt, and decided what was between
my adversary and myself.—Then he appropriated me for
his ostentation, and distinguished me by his preference.
—aAnd I remained a few years prospering in guestship
with him, and pasturing in the oasis of his bounty,—
Until, when his gifts had overwhelmed me, and his gold
chad lengthened my skirt, I contrived to depart in the
_fair condition that thou seest.

Said Al Harith: Then I said to him, “Thanks to
Him who destined to thee the meeting with the kind
one, the noble, and delivered thee by him from the
pressure of thy creditor.”—He said, ‘ Praise to God for
happiness of fortune and freedom from the contentious
adveisary.””—Then he said, ‘‘ Which is more pleasing to
thees that I should share with thee of the gift, or pre-
sent thee with the Spotted Address ?”—I said, ‘The
dictation of the Address will be more pleasing to me.”
He said, “And that too, by thy Truth, is the lighter
upon me: for truly the gift of that which goes in at
the ears is easier than the gift of that which comes
out of the sleeves.”—But then it was as if he scorned the
meanness, and grew ashamed, for he gave me the Ad-
dress and a present together.—Thus I gained from him
two lots, and parted from him with two booties, and
returned to my home, cool of eye, through having gotten
both the Address and the coin.


NOTES TO THE ASSEMBLIES OF AL. HARIRI.


PREFACE.


Tue opening prayer or invocation which, according to the
custom of Moslem authors, is prefixed to the book, begins with
an elaborate series of antitheses, the purport of which is to. ask
deliverance from the opposite faults of redundancy and poverty
of style, and the opposite dangers which arise from the indulgence
or hostility of critics. This kind of exordium is always composed
with especial pains by a writer who aspires to produce a work of
merit ; and it has, generally, more than the usual share of the rhe-
torical artifices, which are to be met with in Arabic writings. The
prayer and preface of Hariri are, perhaps,,the most highly elabor-
ated part of his work, and have always been esteemed as a model
of composition. Having supplicated deliverance both from excess
and defect of diction, and from undue favour and undue blame,
the author asks to be guarded from ambiguity of expression as
much as from actual error; @ request not unnecessary in a work
which deals so much with the niceties of language, and seeks
to exhibit them by plays on words ((wersx*), by contrasting
words that differ only in the diacritical points (i.<), or in the
inversion of the order of the letters (5), or else by bringing
together the widely different meanings that can be borne by
various forms of the same root. After this the author prays for
the moral qualities which shall assist him in producing an excel-
lent work, and one which shall not endanger his- position by
giving offence to the powerful. The prayer concludes by the
due invocation of a blessing upon the Prophet and his House.
The Commentator whom I shall continually cite in these notes is
Abt ’1 “Abbas Ahmed ibn “Abd ul Mu’min al Kayst ash Sherishi,
so called from having been born at Xeres in Andalusia. This


, 266 NOTES.


Commentator observes that the particular form of exordium used
by Hariri, with its antithetical clauses, was originated by ‘Amr
al Jéhiz, in his book called cll, .uaj!. Sherishi gives an
extract from the preface to this work, to show the closeness of
Hariri’s imitation.

Perspicuity—enunciation.—The distinction between baydn and
tibydn is that the former is applied to perspicuity of lan-
guage, by which the meaning, when conceived hy the speaker,
is rendered clear to the person addressed ; while the latter, as
indicated by its form, is applied to the mental process by which
ideas are separated and made distinct in the intellect of the
speaker, so as to be capable of communication. The one, says
the Commentator, is the work of the tongue, the other of the
mind, Sherishi says, “‘..,) proceeds from you to another ;

ws proceeds from you ® yourself.” Thus the Creator may
with propriety be supplicated to “teach” the one, which is the
zeke art af eloquence or perspicuous expression, while he

“inspires” the other, The obstacle to wh is seid or ob-

scurity of expression, which arises, according to Jorjani (Ta vifat,
p- 64, edition of Fligel,-Leipsic, 1845), from a fault in the
disposition of words, through inversion or elision, or else from
the use of words in unusual significations, without due care to
prepare the mind of the hearer.

We take refuge with thee.—A common form of deprecation
among Moslems derived from the versicles which form the last
two chapters of the Koran. “I take refuge with the Lord of
Mankind,” and “I take refuge with the Lord of the Dawn.”

Region—domain.— iy. is literally the market street of a town,


and Lhs., plural of re places marked out for building, as the
Lbs of Kufa and Basra. . 7

Succour or Divine Guidance.— 523,35 is defined in the Ta rifat
of Jorjani 93 the power by which God makes the actions of his
servants agreeable to his will.

Mistake.—z23 is the turning away or deviation from the
Tight path. Compare Koran iii. 5.


NOTES. 267


That we may be secure from slanders |of the tongue.—
Literally, “ that we may be free from the cuttings of tongues.”
z.e. from what tongues may utter, and, as it were, cut off and heap
up against us like reaped corn. In this the author alludes to
a traditional expression of Mohammed. Says Sherishi, ‘‘ He
refers to the Tradition of Mu th, son of Jebel, who relates, “ I
said, O Apostle of God, are we punished for what we speak?
And he answered, Thy mother be bereft of thee, Mudth; is
there anything that will prostrate men on their faces in the fire of
hell more than the cuttings of their tongues?” The expression
LSA) LAG, it may be observed, is a playful one, indicating
good will and fondness, rather than enmity, thus resembling
CSUN or all 20Gb.

Make us not a morsel to the devourer.—One who devours
the honour or character of another. Said the Prophet: ‘When
I was lifted up (to heaven in the night-journey) I passed by peo-
ple who had nails of brass, with which they tore their faces and
breasts. And I said, ‘ Who are these, Gabricl?’ He said, ‘ These
are they who devoured mankind, and assailed their honour.’” |

The venture of Hope.—Hope is here compared to the venture
or merchandise with which the favour of God is sought.

Approaching thee through the merits.—F¥or the signification
of dlrs, see Bayddwi at Koran v. 39. The epithet of In-
tercessor, applied to Mohammed, seems in opposition to Koran
vi. 51 and 69; where it is said that on the Day of Judg-
ment, man shall have no Intercessor but God. From the influ-
ence of Christian doctrine a character somewhat resembling
that of the Messiah came to be attributed by the Moslems to
the founder of their religion.

Set the seal to the Prophets, or closed the series of them.
The twenty-five principal prophets, of whom Mohammed is
the last and greatest, are Adam, Noah, Enoch, Abraham, Ish-
mael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Lot, Hid, Salih, Sho ayb, Moses,
Aaron, David, Solomon, Job, Tha ’1 Kefi, Jonah, Elijah, Joshua,
Zacharias, John, Jesus, Mohammed.


268 NOTES.


*


For Had, see Koran vii. 63; xi. 52; xxvi. 139: for Salih,
vii. 71; xi. 64; xxvi. 142: for Sho’ayb, who is made the
“father-in-law of Moses, vii. 88; xi. 85—98, etc. ; for Thi] Kefl,
xxi. 85; xxxviii. 48. These twenty-five are mentioned in the
Koran, but many others are acknowledged to have had the gift
of prophecy, including the whole line of the Hebrew prophets.
On the subject of the Prophets, consult the Traditions of Al.
Bokhari, section of “The prophets,” Vol. 2, p. 330, Krehl’s
edition. For the prophets who were ‘‘ endowed with resolution,”
see Baydéwi on Koran xlvi. 34.

To the highest heaven. — On the word egal; there is a
diversity of opinion. It is variously said. to be the place
where the works of: the good are gathered together ; a name of
the angels; the seventh Heaven; the right column of the
throne of God, and the Lotus-tree of Heaven. The disputa-
tions on this subject have arisen from the use of the word,
Koran Ixxxiii. 18, 19. Zhe book of the just is in ‘Illiytin.
What shall teach thee what is‘Illiyin? It is a book marked
with letters. Those who approach to God behold it.”

It is the word of a noble envoy.—tIn this passage Hariti,
quoting the Koran, erronéously applies to the Prophet a
title which is really given to the Angel Gabriel. The Koran
being the word of God revealed to the Prophet by Gabriel, could
not be said to be the word of the Prophet : indeed whenever it is
quoted, the phrase used is, ‘The Most High has said.” Thus,
though Mohammed’s chief title is the Envoy or Apostle of God,
it must here be taken to apply to Gabriel, as, indeed, is most in
accordance with the sense of the passage in the Koran, where the
Prophet swears to his fellow-citizens of Mecca that his revela-
tions proceed from on high. The passage is in Sura ]xxxi. verse
17. Hariri, it is said, being convinced of his mistake, afterwards
substituted a verse from the 21st Sura: ‘‘ We have sent thee
only out of mercy to the world,” words which indubitably refer
to Mohammed. As for the phrase in the 81st Sura, Baydawi
distinctly declares that it applies to Gabriel wlito apes what


he received from God. He algo reads 3 rather than * ee


NOTES. 269


On kis House —The term | «:\\ Ji is applied, according to
some, to his followers, whether relations or not, or to his rela-
’ tions, whether followers or not; according to others, to the people
‘of his religion. Ash ShAfi't being asked who were the Jt of the

Prophet, answered “ all pious persons.” But in a Tradition, in
which it is said that the poor-rates are prohibited to him and to
his ,J1, by this is meant those to whom was appropriated the fifth
(aust ord) of the spoils instead of the poor-rates, and these
were the genuine descendants of Hashim, and Al Muttalib.
(Lane): whom also consult respecting the meaning and gram-
matical construction of the word. According to Sherishi there
are instances of ‘its prefixion to the pronoun in poetry and
eloquent discourse.

And now.—At this point the author concludes his invocation,
and proceeds to the subject of his discourse. The phrase ox
or ax (+l, is attributed by the Arabs to Koss, Bishop of Najrin, |
an eloquent preacher of the time of Mohammed; the meaning of
which tradition probably is, that Koss first made popular this
kind of introductory invocation, which would thus seem to have
been adopted by the Moslems from the Christian Church. The
Arabs, however, also fable this usage to have originated with
David. See commentary on phrase whe) cd, pages 27 and
446 of De Sacy’s Hariri; and Baydawi on Koran xxxviii. 19.

Zo that learning.—I have used various words in different
places to express the meaning of Gul. The original meaning
is Discipline of the mind, or Culture leading to moral excellence
and good manners, but it is conventionally used to express what

_ we should term scholarship, or literary skill; the chief education
of the Arabs being in the use of their own language,—cor-
rectness and eloquence in which became the test of politeness
and gentility. cool! els, according to Hajji Khalfeh, cited in
Lane’s Lexicon, is “ the science by which one guards against
error in the language of the Arabs, with respect to words and
with respect to writing.”

The Assemblies.—Of the literary meaning of the word Ma-


270 NOTES.


kémeh, I have spoken in the Introduction. The exact signi-
fication is a “standing,” or “place of standing,” and it is equi-
valent to (juwLs*, since the people who listen to the narrative |
“stand,” or “‘ sit” about the speaker.

Badi’_az_Zemén—A summary of what is known of the
origination of the kind of composition called the Makimeh is
given by De Sacy in his notes to the Makémehs of this author,
which he has inserted in his Chrestomathie Arabe. As I have-
spoken of him in the Introduction, it will be only necessary here
to mention the few incidents of his life which have been pre-
served. His name was Abd ’] Fadl Ahmed Ibn al Hosayn; his
life is related by Ibn Khallikan, and an account of him by Abé’l
Manstr ath Tha labt is given in the commentary of Sherishi. Ibn
Khallikin says ‘‘ The héfiz, Abd ’1 Fadl Ahmed Ibn al Hosayn
- Ibn Yahya Ibn Said al Hamadani is author of some beautiful
epistles and excellent Makamehs, which Al Hariri took as a
model for his, framing them on the same plan, and imitating the
manner of their author, in whose footsteps he walked. Al
Hamadani was eminent for his knowledge of pure and correct
Arabic, in which he cited, as his masters, Ibn Faris, author of
the Mujmil, and others. He dwelt at Herat, a city in the
province of Khorasan.” The biographer then gives some speci-
mens of his style, abounding in conceits which are likely to
meet with less admiration from Europeans than from the poet’s
countrymen, as, for instance, the following, taken from a long
poem of his composition :-——

The gush of the shower were like thee (in thy liberality), did
it, in smiling, pour forth gold. Fortune were like thee, did it
not deceive; the sun, did he speak; the lion, were he not
hunted; the sea, were his waters fresh.

“ He died,” continues Ibn Khallikin, “of poison, at Herat,
A.H. 398 (a.p. 1008). I have since found, however, the follow-
ing note, written at the end of hia epistles, which have been col-
lected by the hékim Aba Said “Abd ar Rahman Ibn Moham-
med Ibn Dost, ‘The author died at Herat, on Friday, 11th
of the second Jumada 398 (February, a.p, 1008).’ On this


NOTES. 271


the hdkim observes, ‘I have been assured by ee of good
authority, that he fell into a lethargy, and was buried with
‘precipitation. He recovered when shut up in the tomb, and his
cries having been heard that night, his grave was opened, and he
was found dead from fright, with his hand grasping his beard.’ ”

In the foregoing extract from Ibn Khallikén I have followed
the translation of M. McGuckin de Slane, which I shall always
use when I do not translate from the original. It is much to be
wished that this exeellent translation were completed.

Ath Tha labi, after giving Badi many titles of admiration,
speaks of his wondrous memory and his powers of improvisa-
tion. He could repeat, without altering a letter, a lengthy poem
which he had heard but once, or four or five leaves of a book ;
he could compose a kasideh or a risdleh on a given subject, or
write what was proposed to him, beginning with the last verse —
and ending with the first; he could turn prose into verse or
verse into prose; when a number of rhymes were given him he
could fit them to verses ; he could improvise in any given metre
“without swallowing his spittle or drawing his breath.” He
came to the court of Sihib Ibn ‘Abbad (see De Sacy’s Chrestoma-
thie, Vol. II. p. 57), and received great kindness from him. He
settled in Nisabir in the year 382, and there it was that he
composed 400 Makamehs on mendicity and similar subjects, of
which he made Abi ’1 Fath, of Alexandria, the hero. (I may
say that my manuscript gives the reading 40S, suggested by De


Sacy. It may be noticed, however, that his reading (J ought
to be L\ax*, Chrest. Arabe, III. 259), The occasion of compos-
ing his Makamehs was as follows: A certain Abi Bekr Ibn
al Hosayn Ibn Dorayd had composed forty stories, of his own
invention, using the style of the Arabs of the Ignorance, full of
rare and strange phrases;. and Badi, wishing to rival him,
composed four hundred similar pieces, of which the chief object
was to please the listener by a display of literary eloquence and
learning. Some of these are of considerable length, while others
do not_reach ten lines. Though it is admitted that the Maka-


272—C NOTES.


mehs of Hariri are artistically superior, yet it is claimed for
Badi’ that he surpassed all the .authors of his own time, and for
this reason he received the dakad or sobriquet by which he is
known. Indeed, in the time of Ath Thalabi, the supremacy
was doubtful between them ; for one scholar, being asked which

the greater, replied, ‘‘ Hariri was never called the Wonder
even of a day ; how then should he be equal to the Wonder of the
Time?” Another superiority claimed for Al Hamadani is that
his compositions were really improvised, instead of being pro-
duced laboriously and at leisure, like those of Hariri.

Al Hamadaini, like other Eastern poets, was fond of wander-
ing from place to place. After many travels he settled at Herat,
where he married the daughter of a rich and powerful man,
named Abfi ‘Ali Hosayn al Khoshnibi, and there he died at the
age of forty, but whether under the circumstances mentioned by
Ibn Khallikéin may, perhaps, be doubted.

De Sacy says, “Il y ale plus grand rapport entre Hamadani
et Hariri, soit pour le choix des sujets et des pensées, soit pour
la maniére de les exprimer : mais les séances de Hamadani sont
beaucoup plus courtes que celles de Hariri, et par-ld méme peut
étre méritent-elles quelque préférence: on y sent moinal’ affecta-
tion d’ employer tout a la fois toutes les richesses de la langue et
toutes les ressources de la rhétorique. On ne pout nier cepen-
dani qu’il n’y ait plus d’art dand celles de Hartri.”

Whatever may have been the real merits of the two writers,
the taste of their countrymen has definitely decided in favour of
Hariri, ‘whose work has been for seven hundred years the delight
of learned men, while that of Al Hamadani is now but little
known.

In which he had referred the composition to Abi’l Fath, of
Alexandria.—Hariri again alludes to the priority of Badi‘, and
asserts his own superiority to him in the Forty-seventh As-
sembly, by putting into the mouth of Abd Zayd: ©

Have thy eyes e’er seen the like of me,


Who draw every bolt by my magic, and captivate every intellect by
my charm ?


NOTES. 273


If the Alexandrian preceded me,
Know that the dew precedes the shower, yet the shower’s excellence
belongs not to the dew.


Obscure, not known, ete.—An allusion to grammatical
terms. ‘See Alfiyeh of Ibn Malik, line 52.

Who joins even two words, etc.—It is said that he who
writes well exposes himself to envy and detraction, and he who
writes ill to ridicule and insult.

As a wood-gatherer by night.—One who ee wood by
night may be bitten by a snake or stung by a scorpion; so
he that is loquacious, or a voluminous writer, may utter some-
thing that will bring him frouble. This proverb is ascribed to
Aktham Ibn Sayfi, an elder of the Bend Temim, in the early
days of Mohammed. A poet says :—

Guard thy tongue, O Man, lest it kill thee, for it is a serpent. .

How many an one is there in the grave, slain by his tongue, whom
his rivals had shunned to meet in the fight! See Arabum Proverbia, ii.
671, Freytag’s edition.

Who musters footmen and horsemen together.—These words
are addressed to Iblis by God, Koran xvii. 66, with the mean-
ing, “ Collect against mankind thy forces, or threaten them
with thy forces, riding and on foot ;” and thus may be used
to signify an impious or abortive effort. Or they may be ex-
plained as applying to a confused and unsuccessful production,
since a band of mixed horse and foot is but a disorganised crowd.

Fifty Assemblies, etc.—Hariri here describes the nature of
his compositions. Not only are verses of the Koran freely
introduced, but the whole language is tinged with allusions to it
which are almost imperceptible to the European, but which are
readily caught by a Moslem, who knows the sacred work by
heart. Metonymy (&S) is the use of indirect expressions, as
though you should say, Such an one is great in the ashes of his
pot, meaning that he is given to hospitality, —Ta rifat, p. 197.) Of
the Arab proverbs a great number are to be found in Maydani,
and the source and original application of others are given by
various commentators. To follow Hariri. in this department of
his boundless learning has ‘always been one of the hardest tasks

: 18


274 NOTES.


of those who have devoted themselves to his work. References
to the most important of them will be found in these notes.
“The scholarly elegancies or subtleties are to be found in the Sixth,
Twenty-sixth, Twenty-eighth, and Twenty-ninth Assemblies,
where the merit of the composition consists in the use of words
witH or without pointed letters ; in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth,
where phrases or 4 whole composition may be read either back-
wards or forwards; in the Twenty-Third, where a part of each
verse may be removed, without spoiling sense or metre; in the
Forty-sixth, where several of these ingenious displays are united.
The Grammatical riddles are represented in the Twenty-Fourth,
where Abii Zayd puzzles his companions by twelve subtle ques-
tions. The decisions dependent on the use of a word in two
different senses are instanced in the Thirty-second, and akin to
this are the enigmas or conundrums which appear in some of
the other Assemblies. The.addresses, orations, exhortations, and
jests are too numerous to be specified.

I change the pasture.—i.e., 1 turn from grave to gay, from
dignified to lightgome style. The Arabs divide the herbage on
which the camel feeds into {4 , which means the sweet kind,
and (cso, that in which there is saltness; on the latter the
camels feed i in the hot season, and it makes them drink, If they
have it not they become lean. The former is called the bread of
the camel, and the latter the fruit; and thé word is used meta-
phorically, to express the refreshing of the reader by a change of
incident and discourse."

» And of the poetry of others.—The Assembly of Holwdn is
the Second, and that of Kerej the Twenty-fifth.

The father of its virginity——Father is here used as we
should use Lord: the father of a poem’s virginity is he who
first broaches or originates it. Compare Sixth Assembly, ‘‘ Who
can deflower a virgin composition ;” also Sixteenth, “ And
deflower virgins of it.”

Of its sweet ahd its bitter,—i.e., of all of it. Compare a

” verse quoted at page 678, De Sacy’s Hariri.
Kodémeh,—Abti ’1 Faraj Ibn Ja far Ibn Kod4met Ibn Ziyad, a


NOTES. 275


scribe of Bagdad, eminent for purity of composition. He is
said to have lived in the time of Muktadir b’illah.

And excellently said one.—The author of these lines was the
amatory poet “Adi Ibn ar Ruka’. They relate to a lover, who
hears a turtledove lamenting the loss of its mate, upon which he
also laments the absence of his mistress. He then addresses
himself with the words quoted, the meaning of which is that the
merit of his verses is lessened by the dove having set him the
example.

Although a translator does not necessarily concern himself
with the technicalities of the original work, yet as this volume.
is intended rather for the student in Arabic than the general
reader, I shall make no apology for dwelling occasionally in
these notes on a subject respecting which there is little informa-
tion to be found in commentators; I mean the prosody of the
verses introduced throughout the Assemblies. Of this branch
of learning, which has been especially elaborated by the Arab
grammarians, I have made mention in the Introduction. An
acquaintance with the metres, and the habit of reading the lines
in accordance with them, are not only necessary for the enjoy-
ment of Hartri’s melodious and plaintive verse, but enable the
student the more readily to seize the meaning of the numberless
parallel passages and shawdhid which are introduced into the
commentary, and which are often ill-written and insufficiently
vowelled. Less attention has been paid to the subject by Euro-
pean scholars than might have been expected; and the Arabs,
who detect the metre at once and do not need artificial help,
generally pass it by without notice.

The verses beginning 3 13 are in the Ly, <7, the most
common of the old metres. In the Hamaseh the greater part of
the pieces belong to this metre or to the bw, pig and Ul ; the
others, though known, not having been in very common use till a
later period. The .,b belongs to the first circle (a&Za\ ito),
so called from being composed of five-lettered and seven-lettered
feet (Hula and dels). To this circle belong the three metres
eeyb, duos, and baw, and two others only used by later


276 NOTES.


authors; the J.beuwe, which is the ugh reversed, and the Sows,
which is the o,. reversed. The first circle consists of the first
two primitive feet mye (that is @ gyn? Wy 8 CRS Ls),


and  jclie (that isa gyns* Wy yoirid Cpe) twice re-
peated, and the original Jb is of the measure,


halls had glclie dosh halle gly) Shahid 85

: This .45,¢ (last foot of first hemistich) is, however, I believe,
not found; the .j.cliv being invariably (4s1«, that is losing
its quiescent fifth letter, and becoming pels, To this (456
there are four aed or closes of the second hemistich. The
first is ¢=? retaining the normal weclie. The second ,3
suffers 435 like the (4,,c, and this is the metre quoted by
Hariri. The other two \,s\ to this (9 consist of one
Wide to clyed and one jyaie to clic. There is also an
diye (25,0 in some use, (It must be mentioned that d>
is the dropping of the iis ww» at the end of a foot, and
ya the dropping of the last letter of a Vint ws at the end


of a foot, and the making quiescent the moved letter before it).

The metre of the lines quoted is, accordingly —

elie Sy lacie yd leds yd laelis JS

But it will be remarked that 6%), in these lines, is of the
measure ,}y25 ; that is, as we should say, the last syllable is
short instead of long, and the same licence takes place twice in
the next line. This brings us to the consideration of the licences
allowable in ys, among which are, according to the prosodists,
two of the kind called Wil> -j, namely, of the kind which affects
the second letter of the —». The first of these licences is
43, which we have seen affects the closing foot of each hemi-
stich ; it may also affect both ged and .j.clie, whenever they
occur, striking out the quiescent fifth letter of each ; and making
the former se, as in the verses before us. Of its effect on
wieelie, there will be many instances as we proceed. The other
licence is 2S, which is the dropping of the quiescent seventh


NOTES. : 277


letter of a foot; by which, in this métre, recline becomes
clas, a licence very common among the old writers. It must
be borne in mind, however, that the same foot cannot suffer both
v4.5 and Wi ; thus, there can be no such foot as clin. This
exclusion of one licence by the other is called sles. Other
peculiarities in this metre may be noticed, but the foregoing are
the most important,

Scratched up its death with its hoof.—An Arab found a ram
in the desert, but had no knife to kill it with, The ram, in
scratching the ground, uncovered one. Hence the proverb
applied to a man who furnishes the means of his own destruction.
Freytag’s Arabum Proverbia, ii. 359.

He who cut off his nose with his own hand.—This is, per-
haps, an allusion to Kosayr, who thus avenged the death of his
master, Jathimet al Abrash on Queen Zebbi. An account of
this stratagem will be given in the notes te the Twenty-seventh
Assembly, under the words, “ It was for a cause that Kosayr cut
off his nose.” Another explanation is that it refers to a man
who, having a razpr in his hand, wished to wipe his nose, and
cut it off by accident. ,

The chief losers, etc.—A quotation from Koran, xviii. 103.

Fables which relate to brutes and lifeless objects.—Fables,
like those of Aisop and Lokman, or the fables of Bidpai, known
under the name of Kalileh wa Dimneh. Such writings, which
belong to an order of great antiquity in the East, as may be learnt
even from the Old Testament, were always highly esteemed,
even by the strictest professors of religion, as conveying wise
morals, and were distinguished by them from idle poetry, and
stories of love or adventure. An instance of the application of
this kind of fable to the highest and most mystical doctrines is
to be found in the Mantik At Tayr of the Persian poet Farid ad
Din “Attér, who wrote in the age succeeding Hariri. Sherishi
gives instances of the use of fables by eminent men, one of them
being the Prophet himself. The beautiful moral allegories of
Azz ad Din al Mukaddasi, edited by M. Garcin de Tassy, under


278 NOTES.


the name of “ Les Oiseaux et les Fleurs,” are fine specimens of
‘ this kind of composition. :
Yet am I content.~ Metre tawil, as in the preceding lines.


THE FIRST ASSEMBLY.


Al Hérith, son of Hammém.—The use of this name and
that of Abi Zayd, by the author, is explained by Sherishi,
who is confirmed by Ibn Khallikan, in his life of Hariri. It
is said that Harith and Hammam are the “ truest,” that is
the most justly applicable-of names. A Tradition of Moham-
med, concerning the naming of children, is recorded, in which
it is said ‘The most acceptable names to God are ‘Abd Allah
and ‘Abd-ar-Rahman ; the truest are Al Harith and Hammam,
and the most hateful Harb and Murrah.” (Abd Murrah is a
kinyeh for the devil). The reason for calling these names the
“truest” is that there is no one who is not a Harith, that is,
who does not labour after gain for his living ; and no one who
ie not a Hammam, that is, who has not his anxieties. The names
were accordingly ‘adopted by Hariri to signify a common ordi-
nary mortal, in accordance with the precedent set by Badi' az
Zemin. Under the name of Al Harith, son of Hammam, the
author is supposed to have signified himeelf, and for this reason
he makes Harith a native of Basra. The name Abi Zayd is
either the real name of a personage whom Hariri had met with,
or it is taken to signify an elderly man generally ; Zayd being
an ordinary name, and the Father of Zayd the ordinary father or
elder. In confirmation of this view, it is noted that Abi Zayd ,
is eontinually spoken of as advanced in years. The use of these
allegorical names is common among Arabs, their own ordinary

* names having, generally, a meaning. An instance of such a des-
criptive name is furnished by the philosophical romance of Abi
Ja‘far ibn Tofayl, whose solitary hero bears the name of Hayy
ibn Yakzin, the Living, Son of the Awakened. It may be


we


NOTES. 279


remarked that Hérith is the Greek Aretds compare 2 Corin-
thians xi. 32, °

Sand of Yemen.—San‘a is thus specified by the author to
distinguish it from another place of the same name, -near
Damascus. San‘a the capital of Yemen, the seat of the Himya-
ritic kings, called Tobba’, and afterwards, for a time, of the Abys-
sinian conquerors, was ohe of the most noted cities in the early
times of Arab history, and preserved its importance as a seat of
trade and martufacture in the days of Hariri. A legend ascribes
its foundation to Shem, son of Noah, who, after his father’s
death, journeyed southward, until he came to the first climate,
and found Yemen the most agreeable country, and the site of
San‘é the most favoured district. He was led by the flight of
a bird to the place where he laid the foundations of the Ghom-
dan, or palace of San ‘4. Descending to more historical times,
we find it related that the Tabibi ah established themselves succes-
sively at Mareb, Zafir and Sana. The Ghomdain, the most
magnificent edifice in ancient Arabia, was built, according to
Kazwini (Caussin de Perceval—Essai sur l’histoire des Arabes)
by Surahbil, one ‘of these ancient monarchs. It was an im-
mense building, with four faces, one red, another white, a third
yellow, and the fourth green. In the midst was an edifice of
seven stories, each story forty cubits in height. The lowest
formed a hall, entirely constructed of marble, and covered with
a single slab of marble. At the four corners were figures of
lions, hollow, so that when the wind entered their mouths, they
made noises like roarings. This great city became afterwards
the formidable rival of Mecca, and if the enterprise of its Abys-
sinian master, Abrahet al Ashram, had succeeded, the worship
of the Ka beh might have been destroyed, the Koraysh subdued
or scattered, and the advent of Islam prevented. The invasion
of Abraheh took place about the time of the birth of Mohammed,
in what is called ‘the year of the Elephant.” Sand was tem-’
porarily wrested from the power of Mohammed by the rival
prophet, Al Aswad, who was slain only two days before the
former’s death. Little historical interest attached to San‘A in


280 N OTES. :


later times, but it ‘continued to be the most populous and
thriving town in Yemen. The Ghorndan and the temple which
belonged to it were destroyed by the ns ‘Othman. San‘A is
said to be an Abyssinian term, meaning * pleasant” or ““com-
fortable,” and to have been substituted for the former name of '
* the city.

+ When I mounted.—When I made it my monture, my usual
conveyance, «c,l¢ is the part between the hump and the neck.
“When I made wandering my steed ” ig the idea intended.

Its depths.—ey>-, the main part or portion of a thing, as the
sea; pand, or a fight; ‘the deepest part thereof (Lane). Hence
it is applied to the thick of the city, and its innermost parts.

Fray ‘the tissue of my ‘countenance.—This metaphor is often
repeated in the Assemblies to describe the shame of beggary.
He who begg is said to wear out the tender skin of his face, to
harden it and dry up its moisture. Though alms-giving is
enjoined on Moslems, and beggars are sufficiently numerous
among them, yet mendicity is always spoken of as humiliating
and disgraceful. ‘he Prophet said, “If ye knew what was in
beggary, not one of you would approach another to ask of him.”
A poet exclaims:

The water of thy hand (its bounty), whether it be generous or niggardly,
Fes sai not for the water of my face, which I spend in exchange

\

The phrase here used occurs again in the Thirty-seventh
Assembly, where, in some verses in praise of patience under
misfortune, the author says :

The man of spirit, if his eye have a mote in it, hides the mote of his
eyelids even from his eye-ball (conceals his poverty or pain) ;

And when the tissue of his garment is worn, he wears not out the two
tissues of his cheeks.

De Sacy, in the commentary to the Thirty-seventh Assembly,
quotes several passages on the shame of beggary. .

A wide place of concourse.— Hariri remarks in the Durrah
that a meeting place is not called yb unless the company are in
it. (De Sacy, Anthologie Grammaticale Arabe, p. 30, Arabic


\


_ NOTES. 281


* Text). It is much to be regretted that this work Of Hariri on
the niceties of the language, has not yet been printed. Judging
from the portion given by De Sacy, it must be an a invaluable
companion to the Assemblies.

Cadences.— += is’ applied originally to the cailence of
a dove’s cooing, and then metaphorically to the parallelistic


‘ rhymed prose, the sound of which has a certain resemblance to


it, Compare j>, and bey.

To catch—-Literally, to take a light or brand. This metaphor,
derived from the custom of getting a light at a neighbour's fire,
is often repeated. From frequent use it came to have a special
signification, so that iktibas, in the language of scholars, is
applied to jhe introduction into a composition of well-known
phrases from another author, proverbial expressions, or words of .
the Koran, for the sake of ornament.

As he coursed.—For the meaning of \_.+., see Lane.

And the throat of his improvisation.—It is impossible, to render
into English the bold metaphor here used. The ditis of the
male camel is the faucial bag or inner part of the throat, which,
when enraged or excited by any cause, he thrusts out of his
mouth with a roaring noise, called bbz, The noise of the she-
camel, as also of the male camel when he does not thrust out
this substapce, is called yo». The disis is thus used figura-
tively to signify the power of rapid and impetuous oratory.
Hariri uses the same metaphor in the Twenty-ninth Assembly
to describe the flew of Abii Zayd’s speech (De Sacy’s edition,
p. 354). In both cases he, no doubt, had in mind the proverb
used by the Khalif “Ali, when he was asked why he had not |
made his oration longer, —;3 ~ jon dibs. The shikshikah
roars and then is silent. (Arab. Prov. I. 673). The sermon of
Abd Zayd is excellently imitated by Nasif al Yazaji in his Third
Assembly. .

Thyself, thy chief enemy.—A saying of the Prophet is, “ Thy
greatest enemy is not he who, if thou kill him, thou hast thy re-
venge, or he who, if he kill thee, thou enterest into paradise ; but
thy greatest enemy is thyself in thy own body”. Al Asmai,‘on


282 NOTES.


receiving from a man food on his journey, said to him, “‘ God
confound all thy enemies except thyself.”

Woe to him who seeks the world.—These verses are of the
Sant pe the sixth metre of the fourth’ circle, or 4x44! glo,
which is formed by the primitive feet

igh cngclie laclie
This circle contains the »., Cty nds, gyi, wncsiie, and
ae, the measure of the last being wile eile wt rite,
twice in each verse. It must be observed that the .i in piss
is & %y,20 o3y, eorresponding to el in the original measure of
the circle, so that this part of the foot is not subject to Wsl>}.
Though there are instances of the =< being used eu, that is,
with its full measure, yet the general use is as here »<*, with
the 4),© and the W,6 regular (as), the measure being .
UY pees yield LS pian
Of Wil>;, there enter into this metre the following—..s, cs,
and JCS. Of the first there are instances in all three of the
verses; .yileli becoming . je, and |! pews becoming
go pie = qpeliv, The (jugrsx* in the rhyme is to be noticed,
Sherishi gives instances of it from other poets. :

Laid his dust, and let his spitile subside.—These metaphors
express the cessation from vehement utterance,

Gazed on his up-rising.—;i< is the preparation to rise; the
being half upright, in an uneasy posture, as one who is about to
stand up and depart.

To move anay from the midst.—To fly away, or aberrate from
the centre. An allusion to the scientific expression. ,

A bucket from his stream.—The use of metaphors from the
drawing of water, from rain or dew, to express the bestowing of
bounty, are continually to be met with im Hariri, as in all
Arabic poets. The ancient Arabs, whose poets set fashions
of literary diction which have never been departed from, were


NOTES. 283


natives of the Nejd and other regions where the want of water
was continually felt, and they spoke to a race whose lives were
passed in anxiety lest their corn and herbage should be des-
troyed, their homes made uninhabitable by a year of drought,
and their journeys perilous by the drying up of wells. Hence
in poetical language, water and moisture are almost synony-
mous with benefit ; to seek bounty is to go to the spring, to
confer it is to fill the bucket or the skin-bag of the suppliant.
It is in accordance with this sentiment that “cloud” has in
Arabic: poetry a favourable signification, while unbroken sun-
shine represents suffering and protracted misfortune ; a use of
similitude the very opposite to our own. To say ‘A cloud
gathered over my life” would mean to an Englishman that
distress or poverty fell upon it; to an Arab it would mean that
success, or a wealthy benefactor had raised the speaker to com-
petence. To forecast the rains by watching the form of the
clouds and the lightning, is a phrase used in the same meta-
phorical manner, and you may say, “J watched the lightning ”
of such a one, with the meaning “I took notice of him to learn
whether he was likely to confer a benefit on me.” Fortune, or
a deceitful friend, are described as a cloud whose flash deceives ;
the prosperous are a well-watered meadow, and their life is a
moistened one. A peculiarity of the Semitic languages is the
clearness with which they show the original material significa-
tion of words, under their secondary and metaphorical meanings,
and this is nowhere more remarkable than in the constant asso-
ciation of water with comfort, good fortune, bounty, wealth, and
similar ideas,

An Attendant.—i.a\5, a word taken by the Arabs from the
Jews or Syrians, — {Sac Hariri, in the Durrat al
Ghawwas, (Anthol. Arabe, p. 50, Arabic text), says that the first
letter must have esr, since words of this form are aint. From
this he deduces that the name of the Queen mentioned in the
Koran, xxvii. 23, must be Bilkis, and not, as often pronounced,
Balkis. Learned men were often waited on by their pupils.


284 NOTES.


Thy reality.—,.s*, ‘The real, intrinsic state of a thing. See
the Thirty-second Assembly, page 401, De Sacy’s edition.

But when.—For the use of isl redundant, after UJ, see Lane,
Book I., page 105.

I don the black robe.—The metre of these lines is the lire,
the only metre belonging to the fifth circle, or Gell isle, which
Al Khalil mentions. This circle, which consists only of five-
lettered feet, is formed by the primitive foot ges \gns, and the com-
plete measure of the lire is

. Hy 7, OF, Fe Ou
cA9d Syd yd yd ty Ott Oly UN
which is the measure of these verses, being the first ,6 of the
first 2°.

The only Wil>; -j which enters into this metre is u4e3, by
which ..Jy23 becomes 3 x3 ; but the chief peculiarity of the metre
is the intermixture of the dade U4y ¢ with the dsia~, by
which the 0 may be ended either by ..J423 or by yx fa as.

This licence is s0 common that, in many compositions, almost
every line is thus shortened. It will be seen that this is the
case with all the author’s lines, except the first and fourth.

The khamisah is described as a black square garment, having
two ornamental borders; if it has not the borders it is not
called by this name. It is, however, evidently used here to
signify a garment worn by pilgrims or devotees.

My meal.—Khabisah is a mess of khabis, or dates and butter,
a common article of food among the poor.

The lion of the thicket.—“ As one who seeks his prey in the
lion’s lair” is a proverbial expression for the rushing into danger
in pursuit of an object, and is derived from the verse of a poet:

O Tayya of the field and the mountains ; he who threatens you is as one
who seeks the prey in the lion’s lair. (Prov. Arab. IT. 359).

My loin quiver at it.— More exactly the muscles of the
shoulders, the part between the shoulder and the side. Compare
Mo allakah of Tarafeh, v. 101.


On the. field of battle, where man dreads death, where the shoulder
muscles quiver, wedged together in the strife.


NOTES. 285


THE SECOND ASSEMBLY.


Holwén.—A proverbial expression is “ Longer in companion-
ship than the two palm-trees of Holwin.” Two palm-trees,
planted on a hill near the town in the time of the Persians, had
been celebrated by the poet Moti ibn Iy&s, who addressed to
them a lamentation at his separation from a slave-girl whom he
had sold, saying that they too would weep if they were parted.
For this reason the Khalif Al Mansér forbade their destruction.
But Hardin ar-Reshid, passing that way, was seized with a fever,
and the pith of a palm-tree being prescribed to him, he cut
down one of them. The other quickly withered away. This
legend is worthy of notice, as it has a character of sentimen-
tality somewhat rare in the East. (Prov. Arab. I. 47), Hol-
win is four stations east of Bagdad, and was named after its
founder, Holw4n ibn “Alt ibn Koda‘ah. It consists of two towns
divided by a large river. It was conquered in the time of the
Khalif ‘Omar by Sa‘d ibn Abt Wakkds, after the’ battle of
Jelileh.

My amulets were doffed and my turbans were donned.—Ever
since I came to the age of puberty. Among the Arabs amulets
were hung round children’s necks to preserve them from the evil
eye, or the designs of Jinn ; and these were taken off when the
child reached a certain age. When the boy approached man-
hood he assumed the turban and girt on the sword.’

The word temd’im signifies “ certain beads which the Arabs of
the desert used to hang upon their children to repel, as they
asserted, the evil eye ;” or necklaces, on which amulets were put.
Tem&'im were forbidden by the Prophet, though in wldles,'
which are sentences from the Koran, there is no harm ;’so that
Hariri, in describing Harith as wearing temd’im in childhood,
speaks after the manner of the Arabs of the Ignorance, which is
allowable in poetical composition, as the attribution to moderns
of classical customs and beliefs is allowed to European poets.


286 NOTES.


Of the charms used among Moslems of the present day an
niteresting account may be found in Mr. Lane’s Modern Egyp-
tians. Another kind of charm to which great power has been
attributed is that which is called by mathematicians a Magic
Square, that is the arrangement of numbers in certain orders,
so that, whether counted horizontally, perpendicularly, or diago-
nally, each row may make up the same sum. ~ Others present
more complicated relations of numbers; and each has its virtue
in certain positions of the planetary bodies. But these latter
were the devices of astrologers rather than of theologians; and
it may be presumed that the only amulet used by the atrictest
professors consisted of verses of the Koran, or relics in some
way connected with religion. .

Learning's seat.—According to the opinion of some this was
the name of a place, so called from being the meeting place
of learned men.

Hope and desire.—Literally, “It may be” and “ Perhaps.”
When he could find no one to instruct him sufficiently, he
passed his time in hoping that such a person would soon
appear.

Shifting among the varieties of pedigree, etc.—The Arab race,
‘being made up of many tribes, the members of which, though
continually roaming through the country and taking up their
temporary abode in strange cities, or among neighbouring
tribes, still prided themselves on their allegiance to their own
kinsmen, and relied on the protection which these would give
them, it was the habit to ask the name and pedigree of a
new comer. Examples of this occur frequently in the Assem-
blies. When Abi Zayd has charmed his audience with one
of his displays, he is commonly asked what is his home, and
from what stock he derives his lineage. In answer, he gene-
rally claims to be of kin to the race of Ghassin, who reigned in
Syria under the protection of the Romans, and whose rivalries
with the kings of Hira, who were under the protection of the
Persians, make up a great part of ancient Arab history. Thus,
in the Sixth Assembly, he says, “ Ghassin is my kindred and


NOTES. 287


Serij my home.” In the present case h¢ is represented as
giving various accounts of himself as might be most suitable
to the various disguises which he assumed.

Beating about.—There may be here a double signification to
ast. From its primitive signification “to beat” it is used
to express the stumbling of the purblind she-camel, which beats
the ground with her hoof, not seeing whither she is going, and
is thence applied to any one who goes recklessly to work in any
matter. Another signification is to beat a tree, so as to break
off the leaves for fodder, whence the word is metaphorically
applied to the extorting alms from the benevolent by impor-
tunity. Either sense would be applicable here. In the Nine-
teenth Assembly the author purposely exhibits the two senses of
the word when he says of Abit Zayd .yomalls .yarlal! bas bask,

Sdsén.—Sasin al Akbar, son of Bahman, son of Isfendiyar,
son of Kushtasif, a Prince of Western Persia, is the reputed
chief and patron of all beggars and mountebanks. The legend is
that Bahman, being near his death, sent for his daughter Homaya,
who was pregnant, and settled the succession on her and her
child, if it should prove a boy, to the exclusion of his own son
Sasin. Sisin, indignant at this, left the court, and lived the
life of a shepherd among the Kurds, ‘so that his name passed
into a proverb for one who leads a vagabond life. Hence “ the
people of Sasin the Kurd” is a phrase signifying beggars, presti-
giators, people that go about with dogs or monkeys and the like,
These people had a cant of their own, which was not thought
unworthy of study and imitation by the learned. One Abi
Dulaf wrote a kasideh in their language, which is said to have
supplied Harfri with many of the terms used in the Thirtieth
Assembly. This Assembly, which I purpose to publish in my
second volume, introduces Abi Zayd making a speech at a beg-
gars’ wedding, full of the cant phrases current among them.
In the Forty-ninth, called the Assembly of Sasdn, one of the
masterpieces of the author, Abii Zayd exhorts his son to follow
a beggar’s life, as the happiest and most independent; and there
he. speaks of Sasdin as having laid the foundations of the pro-


288 NOTES.


fession, and distinguished its kinds, and kindled the flame of it
in east and west. ‘

Sherishi gives another account of the origin of this term.
He says that after the Persians had been subdued in the time of
the Khalifs ‘Omar and ‘Othman, they submitted peaceably to
the conquerors, adopting their manners and religion, and that
being a clever, artful people they betook themselves to various
ways of making their living, one of which was mendicancy.
Their way of exciting commiseration was to give out that they
belonged to the royal house of SAsin, or, as we call them, the
Sassanids, and to describe the cruel changes of fortune and their
fallen conditon, so that at last people came to call a beggar a
Sasini. This may be the true derivation of the word, but it
-is evident, from the Forty-ninth Assembly, that Hariri adopts
the legend which makes Sisin a real person.

The Princes of Ghassdn.—The ancestors of this family issued
from Yemen at that celebrated epoch of Arab history, the break-
ing of the dyke of Mareb. The legend is that Amr Muzaykiyé,
being warned by his wife of the approaching calamity, sold his
property and emigrated, being followed by many other families,
who found the country reduced to sterility. (See the note at
the end of the Seventeenth Assembly, to the words ‘‘ We
went asunder like the bands of Saba”). The part of the
community which followed Muzaykiyé first halted in the
northern part of Yemen, by a lake called Ghassin, and here
Muzaykiyé died. His son Thalabeh migrated with his fol-
lowers to Batn Marr, in the territory of Mecca. From this
place again they were obliged to depart, owing to feuds with the
possessors of the land. On these early and vague portions of,
their history it is unnecessary to dwell. It was only when they
left Arabia proper and migrated to the regions of Syria that.
they became of importance. Here they were known by the
name of Ghassin, from the lake where they first inhabited ; or,
according to other authorities, from a lake of the same name,
between Hijaz and Syria. At last they arrived in the plains of
Bozra, where the Bena Salih dwelt under the authority of the


NOTES. 289 ©


Roman Empire. They were desired to pay tribute, and re-
fusing, sustained a war against the Bend Salih, which ended in
their defeat. They then accepted the condition of tributaries, —
which they held under successive Princes, until at an epoch,
which M. Caussin de Perceval places a.p. 292, they, having
greatly increased in numbers and strength, overthrew the House
of the Dajiam, the reigning family of the Bend Salih, and be-
came the ruling race of the country. The Romans, who
troubled themselves little concerning these revolutions, accepted
a Ghassinide vassal, and Tha labeh, son of “Amr, son of
Mujalid, became the first prince of his race. After his death
the crown passed to his kinsman Jafneh, and the family of
Ghassin maintained a high position for 350 years. It is sup-
posed that they embraced Christianity in the reign of Con-
stantine. Though sometimes, as under their queen Mawiyeh,
rebellions against the Romans, they were generally faithful
vassals, and aided them against the Persians and the kings of
Hira. Their last ruler was Jebelet al Ayham, a prince of gene-
rosity and magnificence. When the Moslems invaded Syria,
undet the Khalifate of Abi Bekr, Jebeleh supported the cause of
the Empire in the field; but when Heraclius gave up the contest,
Jebeleh submitted to the Khalif “Omar and embraced Islam in
637. Thus ended the princeship of Ghassin, but the name of
the family remained as the exemplar of grandeur and nobility”
of race; and kinship with it was, no doubt, often claimed by
Syrian Arabs who had little right to the distinction. Of pro-
verbs connected with Ghassan, see Prov. Arab. I. 421, ‘‘ Take
from Jith’ what he gives thee,” and 422, “‘ Take it, even if thou
give for it the earrings of Mariyeh.” Although Hariri makes
his hero a son of Ghassin, yet the tribe are said by Ibn Khal-
din not to have spoken pure Arabic, since thev bordered on
foreigners, and thereby their language became corrupted.

At one time—at another—and now—and anon.—Thia use of
different words, to vary the expression “at times,” is much
affected by the author. Compare the Twelfth, in the description
of Abi Zayd in the tavern.

19


290 NOTES.


Goodly attainments.—By 4S{ is meant that by which one
works, an instrument. In the saying of “Ali, “He makes use
of the 1 of religion in seeking the goods of the present world,”
science or knowledge is meant ; because thereby only is religion.
The same meaning belongs to the word in the present passage.
(Lane.)

Valued highly. — Compare the use of oil, in the Twenty-
ninth.

With him I wiped away. The metre of these verses is Jab,
as already explained,

Some doubt from my heart.—Uncertainty on points of Jan-
guage and grammar.

Until the hand of want, etc.—These extravagant expressions
are scarcely to be paralleled even in Hariri. The second clause
of the sentence is literally “The want of a bone urged him.”
The word .,¢\ is applied to setting on a dog, and is therefore in
keeping with the words “want of a bone.” When the words of
a phrase are vey in keeping with the metaphor, the metaphor is


termed e Sey otherwise it is os. ' See note at page 8, De Sacy’s

edition. It may be noticed that Hariri says in the Durrah that

us can never be applied to a cup except when it has liquor in
it.

After he was gone.—These lines, in the original, are a string
of assonances, very ingenious and not unpleasing. The rhymes
of _g3\, and es and of yk and ik, present instances of
what is called col wedi ; that is, the insertion into the body
of a sentence or verse of two rhymed words, in order to gratify the
hearing by the assonance. The term d>-,3;0 433, like cyte,
is applied to a poem where the two hemistiches of each verse
rhyme together,.and there is no continuous rhyme throughout
the poem. A familiar instance of this is the Alffyeh of Ibn
Malik ; in Persian literature it has been preferred by the
greatest poets. But in Arabic this “ coupled” rhyme is more
usually thrown in as an ornament in the body or y4> of the
verse. An instance of it, probably accidental, is given from


NOTES. 291

|
the Koran, xxvii. 22, where the bird says to Solomon,
ol “Lan! Tas ure LS2im (I have come to thee from Saba, with
certain intelligence) ; also in the words of the Prophet ..,y~es\!
ures wer Tarifat, p. 62. Examples of it so abound in
Hariri, that it is needless to quote them. In these verses there
is also an instance of what is called c| or eo) 3 bopy;}, which
consists in the author making a more ineoues Sea) at the end
of his verse than he is obliged to do by the laws of prosody. If
the author constrain himself to keep to a certain ridf or dakhil,
or to one particular letter or vowel before the rawi, he produces
a more perfect and melodious rhyme. In this case the termina-
tion of both lines with af is an instance of such an elegance.
Here the rami, which is s, is preceded in both verses by a dakhil,
namely, .} with Aesr, and the ¢a’sis which is\. Furthermore,

each hemistich of each verse closes with 5.

He was hidden from me.—This word. is used to signify the
disappearance: of the moon during the last days of the month,
when it is in conjunction with the sun.

Where my branch had sprouted.—His native town of Basra.
For a similar expression see the Thirty-third Assembly, “ Make
known to us the dowhah (some large tree) of thy branch.”

To produce what was in his wallet.—To make a display of
his stores of learning. :

The sagacity of his judgment.—The meaning of W\bs'\ (J.a3,
as applied to David in the Koran, has been the subject of much
controversy. From the context it would seem to mean the
faculty of judging and settling disputes, or of perceiving the
application to himself of the case which the angels put before
him, (Koran, xxxviii. 19). Baydawi says that the (cs of litiga-
tion is the discrimination of right from wrong; and of discourse
the use of choice language, which gives the person addressed a
true conception of the meaning, and in which the grammatical
and rhetorical distinctions are fully observed. It may be ob-
served that from this passage in the Koran ia derived the strange
idea of some Moslems, that the phrase sx \+\, and the practice
ot prefacing a discourse with an initiatory invocation, was due to


292 NOTES.


David, since Glke!! Jaci is attributed to David, though, of
course, as Baydawi points out, not in the technical sense which
the words afterwards assumed.

Abi‘ Obddeh. —Welid ibn ‘Obayd al Bohtori, said by one autho-
rity to be the seal, the last and the chief of the later poets, was
born at Kufa at the beginning of the third century of the Hijra,
and was of the tribe of Tay, as was Abi. Temmam Habib, the
compiler of the Hamaseh. Hence they seem to have been
called the two Tays (Anthologie Gram. Ar. p. 131). His
poems are extant, and have still many readers. Abi ’l Faraj Al
Isfahani, cited by Sherishi, says of him that he was versed in
every kind of poetry, except satire; though his essays even in
this were successful. Sherishi gives several anecdotes of him,
which it would be tedious to transcribe. He died in the year
283.

As though she smiled.—This verse is of the metre called 2,
which is of the fourth circle, already described. The measure of
the ee is |

Cyrin Gleiuie claiue — Cigale Slain slats

It has four .,\cl, the first of which has three \\,c|. The first
_v97e (for the normal form of the verse appears not to be used),
is Hoe digthe: that is the = of Ayers is dropped by Wiss,
which is the dropping of the last letter of a 32,20 05, at the end
of a foot, and then the , is dropped by _.b, which is the dropping
of the fourth quiescent letter of a foot: the Maye, after these two
changes, becomes aie = Jel. The first <3 to this {256
is Wigiye (sqloe, losing the , by (b as described and quiescing
the = by —%,, which is the quiescing of the last letter of a

cigpi 05, at the end. of a verse: after these two changes: it
becomes illeie = Mel.

The measure of the verse quoted from Al Bohtori is, accord-
ingly, | n ‘ ‘ e o


The tanwin given in De Sacy’s edition is superfluous.


NOTES. 293


Of Wile; there enter into the verse ‘guneed wes and <b,
both of which have been explained; the first foot gives an
instance of the former, the second foot of the latter.

Comparisons such as those contained in this verse are to be
found even in the more ancient poets. Thus Tarafeh in his
Mo allakah says :


She smiles from a dark red lip as when the white camomile flower
shows itself from a moist spot in the sand: vv. 8.


Thou hast taken for fat, etc.—These are two proverbial ex-
pressions, introduced by Hariri in accordance with his practice
of imitating the talk of the desert. For the second of them, see
Prov. Arab. II. 429.

Uy life a ransom.—These verses are in the bw <7, one of
the most common and melodious of the ancient metres, and
often dedicated to such themes. It is of the first circle like
use and sre, consisting of five-lettered and seven-lettered
feet. Its normal measure is :

This, however, appears to be rarely used; the most common
eye being Ki gne, with a «1,6 like itself; each hemistich
closing with pees This is the measure in the present case.

Of the Wile; there enter into this metre jo in eld and
iricue ; also - and jas in jesus; Jas being the union
of ict and ue Instances of all these licences may be seen
in the two verses. .

Some suspicions are a sin. Koran xlix. 12.

My saddle-bag.—Used in the same sense as “ wallet” above.
The di» is a bag for provisions bound behind the traveller on
the camel. For its use in a figurative sense, by an early poet,
see the Diwan of Imr al Kays (Edition of McGuckin de Slane,
page 49, line 9):


God is he who most gives me success in what I seek, and piety is a
man’s best saddle-bag.


It may be remarked that when an extravagant metaphor or
comparison occurs in Hariri, it may generally be traced to some
popular or archaic usage, which the author desires to com-


294 _ NOTES.


memorate. The word is again used in the Thirty-third Assem-
bly, (page 426, De Sacy’s edition.)

‘Unnéb.—A red fruit, of an oval shape, about an inch in
length, and with a large stone inside. It is‘sold in the English
market under the name of “‘ Chinese Japonica.” Schultens, in
his edition of the Six Assemblies, is in error when he writes
wks. and translates “grapes.” Haririi Consessus Sex. 1731,
p- 100. The metre of this verse, and the next four, is bw,
‘as already described. The line quoted by Aba Zayd’s antagonist
is said to be from Abd’l Faraj Mohammed ibn Ahmed al
Ghass4ni, called Al Wawa. The meaning is “ She dropped tears
from her dark eyes, and watered her rosy cheeks, and bit upon
her red lip with her pure white teeth.”

I asked her when she met me, etc.—Abt Zayd here describes
the parting between a lover and his mistress. The meaning of
the second line is, “‘She removed the red veil which hid the
lustre of her face, and dropped tears from her eye.” ~

Night lowered on her morn, etc.—He compares the black hair
which she let down to night, her face to the morning, her
slender waist to a branch, and her teeth and fingers to pearls and


crystal. A great number of parallel passages from the poets


_ are given by the Commentator, but it would be useless to refer to
them. The single verses quoted from Al Bohtori and Abd ’l
Faraj al Wawa are those referred to in the Preface.

His dark night was moonlit.—His hair had become silvered
with age.

The stroke of calamities.—The metre ia mujteth, like that of
the verses in the First Assembly.

Trust not the gleam of its lightning.—The heavy showers
that give life to the parched plains are usually preceded by
lightning; which sometimes, however, fails to fulfil its indica-
tions; the cloud passing away without having discharged any
rain. Hence he who deceives expectations is said to have
lightened deceitfully. These metaphors, as has been observed,
are of frequent occurrence in the author. Compare, in the next
Assembly, ‘ The rain-cloud pours if it has thundered.”


NOTES. 295


THE THIRD ASSEMBLY.


Kaylah.—This ‘Assembly is called “of Kaylah” because, in
the course of it, Aba Zayd exclaims, “.By Him who made me
descend from Kaylah.” Kaylah is said to have been the ancestress
of Ows and Khazraj, who inhabited Yathrib or Medineh in the
time of the Prophet. She was the daughter of Al Arkam, the
Ghassini, so that when Abi Zayd claims descent from her, he
refers himself to the race of Ghassin. Ows and Khazraj, under
the leadership of Jith’, who was disappointed at not succeeding
to the princedom of Ghassin, left the main settlement soon’
after the foundation of the sovereignty, and settled in Hijiz,
where they became the Ansar of the Prophet. ,

The rubbing of the fire-shafts, etc.—These metaphors signify
that, though there never was wanting intelligence to keep up
the conversation, or scholarship to give the answer to any
question that might be propounded, yet discussion never pro-
duced anger and rude contradiction. “The rubbing of the fire-
shafts” is an expression often used to signify the eliciting the
spark of genius or learning that may be in a man. The two
sticks by which the Arabs produced fire were called—the one Jj,
and the other 503}; the former was made of the wood called
jic, the latter of tr these being found the most fitted to pro-
duce a spark. The wood called eo was also used. Compare
. Prov. Arab. IT. 208 and 256. The two are called ..,\43;, but the
plural form oj; is used as a singular (Prov. Arab. IT, 143).

Best of treasures.—For a full discussion of the form j\s\
and the use of 5 as a comparative, see Lane’s Lexicon.

Health to you this morning.—An ancient form of salutation,
said to have been first addressed to kings. It is often used in
the early poets. Imr al Kays thus addresses the deserted habi-
tation of his mistress (Diwan, p. 20, 1. 1). Compare’ also
Moallakah of “Antarah, 1. 2,

Morning draught.—The copiousness of the Arabic language is


4


296 NOTES.


exemplified in the terms applied to draughts at the various times

of the day. Hariri says in the Durrah (Anthol. Gram. Arabe,

p. 27, Arabic Text) that the drink of the morning is called ce

_ that of the evening (39.¢, that of mid-day (J.5, that of the night
iss, that at day-break & ii le.

The rival had compassion—The envious pitied.—\)\z is he who
wishes to be ini your condition without depriving you of it;
dul» is he who wishes to pull you down from it. The former,
ambitious emulation, is a venial sin. A Tradition cited by Lane
(Book I. p. 698) says that Mohammed was asked, “‘ Does la.e, i.e.
the wishing for a blessing, on condition that it shall not become
transferred from its possessor, injure him who entertains it?” He
replied, “No; save only as the beating off of the leaves injures
the tree called ‘“idah,” that is, it only diminishes without annul-
ing its author’s recompense, like the beating off the leaves
without cutting the tree down, for the leaves will grow again. On
the other hand, aus is a great sin, being the first committed
against God in heaven, for Iblis envied Adam; and the first com-
mitted on earth, for Kabil (Cain) envied Habil (Abel) and killed
him. The Prophet said, ‘‘ Have compassion on three—the rich
who has become poor; the powerful, who has been abased ; and
the wise, who is mocked by fools.”

Anointed our eyes.—We were koheled., The (\=° or ointment
of antimony was applied by women to the lids of their eyes
from a very early time; a legend makes Zarkéi ’l Yemameh the
first woman who used it. For an account of her and her marvel-
lous powers of eyesight, which, according to the story, were
attributed by her to the use of kohl, see Caussin de Perceval,
I. 101, and commentary to Fiftieth Assembly ; also Prov. Arab. 1.
192, ‘‘ More keen-sighted.than Zark&’l Yemameh.” The term is
here used to express the dull look which i ac would give
to the eyes,

Came to forget our saddles: being reduced to go on foot.
Thus Aba Zayd, in the character of an old woman, in the Thir-
teenth Assembly, says, ‘‘ That on which I carry is now my back
after being my beast.”


NOTES. 297


How noble—The metre of these verses is j=, which is
often used in improvised compositions, being the most simple
and unconstrained form of metrical rhythm. Yet there is none
which has so much engaged the attention of prosodists, and given
rise to s0 many discussions. In early times there was no such
thing as a regular poem, but verses were uttered by each
according to his need, to express his feelings of anger, regent-
ment, joy, or surprise. A great number of these versicles have
been handed down, and whether we look upon them as having
been spoken by those to whom they are attributed, or composed
by early reciters and story-tellers, they undoubtedly represent
the oldest form of Arab metrical composition. The chief feature
of these was a continuous rhyme; for though the verse was
commonly made up of a simple metrical foot of the normal form
priiomce, this does not seem to have been originally essential to
the style. The records of the Ignorance have preserved a number
of metrical rhymed verses of a simpler structure than those of
the poets who, in the age preceding Mohammed, brought Arabic
poetry to its perfection. The peculiarity which distinguishes
this rejez from other metres is that in its original form it was
apparently not divided into two hemistiches. For this reason Al
Khalil ibn Ahmed would not allow it to be verse, and the Arabic
writers always make a distinction between ls and ;>\,. But
although they insist on this difference, they have endeavoured to
bring the j=, under the same metrical laws as other kinds of
verse, and various ingenious theories have been propounded to
account for its peculiar structure. According to the accepted
system, >) is the second metre of the third circle, or 35\o
west, which is formed by the primitive foot .j\.clie, thrice
repeated, and the normal measure of the j>, is priae,
price price, twice. This measure has been used by the
poets, but is probably only a development of the simpler form.
The measure of the lines in this Assembly is , 2, that is,
one half of the verse is thrown away, so that though the verses
are rhymed there is properly no _2.,5 and no w,<. For the


298 NOTES.


diversities of opinion on the subject see Freytag’s Darstellung der
Arabischen Verskunst p. 234. The last foot of the verse is
declared by one writer to be an _25,<, and by another a Ww Spd}
but the most reasonable explanation is that the original form of
the j=, is simply an indivisible verse, consisting of prions
twice or thrice repeated.

Of the Wils;, there enter into this metre wes rise and Ja,
which have been already explained, so that <jlei-..» may drop
either the Cw, or the —3, or both together. Hence the extreme
simplicity of the verse, and its fitness for improvised and inarti-
ficial addresses. The name j>, signifies a weak, trembling
metre, and is derived from the effect produced on the hearer by
a series of short lines with a number of short syllables and a con-
tinuous rhyme. ‘\j>-, GU is the she-camel afflicted with a
disease which makes her haunches tremble,

Perfected by it.—The meaning of Ws is it suffered loss or

diminution, and a2.:\ is, it became complete, and in a right
state, lit. “ 2 demanded loss or diminution,” because these some-
times follow completeness. Or it may be that W is a substi-
tute for », the meaning being acwl. Lane.
_ How many a full moon.—A person in authority, called 20
from his loftiness and splendour. %,., is applied to various
sums of money; some say ten thousand dirhems, some seven
thousand denars. It is here used to signify a large sum of
money, such as would bribe a man in power, and make him des-
cend from his high state to fulfil the seeker’s desire.

By the truth of the Lord: the necessary eaistence by His onn
essence.

His Sear.—_ di signifies fear of God, by which one guards
one’s self from sin, and from punishment in the world to come.
Compare Ta rifat, p. 68; also Baydawi, on word pe, at begin-
ning of the Second Sura.

Its power is supreme.—Abi Zayd’s fear of irreverence is
grounded on the use of (> to signify especially the greatness
of the Deity, to whom this word is generally applied. J>


NOTES. 299


means the supreme greatness and majesty of God, or his abso-
lute independence. Abd Zayd asks pardon for saying that
money is Almighty. . ;

The honourable performs what he promises.—This saying was
first uttered by Al Harith ibn ‘Amr al Kindi to Sakhr ibn
Nahshal. Harith had said to Sakhr, “Shall I show thee.
booty, on the condition that I receive the fifth part of it?”
“Yes,” answered Sakhr. Harith had then directed him to a
caravan from Yemen, which Sakhr plundered. Harith then
uttered these words, which passed into a proverb. The legend
goes on to relate that Sakhr’s tribe desired to evade payment of
the fifth, until he seized a hill by which they must pass, and,
after a fight, compelled them to fulfil his agreement with Harith.
Prov. Arab. II. 747 and I. 52.

The rain-cloud pours if it has thundered.—}\s are clouds
which make you think there is rain in them. Thus the word
cannot be applied to a cloud after the rain has come out of it.

He cast it into his mouth.—This superstitious usage seems to
be common in many parts of the world.

The adornment of the loved one, the colour of the lover.—The
adornment refers to the impression of the coinage ; the colour to
the yellowness of the gold.

The niggard shrink from the night-farer.—To receive the
traveller at night, and to minister to his needs, was one of the
most sacred duties of the Arabs. For this purpose the generous
used to pitch ‘their tent near the camel-tracks, that the traveller
might not miss it, or on heights that he might discern it from
afar; they were accustomed also to light fires, that he might
find his way to them by night. Thus Abd Zayd, in the
Thirteenth Assembly, says, “ Their fires were kindled for the tra-
vellers, and they fed the guest with fresh meat.” Compare also the
beginning of the Forty-fourth: “On a dark night I spied a
fire lighted on a hill top, the sign of liberality.” Compare also
Hamiseh I. p. 693, where a poet says, “I occupy the road with my
tent and ita vestibule; I settle on the tops of the hills, and dwell
there ;” and p. 699, where it is said of one: “His fire was


300 ' ‘NOTES.


kindled on. the hill when the fires of others were veiled. He
was not the richest of men, but he was the widest of arm (the
most generous.)”

Many similar passages will be found in the Wiley) Hb
Ee). The traveller often made a noise to set the dogs bark-
ing, so as to be guided to an inhabited place; he was then called
cue: compare Fifth Assembly. The niggardly man was as
much despised as the generous man was admired. His pot was
said to be cold, and he was compared with a glowworm, whose fire
warms nothing. A certain Madir was noted for his meanness :
see p. 517, De Sacy’s Hariri; also Prov. Arab. I. 190. Kosa’
was also proverbial for his stinginess, since he burnt his dog’s
throat to prevent him from barking, so that travellers might not
-be brought to his tent. Prov. Arab. I. 202. The early Arab
poets are full of the most extravagant praises of the liberality
both of themselves and those they celebrate; and this virtue
appears to have been carried to the wildest excesses. The history
of Hatim Tay, as recorded in legends and proverbs, is the most
conspicuous instance of this. Hariri, in his verse, attributes the
meanness which sometimes marked the reception of a benighted
wayfarer to the corrupting influence of the denar.

Save by fleeing from thee.—The meaning is that money can
only render service to a man when it quits him.

How abundant is thy shower —The two forms of admiration
aledl Le and a (Jei! occur in this Assembly ; the latter at the
beginning of the first rez, the former in this passage. Fora
full explanation of them, see Alfiyeh of Ibn Malik, with com-
mentary of Ibn “Akil, p. 228, edition of Dieterici, or p. 178
Boulak edition. The theory concerning them which is accepted
by these grammarians, is that, in the case of fy dj wn | L., the
Le is the inchioative (luz-e), and is ds 5G or a perfect indeter-
minate, that (wo! is the past tense of the verb; the pronoun
hidden in it referring to le, and {sj being the object of the
verb, The proposition is the .* of le, and the virtual meaning
fu; ano! ‘=. In the second form, 4 aes , the verb expresses


NOTES. 301


admiration under the form of the imperative, its agent being
the noun mejrir by “4, and the “y being pleonastic. The proof
that ( ju»! is a verb is that it takes the 434 ..,93 before the os of
the first person. The question whether the le is dU is not of
much importance; the dictum of Sibawayh is in opposition to
the opinion of Al Akhfash, who makes it iycye. In one case
the sense would be, “ What a thing makes Zayd handsome!”
or, “ What a making of Zayd handsome ‘there is!” In the
other it would be, “That which makes Zayd handsome, or the
making of Zayd handsome, is a wonderful thing.” . For the con-
ditions under which admiration can be expressed by these two
forms the student must be referred to the Alfiyeh itself.

Agreement binds strongest.—Prov. Arab. I. 669. The author
of this saying was a judge of the Arabs, who addressed it to a
dishonest suitor.

Tossed him.—Tossed him gently ; the meaning of “ give” is
secondary.

The twice-read chapter.—The first chapter of the Koran is
evidently. here meant. It begins with the words, “‘ Praise to
God, the Lord of the world,” and may therefore be fitly used in
returning thanks for any blessing. The poet Ibn Rashik, quoted
by Sherishi, says of a beautiful boy whom he had been describ-
ing, ‘Say to him who admires his beauty, ‘Repeat over him
the Sura of Praise.” The word Lake, which occurs in the
Koran, xv. 87, has given rise to much controversy. The
passage runs, “ We have given thee sll! ys (enw.” The expla-
nation of Baydawi, which is commonly adopted, is that this
refers to the seven verses of the first Sura; he gives, however, a
dictum which asserts that it signifies seven Suras, of which the
first is the Cow and the last the double chapter, the ,Jlu\
and the &,3. “Compare also xxxix. 24. Other significations
are also propounded, for which see Lane. Hariri uses the word
to signify the first Sura, which is pronounced twice in every act
of prayer or rek‘ah.

Blessing his morning's walk.—I have thus translated to dis-


302 NOTES.


tinguish os> from ~~ which follows; though the distinction
made by the author is somewhat hard to seize. Ié is said that
«> is praise for that which depends on the will of the person
praised ; so that praising a pearl for its clearness is not wo»
y though it is cae. In the present case ws> would seem to be

more applicable to the company. But as» also has the signifi-
cation of lowly and reverent praise, and may therefore refer to
the providential morning’s walk, by which God mepuene him to a
generous friend.

What is thy condition. _For dealt ols, see Alftyeh, line 313,

The tempest.—A strong, hot wind, that strips and burns the
trees, -

I have feigned to be lame.—The metre of these verses is
~ 2 lise, as of those at the end of the First Assembly, except
that here the (yd is Wi,is*. The same liberty of making the
aye d= also obtains.

There is no guilt on the lame.—An allusion to the Koran,
xxiv. 60, where it is said that there is no harm in the blind
or the lame sitting at mens’ tables, The Arabs of the Ignorance
had a superstitious prejudice on this subject, which Mohammed
sought to remove. Abi Zayd now takes the words from the
‘context, and turns them into an excuse for himself. Or he may
allude to xviii, 17, which excuses the lame man from going to
war.


THE FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


Looked upon the features of joy.—Unveiled jby as a bride.
The word , J=>-| is applied to the unveiling and looking upon a
bride by the bridegroom.

Broken the staff.—A phrase of doubtful origin, but meaning
to depart from or forego. The Arabs said of one who deserted
his tribe, “ He breaks the staf ;” s0 one breaks the staff of the
Moslems by deserting the faith. Here the meaning merely is,
they avoided or eschewed dissension.


NOTES. 303


The milk-flows.— Literally, the milk which has collected in the
udder between two milkings.

Like the teeth of a comb.—An expression of the Prophet ;
“Men are as (like each other as) the teeth of a comb.” Ina
bad sense they say as dike as the teeth of an ass.

A night youthful in prime, etc.—A night in the early sat of
the month, when there is no moon. The comparison between a
dark night and youth, and between a moon-lit night and the
silvered hair of age, is not uncommon. Compare the Second
Assembly, And now his dark night was moon-lit ; also the Fifth,
Its hind locks grew gray in the dawn.

The white camels.— wos signifies literally, “of mixed white
and red.”

The night-halt. UY yyr5 WAS & halt for rest towards the end of
the night.

The groan and the roar.—The one is the groan of the camel
when its burden oppresses it; the other is the hoarse voice of the
male, when he protrudes his shikshikah.

His talk-fellow.—aAll through the Assemblies we shall have
mention of these night-conversations. The Arabs, like the
natives of many hot climates, took a siesta in the middle of the
day, and devoted the cool of the nights to those long colloquies
in which first their genius for poetry, and then their fancy for
every kind of rhetorical subtleties were fostered. The word
means the shade of the moon, or that half darkness which pre-
vails during moonlight in a place which the moon do@® not shine
upon ; but it is also applied generally to the dark of a moonless
night. sill, aul! ales! J means “TI will never do it.” By a
natural transition, it came to signify the place of conversation,
and then the conversation itself. For a curious derived sense of
ay see Prov. Arab. II. 513. Compare also Hariri’s own re-
marks in his interpretations to the Forty-fourth Assembly.

My companion.— Ja»; is he who rides with or behind one on
the same beast.

Alas.—Ssy is either a contraction of A%.,, or an ejacula-

" tion expressing eurprise.


304 NOTES.


Only he who clings should be clung to.—A proverb referred to
Al Aghlab al “Ajali.

The sun rise.—Hariri says in the Durrah that 2&5 only
applies to the rising of the sun during winter.

1 Excellently said thy father.—The phrase « eld i is interpreted as

“ ascribed be to God,” that is “ fitting to God, through its excel-
lence is what thy father said.”—-Compare the common expression
jo all.

Whoso attaches.—The metre of these verses is te» like that
of the verse quoted in the Second Assembly ; but with this
difference, that the 4 is WigiGe uss, like the (49 ,¢ 5 both
becoming .\cb.

These verses appear to have been imitated from Imr al Kays.
(Diwan, p. 49). The poet says :—

“TJ break with him who breaks with me ; I unite with him who wishcs
union with me.”

And ee

“T join my cord to thine, and by the feathering of thy arrow I feather
mine.”


There may be some one.—For the use of \y, see Alfiyeh,
v. 366. |

The sun.— 3 is said to be a proper name, and feminine,
and for this reason imperfectly declined.

With an earliness beyond the earliness of the crow.—The sub-
stance of the note quoted by De Sacy from Sherishi is as follows:
When J, is used in 9 comparison among the Arabs as in this
case, ‘‘ With an earliness not as the earliness of the crow,” the
meaning is that the thing compared is inferior to the object of
comparison. Thus in the proverbial phrase CALS 3, is (a
man, but not as Malik) the meaning is that the person spoken of
was not equal to. Malik in bravery and goodness. But Hariri
evidently uses the idiom in the opposite sense, and wishes to say
that the earliness was superior to the earliness of the crow.
Sherishi says that this use, though not pure Arabic, was common
in Irak, and that it prevailed in the West among the people of
Morocco, though not in Andalusia. It is also to be met with in


NOTES. 805


the writings of modern authors, and notably in the Assemblies
of Al Hamadaini. This Malik, whose name has thus passed '
into a proverb (Prov. Arab. II. 213), was Malik ibn Nowayrab,
who was treacherously put to death by Khalid ibn al Welfd,
under the Khalifate of Aba Bekr. For the narrative, see Hamaseh,
p. 370, in the commentary to some beautiful lines of Malik’s
brother, Mutemmim ibn Nowayrah, to whom the proverb is
attributed. For another proverbial expression given by Sherishi,
. “A meadow, but not as the plant Sadan,” see Prov. Arab.. II.
617. It must be observed, however, in Hartri’s defence, that in
both the phrases cited as testimony of Arabic usage, the object
of comparison is preceded by J, which makes an obvions
difference in the sense. The idiom of Hariri resembles that
which occurs in the Thirty-second Assembly, “guile, as was not
the guile of Pharaoh towards Moses,” that is, “ greater than the
guile of Pharaoh ;” so here the literal sense is, “an earliness
as is not the earliness of the crow,” that is, “ unequalled by the
earliness of the crow.”

Two worn mantles.—The 3,) was an oblong cloth, striped down
the sides, which was thrown round the body. Mr. Lane says,
“The modern ion in every case in which I have seen it, I have
observed to be an oblong piece of thick woollen cloth, generally
brown, or of a dark or ashy dust colour, either plain, or having
stripes so narrow and near together as to appear, at a little
distance, of one colour; used both to envelope the person by day
and as a night covering.”

To shake for them the fruited branches: to procure for them
the bounty of the travellers.

The training-ground.—The place where horses that were to
run in a race (4\>) were exercised.

Spies and scouts.—Those who go before an army to spy out
the position of the enemy, and those who go before a caravan or
tribe to find a fit place for halting or settlement,

And the wasted bank of the day had nigh crumbled in.—This
strange similitude is taken from the eating away of the under

‘part of a bank by a rapid stream, so that the rest is ready to fall
20


806 NOTES.


in. The meaning is that Abd Zayd wasted their day little by
little, until at last they discovered that it was evening and the
day gone. There is probably an allusion to Koran ix. 110.
Motarrezi, cited by De Sacy, remarks on the incongruity of this
metaphor, not ye in itself, but in-respect to the former
karineh.

The greenness “op dung-heaps: a proverbial expression for a
fair exterior which masks deceit. The 4.0. was the pen where
camels or sheep had been kept during the sojourning of a tribe
on a particular spot. When the tribe migrated the place became
covered with a rich grass, very fresh and green to the eye, but
rank and coarse, and not relished by the herd. The word is used


generally in the same sense as Ji, to signify the traces of the
encampment in the form of ashes and other refuse. Zohayr,
- Moallakah, 1, 1; Lebid, Mo‘allakah, 1.8. The Prophet said
‘Beware of the green of dunghills.” It was said to him,
‘What is that, O Apostle of God?” He said, “A beautiful
woman of a bad stock.”

When they have eaten separate.—The metre of these verses is
iS, which is a metre of the second circle, or cali i Slo, 80
called from ‘all its feet being seven-lettered. This circle is
' formed by the third primitive foot cpslin, thrice repeated,
which is the measure of the ily one of the two used thetres of
this circle, The normal measure of the (\w\S is
The (29, in these verses is i,;<*, and the .,< is identical with
it; so that the measure is the normal measure, minus one foot of
each hemistich.

Of the Wile}, there enter into this metre cl, which is the
quiescing of the moved second letter of a foot. By this licence
icles becomes ,jleinuwe, and as it may take place in any part
of the verse, the «lS may be made identical with the j>).
However, if the original foot occur even once, you may know
that the metre is «lS. Another licence is (<3, which is the
dropping of the moved second letter of a foot. Thus, ,jclire


NOTES. 807


becomes .jcliv. The third licence is js, which is the union
of jest and is By this .\cliis becomes (leiie. Instances
of the two former licences may be found in the verses.

In the Koran (Sura xxxiii. 53), it is written, ‘‘ 0, believers,
enter not the house of the Prophet, unless ye be permitted to eat
there; but, if ye be invited, enter, and when ye have eaten,
separate, and go not familiarly into conversation, etc.” _Moham-
med once entered the house of his freedman and adopted son
Zayd, and there, by accident, he saw Zayd’s beautiful wife,
Zaynab. The Prophet instantly became enamoured, and ex-
claimed in admiration, ‘‘ Praise to God, who inclines men’s
hearts!” Zaynab understood his language, and, possibly desir-
cus of a higher alliance, reported it to her husband. Zayd, out
of gratitude or respect to the Prophet, announced his purpose of
- repudiating his wife, alleging as his reason her haughty manner
towards him, Mohammed then resolved te marry her; but as
a marriage with the wife of an adopted son was contrary to Arab
usage, a revelation was necessary to give this liberty to the
Prophet and his followers. The marriage was celebrated with
great splendour. A number of Moslems were invited by the
Prophet, and the banqueting lasted far into the night. Moham-
med, who was anxious to retire, became angry at the tedious
familiarity of his followers, and soon after.the above words were
revealed, and established a more respectful usage at the enter-
tainments of the Prophet. Abfi Zayd, as in the last Assembly,
quotes the Koran as an excuse for his behaviour.

His witticism.—The meaning of 43\,+. is a pretty and witty
story, and the more reasonable etymology makes it to be what is
“gathered” of the sweets of flowers or fruit, as by bees, and
thus, by a natural transition, the sweets of conversation or story-
telling. Compare 4a\G and aS. But the usual tradition is,
that Khorafeh was a man of the tribe of ‘Othrah and an inhabit-
ant of Medina, who, being questioned, after a long absence, by
‘Omar, related that he had been carried away by Jinn, and had
‘married a female of the race. A war had broken out between


308 NOTES.


the believing and the unbelieving Jinn, and God had given the
victory to the believers. Khordfeh had been taken prisoner
with others, but as soon as the believing Jinn heard that he was
& Moslem they had given him his liberty, and permitted him to
return to mankind. People disbelieved this story, and his name
passed into a proverb as a teller of wonderful and impossible
tales: so that it was said, ‘‘ Vainer than the tale of Khorafeh.”
Prov. Arab. II. 716. The Prophet, however, is related to
have said that the story of Khorafeh was true: a tradition which
countenances the belief in Jinn. Sherishi, in his commentary,
relates at length a tradition of “Ayisheh, who testified that
having once asked the Prophet to tell her the story of Khorafeh,
he had declared that Khorfeh was a good man, and had then
told her how he had been made captive by Jinn. The adventure
contains a narrative of a man, who, by drinking at a certain
well, had been changed into a woman, and borne children, and
who by drinking again, had been changed back to the male form,
and begotten more children; of a second man, who continually
followed a bull which he was unable to overtake, and a third,
who had enchanted horses. The stories are much after the order of
the Arabian Nights, and, if the tradition be authentic, it is chari-
table to believe that Mohammed related them more to amuse
his young wife than to instruct her in the truth. In the Six-
teenth Assembly, Hariri uses the word with the article to signify
the idle tales told in a night-talk.


THE FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


_ Kufa.—Of Kufa in Irak, the rival in eloquence and learning
to Basra, I have spoken in the Introduction.

Whose complexion was of a two-fold hue, whose moon was as an
amulet of silver.—The meaning of this description is that it was
a night of a crescent moon, which sets early and leaves the earth
in darkness, so that the night is one of two hues, the moonlight


NOTES. 809


and the gloom. The amulet to which the moon is here coim-
pared was a crescent-shaped piece of silver hung round the neck
of children to preserve them from Jinn, the evil eye, and other
dangers. It was generally inscribed with verses of the Koran.

Sahbén.—Sahbin Wa’il was the most celebrated preacher and
orator of the early days of Islam, and his name has become pro-
verbial, like that of Koss, bishop of Najrin. He was born in
the time of Mohammed, and died in the year 54 (a.p. 673). It
is related of him that he could preach for hours, and that he
once preached before the Khalif Mu awiyeh from early morning
to the mid-day prayer. He required to hold a staff in his hand,
and on being told that this was not suitable to the presence of the
Khalif, he defended himself by the example of Moses, who held
a staff when delivering the messages of God. Koran xx. 72,
and xxvi. 31. One of the earliest extant specimens of an Arab Jb.
in rhymed prose is by Sahbin. It contains the usual incentives
to morality, founded on the shortness of life, and the certainty
of future reward and punishment. Some specimens of his versifi-
cation have been preserved, The family of Talhah, at Basra,
was noted for its generosity. The most illustrious member of it,
called for his munificence Talhat at Talhat, was governor of
Sejestan, and Sahbin thus addressed him :

O Talhah, most noble in worth, most generuus with thy hereditary
wealth ; , ;

Thine it is to give, so give to me; then on me will it be to praise thee
in the assemblies.

Talhah said, “Choose what thou wilt.” Sahban answered,
“Thy bay horse, and thy baker lad, and thy castle of Zerenj,
and ten thousand dirhems.” Talhah said, “ Fie! thou hast
asked of me according to thy own measure, and that of thy
people Bahileh, not according to my measure; thou art to be
blamed for asking 80 little ; if thou hadst asked all my castles, ,
slaves, and beasts I would have given them.” It may be re-
marked that Bahileh was the least esteemed of the Arab tribes. _
It is related of Sahbin that, on a question of reconciliation
between two tribes, he spoke half a day, without repeating a


310 NOTES.


single word. See Prov. Arab. I. 450. “More eloquent than
Sahbin Wail.”

Each was a man to remember from and not to guard against.— .
Ati is impossible to avoid some awkwardness in the translation of
‘this sentence, in which the word i> is used in two different
though cognate senses.

Fascinated us, or gained the mastery over us. A similar use
of the word occurs in the Forty-third Assembly.

Rousing the dogs.—Literally, making them to bark. When a
traveller lost his way in the darkness, he shouted so as to set
barking any dogs that might be near. By these means he was
guided to a habitation. Compare Imr al Kays, Diwan, p. 49,

‘last line of the poem. The word is often used by poets as
synonymous with a belated traveller.

O people of the mansion.—The metre of these verses is j=),
like that of the verses on the denar, in the Third Assembly, with
the exception! that here the last foot suffers .5, which is the
dropping of the last letter of a gAS* oy at the end of a foot,
and the quiescing of the letter before it. By this licence eiuwW
becomes ..jgeie. It will be observed that there is here an uneven
number of verses, so that the distinction between V49,¢ and 3
cannot exist.

Like the new moon.—He likens himself to the new moon,
becanse he is thin, bent in shape, and pale or yellow in com-
plexion.

Begging boldly.—In the Koran, xxii. 37, the believer is com-
manded to give of his meat both to the gil5 and the pe ex+
plained to mean him who waits and is content with what is given
him without begging, or else begs very humbly, and him who
begs boldly and openly. Abdi Zayd uses both terms in these
verses as deecriptive of himself.

Knew what was behind his lightning.—One of the many
figurative expressions taken from the rain-cloud, to signify
knowledge of a man’s real nature and acquirements. We knew


NOTES. 311


by the verses which he uttered that behind the sudden solicite-
tion of the traveller was hidden a pight’s amusement for us.

I will not roll my tongue over your food.—This word, which
signifies to move the tongue in the mouth over the remains of a
mouthful, is used in the Thirty-seventh Assembly in the sense of
to taste, to get the full savour. Abd Zayd’s son complains that
his father made him taste the savour of beggary. Compare
Job, xx. 12. .

In a note to the verses on the letter , in the Forty-sixth
Assembly, two other forms of kas) are given, namely Sd) and
¢e. This variability of the third radical is very common in


Arabic, particularly in words that express very familiar ideas.
and are much in the mouth of the people. A certain weakness
in one of the radicals, generally the third, is to be remarked both
in Arabic and Hebrew, and has encouraged the belief that the
original Semitic roots were biliteral and monosyllabic, and that
another letter was developed in the eourse of ages, as a larger
variety of ideas required expression. M. Ernest Renan (His-
toire des Langues Sémitiques, p. 96) says, “ On est amené a se
représenter chaque racine sémitique comme essentiellement com-
posée de deux lettres radicales, auxquelles s’est ajoutée plus tard
-une troisiéme, qui ne fait que modifier par des nuances le sens
principal, parfois méme ne sert qu’d compléter Ie nombre ternaire.
Les monosyllabes bilitéres obtenus par cette analyse auraient
servi, dans ’hypothése que nous exposons, de souche commune
a des groupes entiers de radicaux trilitéres offrant tous un méme
fond de signification. Ce seraient ld, en quelque sorte, les élé
ments premiers et irréductibles des langues sémitiques. En
effet, presque tous ces radicaux bilitéres sont formés par onoma-
topée.” The two letters 93, for instance, express the idea of
scratching or scraping which is found in the verbs 353, “M3,
73, 793, S53, DAY, DY, YU, WD; to the two letters WB belong
a similar series of verbs. Similarly, in Arabic, we have 45),
ee ar ede Sh 3,3, jf, gi, ete. Compare also M.
Renan’s remarks in the same work (Book V. chap. 2.) It bas


312 NOTES.


nlso been observed that the etymologies, or rather plays on .
words, in the Pentateuch often assume the biliteral root,
(Genesis iv. I, v. 29.) The Arab authors have not failed to
observe this characteristic of their language. De Sacy, in his
Anthologie, page 449, gives several passages from Motarrezi, in
which that acute grammarian, commenting upon Hariri, re-
marks upon the Sj, or letter-formation of certain verbs, as
expressing certain classes of ideas. Baydawi, in his commentary
on the first verses of the second chapter of the Koran, says
Gu and oi! are of kin, and if yeu go through the verbs,
which begin with these two letters, ., and —5, you will find that
they have the signification of “departing” or ‘“‘going out.”
He makes a similar observation on the verb Pe which,
whether it be spelt with a ct e signifies the gaining of
something sought or “the opening of the way of success.” Then
he adds that words which resemble it in the first {wo letters, such
" cs, 33 and (33, express the notion of “ breaking” and

“opening.” The interest which scholars feel in determining the
early structure of the Semitic languages, and their relations to
those called Atyan, must be my excuse for this somewhat irrele-
‘vant note.

And forbids him his repasts. —Compare Prov. Arab. I. §40,
“‘ Sometimes one eating hinders several.”

The best suppers are those that are clearly seen.—The fall
proverb is given, Proy. Arab. I. 442. ‘“‘The best morning
meals are the early ones, the best evening meals are those that
are clearly seen, or that show their face,” that is, that are taken
before dark.

Unless, by Allah.—On the usage of mol see the commentary
to the Forty-third Assembly, p. 563, De Sacy’s edition, where
also it is explained that the fethah at the end is in substitution
for the vocative particle. Compare the French note to p. 569. '
But the two may be exceptionally combined in poetry: Alfiyeh,
v. 584. See also Baydawi on Koran, iii. 25. The peculiar


NOTES. 313


force of ml as unless indeed, unless possibly, suggests 8 com-
parison with v7) dia in Greek. ,

Shot with the bow.—According to the author of the Kamis,
cited in the commentary to De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 447, .,° haa
here the meaning of ile.s|, and is equivalent to W.

And, lo! it was Abt Zayd.—These words seem not to form
part of the karineh, but to be a kind of exclamation apart from
the regular movement of the cadence.

For if the moon of Sirius has gone down, etc.; if the full moon
of the Lion has maned, etc.—By Shira the Arabs understand the
star which we call Sirius, but they also speak of Shirayan,
meaning Sirius, which they call jy' _.¢ 2J\, and Procyon. The
stations of the moon, according te the Arab astronomers, are
twenty-eight in number. She passes through the signs of the
zodiac in every lunar year twelve times, and remains in each
station a day anda night. Their names are as follows :—

wk bys the two horns of the Ram.
; was the Ram’s belly.
C3 the Pleiads.
wl Aldebaran.
dsid three stars in the head of Orion.
dex» five stars in Orion’s shoulder.
elo two atars above the Twins.
55 nose of the Lion.
wb eye of the Lion.
&,.> forehead of the Lion.
. 55 mane of the Lion.
dio heart of the Lion.
412 the Dog, five stars in the Virgin.
Olio Spica Virginis.
44 the stars , 4 « in the foot of the Virgin.
isk} the horns of the Scorpion.


814 NOTES.


JelS| the Crown.
ws the heart of the Scorpion.
43,3 the Scorpion’s tail.
j\ei stars in Pegasus.
Zola place were no constellation appears.
Eis des the Slaughterer’s Luck, in Capricorn.


7 3,


cl 3 ons the Glutton’s Luck (see Lane, sub voce
Oyrad! Qe the Luck of Lucks, stars in Aquarius,
S31 deS the Luck of the tents, stars in Aquarius.
pal & 4 the fore lip or spout of the Urn.
San gl the hind lip of the Urn.


ys| by the Fish’s belly.
These twenty-eight stations are divided into four parts, seven


being allotted to each of the four seasons; thus 4) is the eighth
of the number, and consequently the first station of summer.
The laborious Nasif al Yazaji has united the names of the stations
of the moon in some verses which are to be found in hig twenty-
second Assembly, page 215.

_ Might be removed.—This rendering, which is sdopied in De
Sacy’s commentary, is given as more ‘idiomatic and apposite
than “he bade take away.” Sherishi allows either.

The hurlings oe extle.—Sherishi gives raed as 8 synonym
of this word; or it‘may mean “ destinations” or “distant goals.”
See Schultens’ note, Harir. Consess. Sex. p. 113.

Like the heart of the mother of Moses.—In the Koran, xxviii.
9, it said, “‘ The heart of the mother of Moses was empty,” that
is, despairing or bewildered at the loss of her child. Another ex-
planation is, “free from care,” because she had confidence in
God, or believed that Pharaoh would take care of the infant.


(Baydawi), From this passage “the heart of the mother of |


Moses,” passed into a proverb as an image of emptineés.
Fate which is bye-named the Father of wonders, i.e. which has
this name asa metonym. The 4S of an Arab is formed from the


NOTES. 315


name of his first or his favourite son, by the prefixion of Aba.
To address a man by this fore-name was commonly indicative of
respect and goodwill. When his names were written at length
it was placed at the beginning of them; thus, Abd Mohammed
Kasim ibn ‘Alt ibn Mohammed ibn ‘Othman al Hariri al Basrt.
Kasim was the name given at birth; ‘Alt, Mohammed, and
“Othman were the names of his father, grandfather, and great
grandfather; Hariri was a name given him from the trade of
his family ; and Basri (the Basrian) from the name of his city.

The dakab or sobriquet given in praise, as Badi' az ZemAn, or
in blame as 45\:!! «3 must be placed after the name, but when the
kinych alone is used, the /akad may be placed either before or
after it. The subject of names is discussed in the Alfiyeh and
its commentary, section phe; and still more fully by Al Ashmini.
and his Commentator, As Sabbin: Boulak edition, Vol. i. a 164.

Hail, people of this dwvelling.—Metre rejez. The word (jal
is mansib, both as being in a state of annexion, and as not
referring to persons actually present to the caller.

Worn with journeys.— spa is here mejrir after gai. This
kind of annexion is called 444 3\s\ or daw 2. Alfiyeh,
v. 387. ,

Aching in entrails.—_sy>- is said to be a masdar used as an
epithet.

Throw anay thy staff—A common expression for settling or
coming to rest.

By the sanctity of the Shaykh who ordained hospitality, and
Sounded the House of pilgrimage in the Mother of Cities.—
According to Moslems, the Kabeh or Holy House of Mecca
was founded by Abrabam. A legend declares that he was called
“Shaykh” because he was the first man who became gray. On
seeing his white hairs he said to the Lord, “ What is this?”
The Lord answered that it was the sign of dignified gravity.
Abraham said, ‘‘ Lord, increase this in me,” and then he became
fully gray, being about 150 years of age. He ordained the
rites of hospitality, since he was the first who entertained guests


816 NOTES.


and fed the poor. He also entertained angels: “Our mes-
sengers came to Abraham with good tidings. They said,
“Peace;’ he answered, ‘Peace,’ and delayed not to set before
them a roast calf.” Koran xi. 72. The hospitality of Abra-
ham is highly celebrated: compare the well known poem of
Sadi, beginning
Jana!) op! Bin CSS pat

which Dr. Franklin paraphrased into the style of the Bible.
Abraham is held by the Moslems to be the original founder
of their religion, which is the worship of one God, and complete
submission to His will. Tradition goes further and makes him
the author of the rites of the pilgrimage, and even of the
usages of civilized life. Thus it is said of him that he was
the first who cut his moustache, and pared his nails, and rasit
pubem, and cleaned his teeth, and parted his hair, and wore
a shirt, and cleansed his nostrils by drawing up water into
them, and in latrind se aqud mundavit. Qn this subject see
Tabari. That he was the founder of the Ka beh is an article of
faith, since it is expressly declared in the Koran (xxii. 27). For
the epithet of the “Friend of God,” applied to Abraham, see
Baydawi on Koran iv. 124. Compare also ii. 118; iii. 60
‘and 89—91 ; also the beautiful legend at vi. 74. For the ex-
planation of the name Bekkeh at iii. 90, see Kashshaf of Zamakh-
shari, Calcutta edition, p. 219, or Baydéwi. Traditions con-
cerning Abraham are to be found in Al Bokhari, vol. ii. p. 338.

Fayd: a place in the Nejd, half way between Mecca and
Bagdad. It is mentioned in the Moallakah of Lebid; and the
passage may be profitably referred to since the commentary con-
' tains a curious remark concerning the declinability of nouns.

The Beni: “Abs. —The tribe of “Abs was one of the most
famous during the Ignorance. It descended from Ghatafan
through Baghid, and was close of kin to Thobyan, with which
it waged a long war. Thia war, which is one of the most cele-
brated events of the pre-islamitic period, is known as the war of
Dahis from the name of a horse belonging to Kays, son of


e NOTES. 317


Zohayr, chief of the “Abs, which was the cause of the dispute.
It lasted forty years, that is, the feud or vendetta which arose
extended over that time; for by the term “war” among the
early Arabs must be only understood a state of chronic hostility,
in which each tribe endeavoured to injure the other by forays,
ambuscades, or single assassinations. The origin of the war of
Déhis was the treachery of a section of the tribe of Thobyan,
who, when Daihis was matched against Ghabra, a mare belong-
ing to a certain Hothayfet ibn Bedr, obtained the victory for the
latter by foul means. The whole story may be read in M,
Caussin de Perceval’s Essai, vol. II. and at the Proverb ‘There
has fallen out between them a war of Dahis and Ghabr&.” Ar.-
Prov. II. 275. Compare also Ar. Prov. I. 210. Elegiac
verses by Kays on Hothayfeh are to be found at Hamiaseh, p.
210. This war, like the war of Basis, was celebrated among
the Arabs for its calamities; hence the proverb More unlucky
than Ddhis. (Prov. Arab. I. 690). Several phrases, said to
have been uttered by Kays during the race, have'also become
proverbial, The “Abs were eventually driven from their settle-
ments, to which they only returned after a considerable time ;
at last they were reconciled with Thobyin. The most cele-
brated personage of the Bent ‘Abs in older times was the war-
rior and poet “Antarah, son of Sheddid. He fought in the
war of Dahis, and was, moreover, author of one of the Mo al-
lakit. His poem was composed in honour of his cousin
“Ableh, whose hand he succeeded in gaining, against the will of
her father and brother. ‘“Antarah was a mulatto, the son of
@ negress slave, and therefore ignoble, wee. He was of so
dark a complexion that, like Ta’abbata Sherran, another poet of
the early age, he was nicknamed 1s, “crow.” For these
reasons his alliance was long rejected, and he was exposed to
treacherous schemes against his life. Yet his valour and genius
made him one of the most conspicuous persons in a remarkable
age, and he has always been reckoned the chief hero of the sons
of ‘Abs. A romance has been founded on his adventures, which
is still one of the most popular works in the East. “Abs em-


318 NOTES.


braced Islam early, and when the deputies came to Medina to
make profession’ of faith on the part of their brethren, the Pro-
phet told them that the warrior he most desired to have seen was
“Antarah. ‘Abs, with the rest of the race of Ghatafin, joined in
the revolt against Abi Bekr, but were subdued by Khalid ibn
Al Walid. Their descendants are said still to inhabit their
ancient regions. —

And be raised when thou fallest.—When a person tripped and
fell, it was usual to utter a pious exclamation, equivalent to
“God raise thee.” The formula was £9 ld, or ld. Compare
Thirty-fourth Assembly, “ And if thou trip he will say \J.”

Barrah was a celebrated woman’s name among the Arabs,
having been borne by one who was sister of Temim, and an
ancestress of Koraysh, two families of the highest repute, the
one for its nobility and generosity, the other for its position at
Mecea, and its kinship with the Prophet. The poet Al Farazdak
says of Koraysli :

They are the sons of Barrah, daughter of Morr; how excellent are they
in mother’s and father’s kin !


For there is no’ progenitor more pure-blooded than Koraysh, and no
maternal uncle more noble than Temim,


(De Sacy’s Commentary to Thirty-seventh Assembly).

A crafty bitd.—dsil) is described as a cautious bird, which
‘looks to the right and left while drinking, through fear of the
fowler, and does not come to the usual waleringeplaces where men
drink, but repairs to stagnant pools. The name is applied to
any cunning and crafty person. Prov, Arab. I. 162. For
Ge al mb, a little further on, see Lane, Book I., p. 399.

Mixed hues.—The author alludes to the mingled joy and care
which had preceded the advent of Abi Zayd, and which were
now lost in unmingled pleasure, as well as to the mixed moon-
light and dark which had been succeeded by a single shade.

The limb of the sun.—éd\\j2 is one of the many figurative
synonyms of the sun, and according to Hariri (in the Durrat al
Ghawwas), it is only used of the rising sun, while & go is only
used of the setting. Sherishi gives ten of these synonyms ; five


NOTES. 819


of which have the s, namely dl\ja\, do te by, ile, and
dx}, while five have it not, (ssl, cist, cieall, WS, and ce:
The word 4J\;2 gives rise to the 63rd question in the Thirty-
second Assembly.

O thou who didst fancy.—The metre of these verses is bw,
which has been explained in the notes to the Second Assembly.
The measure here, however, is that of the third 4, ©, which is
dsoin Se; that is, ick is dropped at the end of each
hemistich, and wriuwe becomes egrie. Its o»é is identical
with it; and both may suffer wx and become ..j9x3. Sometimes
wgrie and wage are interchanged in the same poem; sometimes
ye alone is used, and then the measure is called baud! pis,
on account of its lax and tottering rhythm. This last is the
measure in the present case.,

Al Asma‘t.—Abd Sa‘td ‘Abd al Melik ibn Korayb al iad i,
the most famous man of letters of his time, and the greatest
authority on all points of Arabic learning, was born a.H. 122
(a.p. 740), and died at Basra at the age of eighty-eight years.
His life is given by Ibn Khallikan, who says that he was a com-
plete master of the Arabic language and grammar, and the chief
of those who transmitted orally historical narratives, singular
anecdotes, amusing stories, and rare expressions of the language.
He was a native of Basra, but removed to Bagdad in the reign
of Haran ar Reshid. It is related that Al Asma‘t said that he
knew sixteen thousand pieces of verse, composed in the metre
called rejez. These verses being mostly of great antiquity, and
requiring a knowledge of the archaic words and forms of the
language, could only be retained in the memory of a consum-
mate scholar. It was said of him that none ever explained
better than he the idiom of the desert Arabs, When he was old
and had returned to Basra, the Khalif Al Ma’man often invited
him to court; but as he pleaded feebleness, Al Ma’min used to
draw up questions on doubtful points of literature and send
them to him that he might resolve them. His knowledge of
pure Arabic was so great, that on one occasion he named every


820 NOTES.


part of the horse successively, quoting the verses in which the
poets of the desert. had mentioned each. He composed works
on the human frame, the species of animals, and other subjects
of natural history; on the anmé or settings of the stars which
indicate rain (see Nineteenth Assembly), a work on the hamzeh,
another on the metre rejez, another on masdars, He related of
himself that one day, at the request of Hardin ar Reshid, he
extemporized a poem on the horse, in which he introduced
twenty parts of the horse’s body which have names synonymous
with the names of birds. The poem is extant, and is a wonder-
ful piede of philological learning, but whether it was improvised
by its author may well be doubted. (Ibm Khallikin and Ham-
mer Purgstall).

Al Komayt.—Al Komayt ibn Zayd was the last of three
‘poets of the same name. He belonged to the first century of
Islam, having been born in the year 60. He was learned in
the poetry, the battle days, and the proverbs of the Arabs, and
was a man of accomplishments and generous character. His
political poems, in honour of the house of Hashim, brought on
him the anger of the Khalif Hisham, and nearly cost him his
life. He took sanctuary at the grave of Mu dwiyeh, the lately
deceased son of the Khalif, and the children of Mu 4wiyeh inter-


’ ceded for him. He then replaced the offensive verses in his


poem by others, and was released. He ‘was afterwards murdered
by a body-guard of Yemen soldiers in the year 126. The great
length of his compositions became proverbial. At his death he
had produced 5289 verses, an inordinate number in the eyes of
his countrymen, for the Arab poets were never voluminous.
Hence the expression of Abi Zayd, ‘‘ Such as Al Komayt never
wove,” or as we should say, “ span.” A poet says:


Thy stay, my brother, is so long,
That it is like a poem of Al Komayt.


Some verses composed by him in honour of Meslemet ibn “Abd
al Melik, brother of Welid and Sulayman, are to be found in
Hamiaseh, p. 774. This prince had fought with success against
the Greeks, and twice besieged Constantinople. There were


NOTES. 321


three poets of the name of Komayt; the first, Al Komayt ibn
Tha labeh, was a Jahilt ; the second, his grandson, Al Komayt
ibn Ma‘rif, was a Mukhadram; the third, the subject of this.
notice, was, of course, an Islami. The second is said to have
had the finest poetical genius.

Coals of the Ghada.—A wood proverbial for making a power-
ful and lasting fire. Hariri, in the Forty-seventh Assembly,
Bays : ,

Oft is the ruby burnt in coals of Ghada; then the coals are ex-
tinguished and the ruby is a ruby still. ;

Mr. Palgrave, in his Travels (vol. I., p. 88), says, “ We saw
the Ghada, a shrub peculiar, I believe, to the Arabian Peninsula,
and often alluded to by its poets. It is of the genus Euphorbia,
with a woody stem, often five or six feet in height, and innumer-
able round green twigs, very slender and flexible, forming a
large feathery tuft, not ungraceful to the eye, while it affords
some kind of shelter to the traveller, and food to his camels.”


THE SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


The diversified.—The original meaning of —i.5\ is a horse
which has one of its eyes blue and the other black ; the word is
then applied to other kinds of diversity or variegation. Thus,
wihs{, plural of Wis, signifies brothers who are sons of one
mother, but of different fathers. In the Forty-sixth Assembly,
Abi Zayd bids one of his pupils repeat Ls\ Ll, which
have the same property as those of the present Assembly.

Of the pen.—-The reed-pen, used for writing. The word
is only used of the reed after it is shaped for writing.

Open a virgin style.—Literally, deflower a virgin composition,
i.e., write in a new and untried style, without imitation of former

authors.

: 21


322 NOTES.


Sahbdn W@il has been spoken of in the notes,to the Fifth
Assembly.

Scattered fruit, good and bad, Srom their store—A meta-
phorical phrase, signifying the expression of able or worthless
criticisms. In Sherishi’s commentary it is said that 55° is not

be found among the names of the Arabs for dates; and it is
suggested that it is a provincial term peculiar to Basra, which,
being distinguished for its abundance of the fruit, had doubtless
many local names for it. It may have been a kind used only
for the feeding of animals. As for 3,5, it is applied at the
present day, I believe, to thé cake of pressed dates which is
commonly sold in the London market.

When the quivers were empty—A common metaphor of
Hariri for the exhaustion of a speaker’s arguments. Compare
the Seventeenth Assembly.

Ye have uttered a grievous thing.—A phrase taken from the
Koran, xix. 91, where it is applied to the Christians: ‘They say
that the Merciful has begotten a son; behold! ye have uttered
a grievous (or Abominable) thing; one at which the heavens go
near to cleave in sunder, and the earth to gape, and the moun-
tains to be driven in ruin.’

Skilful in ‘testing. —da,>- is the Arabic form of the Persian
dx, & broker, one who makes bargains for others. Thus the
literal meaning would be “ ye brokers of money-testing,” ye
who make a profession of examining and judging the merits
of works. See, too, De Sacy, Chrest. II., 328.

Ye sages of loosing and binding.—From signifying a priest of.
the Guebres, or fire-worshippers, the Persian dy was applied to
any sage or philosopher, and then to a judge or councillor
of state.

Cuts the envious. = Sihestahi, however, renders it coiled Ge.

President of the Court.—The diwén here irientioned is the
Court of official writing or ixshd’. Sherishi gives a curious
anecdote which, as he imagines, accounts for the derivation of —
dindn. The king of Persia, having ordered a laborious enu-
meration to be completed by his scribes in three days, was


NOTES. 323
amazed at their rapidity in calculation and copying, and ex-
claimed, “I see devils” ..,!y0; hence the place of their assem-
bling was thenceforth called diwdn.

The chough in our land, ete.—For the many meanings
given to baghdth, see Lane. This proverb was originally used
in a sense very different to that which it has here. A hospitable
and powerful tribe, receiving and adopting a stranger, boasted
that “ With us the chough becomes an eagle (or vulture) ;” that
is, “the poorest wanderer by our adoption becomes a powerful
personage.” Hariri uses the proverb merely to signify that the
speaker will not be deceived by the pretensions of an incapable
person, so as to look upon him as a man of eminence. In Arab.
Prov. I. 6, the verb is in the singular and the we is with
dammah. The word is used to signify the weakest and poorest
of birds; thus the verse of a poet :

The common birds have the most chicks :

But the mother of birds (the eagle) hatches but one; she breeds little-
It is said that Wole signifies birds that are preyed upon ; rod is
birds that prey on others; and ra) birds that neither prey upon
others nor are preyed upon themselves, as the swallow.

Each man knows best the mark of his arrow.—As allusions to
the old games of chance of the pagan Arabs are frequent in
Hariri, the remembrance of them being preserved in verses of
the poets, and in popular proverbs, it may be as well to give
some account of the game called pees to which the proverb in
the text refers: The Arabs of the Ignorance were so immoder-
ately given to gambling that they would sometimes stake their
whole property, and when all was lost, play, like the barbarians
of Europe, for their own liberty. For this purpose, as well as
for divination, short, pointless arrows were used, called ciost,
and ¢J;!, the latter name being more peculiarly applied to those
employed in divination; though, according to one interpretation,
it is applied to gambling by arrows in Koran, v. 4. The
stake in the peer was @ slaughtered camel, which was divided
into ten or twenty-eight portions, according as one of two


324° NOTES.


slightly different games was played. The arrows were short
sticks of the tree called Le: and these, when struck against each
other, ‘emitted a peculiar sound, so that an arrow of another
wood was easily discovered, and it may be presumed the use
of it was unfair. The arrom sounded ; it is not one of the right
sort, became a proverbial expression in reference to a false pre-
tender: the words having been used by ‘Omar, .on the day of
Bedr, in speaking of Welid ibn ‘Okbah, who had exclaimed that
he was of Koraysh (Arab. Prov. I. 341). The game was played
by seven persons, and ten or, some say, eleven arrows were used.
According to one authority the ten were named as follows :—


1, Gals 2 wryly 8, eM 4, Cuheslls 5, Guill 6, Seok ;
7, al; 8, ciel; 9, on; 10, sé}\. Each arrow had a


mark on it by which the players might recognise to whom it
belonged ; hence the proverb in the text. In order that there
might be no cheating, each was placed in a leathern case, and
+ the drawer put on a thick glove, so that it was impossible for
him to tell by! sight or feeling to whom any arrow belonged.
It has been said that not more than seven persons played, conse-
quently three of the arrows, the eighth, ninth, and tenth, belonged
_ to no one, and were only added to give greater interest to the
game. The drawer, called (cate, drew from a bag, and when-
ever one of the three unowned arrows came out, it was put in
again. The principle of the game was that the third arrow won
three shares, and the seventh seven shares, while those whose
arrows were drawn first, second, fourth, fifth, and sixth in order,
gained nothing, but had to pay for the beast. When a player
won, it was said oy L.3 76, (see Nineteenth Aseembly,
near the beginning). A different and somewhat unintelligible:
account is given of the game by Nowayri (Freytag; Einleitung in
das Studium der Arabischen Sprache). It seems, however, that a
second game was played, in which the animal was divided into
twenty-eight portions. In this the first arrow gained one por-
tion, the second two, and so on, the seventh gaining seven por-
tions. This kind of gambling was forbidden by the Koran, so that


NOTES. 825


whenever Hariri uses phrases connected with it he. speaks after

the fashion of the Ignorance,—a species of classicism extremely

common among the writers of Islam. The maysir is forbidden

by name, Koran ii. 216, and more strongly v. 4 and 92. , The

latter passage is as follows; “O believers, the maysir and idols

(or any stone or altar that was the object of superstitious rever-

ence), and ¥5\ (arrows for divination), are an abomination of the -
work of Satan.” "The Moslems consider this prohibition to

extend to all games of chance. The “mark” on the arrow

alluded to by Abii Zayd.was called 4+ 5.

With respect to the divination by arrows, Baydawi in “his
Commentary to Koran v. 4, taking the passage to refer to divi-
nation of the future, says that the Arabs used to place three
arrows in a bag: on one was written ‘‘ My Lord bids me;” on
the second “ My Lord forbids me ;” while the third had no in-
scription. When they contemplated any enterprise they drew
one of them: if the first came out, they persisted in what they
purposed ; if the second, they abstained from it ; if the third, they
put it back and drew again, until an affirmative or negative an-
swer was obtained. Ona journey a man would carry these ar-
rows with him and consult them on any occasion of doubt. At
Mecca the statues of Abraham and Hobal are said to have held
in their hand arrows for divination : these Mohammed destroyed.
Pocock long since pointed out the identity of this Arab practice
with the divination spoken of by Ezekiel, xxi. 21: “For the
King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of
the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he
consulted with images (¢eraphim), he looked into the liver. At his
right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains,
to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with
shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a
mount and to build a fort.” He says (Specimen Historie Ara-
bum, p. 318, edition of 1806): Certé quee de hic Bedopartelas
genere vidimus, multum conferre videntur ad illustrandum locum
istum Ezek. xxi. 21. Stetit enim Rex Babylonis in bivio, in ca-
pite duarum viarum ad divinandum divinationem, tersit sagittas,


EX 4 67


326 NOTES.


rogavit imagines (vel, ut Vulgat. divinationem querens, commis-
cens sagittas, interrogavit Idola, ete.) ad quem que affert Hiero-
nymus miré concinnunt cum iis que de isto Arabum antiquorum
more traduntur. , Stabit (inquit) ix ipso “compito, et ritu gentis
sue oracalum consulet, ut mittat Sagitias in pharetram et com-
; misceat eas inscriptas, Sive signatas nominibus singulorum, ut videat
cujus sugitia exeat, et quam prius cititatem debeat expugnare.
Ubi observare liceat’ vocem op op. que: qlias ¢ersit, polivit, reddi
‘solet, ab Hieyonymo hotione commiscendi explicari. Certé apud
Arabea Jil3 idem valet ac 2) ) e-commovit, atque idem hic deno-
tare videtur quod del apud ipsos in descriptione sortilegii sui,
scilicet commovere vel agitare, | ut confusé misceri possent sortes.
As thé Rebels invested Abi. Na‘émeh.—Among the bands of
Separatjsts, or Rebels, who arose after’the death of ‘Othman and
disturbed the Khalifate during many years, was the sect of the
Azarikah, implacable enethies of the House of Omayyeh. In
thd 68th year of the Hijra (a.v. 687) they made an eruption out
of Persia and overran all Trak till they came near Kufa. Al
Mohallib, governor of Mowsil, mustered his troops at Basra-
and met them in battle : they are said'to have fought for eight
monthg without: intermitting a single day. Aba Na‘amet al Ka-
fart ibn al’ Fuja’ah seems to have been at the head of these fierce
sectaries. His life is given by Ibn Khallikin, who says that he
commenced his revolt when Mus ab ibn az Zobayr was governing
Trak as lieutenant of his brother “Abdallah. Mus ab was ap-
pointed to this post in the year 66, and Abii Na Ameh contihued
for twenty years to wage war, and to be saluted with the title of
Khalif. He was a man of wonderful bravery ; and unless the
lines which bear his name in the Hamiaseh have been falsely at-
tributed to him, he had some poetical genius. It is related of *
him that in one of his battles he rode forth from the ranks on a
lean horse, with a cudgel in his hand, and challenged the opposite
party to send out a man to fight with him. One of them went
forth to encounter him, but fled when Abi Na Ameh removed the
covering from his face and showed who he was. “ Whither art
thou going?” exclaimed the rebel champion. “ No man need be


NOTES. 327


ashamed. of flying from’ thee,”. returned! his adversary. Ibn
Khallikin goes on: to say that Abi Na‘ameh continued his suc-
cesses until Sofyin ibn al Abrad al Kelbi marched -againet him
and defeated him in the year 78; and’ notices the discrepancy
between’ this.date and the assertion ‘that: he was saluted as Khalif '
for twenty years after his revolt.-

Verses by’ Aba Na amet‘al Katarf are to be found | in the Ha-
maseh, Vol. I. p. 44. The warrior addresses his souk and bids it «
to be courageous in war, to remember the derthinty, of death, the-
worthlessness of life, and the cammon faté which awaits all mors |
tals.. Ibn Khallikin says of them, “ They would give courage'to * :
the greatest coward God ever created ; ‘and I know of nothing
on the subject to be compared with: them: they eould énjy lave
proceeded from’ haughty spirit aspiting after glory.” Like
many of the early Arab heroes he was also famous for his pulpit
oratory. Sherishi gives a Khotbah by him on the worthlessnese
of the world, and cites gome verses of his compésition. He Shys
that he had the Ainyeh of Abi Nadmeh in war from his mare
‘Na Ameh (ostrich), but, that in ‘peade he was called Abi Mo-
hammed. “ +

The name of Khawarij was given to those fanatical Hiowens
of “Ali who, after the battle of Siffin, repudiated his authority and
went into open revolt against both the contending Khalifs. The
Azdrikah owed their origin to Nafi ibn al Azrak, a heretical
leader. An account of their tenets is given by Ash Shahrestani.
They held “Ali to be an unbeliever, and reverenced his murderer,
“Abdallah ibn Muljim. But with impartial hatred they damned
“Othman, Talhah, Zobayr, “Ayisheh, “Abdallah ibn “Abbas, and
other Moslems. For a full account of Abd Nadmeh, see Weil,
Geschichte der Chalifen, Vol. I. p. 395.

The straightening of my crcokedness : the deliverance of my-
self from embarrassment.

Come with a sign, ete.—Koran xxvi. 154.

Wool thy inkflask.—Make it ready by putting into it the wool
in which the ink is kept absorbed, to prevent it from drying up.

Ghassén is my noble kindred.—The metre of these verses is


328 NOTES.
Jey os? JolS. The JS hag been described in the notes to
the Fourth Assembly, The present measure is considered to be
of the third (5, ye, Which is dxt< Sys, and the first 2
_ Which is (J 3~«, and the metre is as follows :
Pos . willie wel. elie ele
On these bedutiful verses Rickert, who has so well imitated
them, remarks: “ Dieser Ton, den Abi Seid Ofter, und nie ohne
“gu ribren, anstimmt, ist gleichsam der zuriickgedriingte reine
Grundton seines Innern, der von Zeit zu Zeit aus den moralischen
Dissonanzen hervorbricht, und sie in sich aufzuldsen strebt.
Ohne diese einzige Wahrheit in seinem aus Lug und Trug
gewebten Leben kénnte er gar keine poetische Person vorstellen.
Diese elegische Klage um ein verlorenes Jugendparadies, und
diese Sehnsucht nach einem theueren Vaterland, sind nicht er-
dichtet. Man fuhlt das iiberall, wo dieser Ton anhebt, aber voll-
standigen Aufschluss dariber gibt der Dichter, sehr kunstgerecht,
erst in der ehvorletzten Makame. Mann kann sagen: Dieses
gute Hirchen am grauen Siinderkopf ist es, woran der Himmel
ihn halt, um ihn zuletzt aus der Irre zur Heimat zuriick zu
fihren.”
Filled his mouth with pearis.—Conferred on him rich presents.
Sure to-traverse the lands. — Metre .,\ix». See notes to
First Assembly.


THE SEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


I noted the signs of the coming feast.—Literally “I had
observed the flash or lightning of the feast.” The metaphor is
the one common with Hariri of calling the index or promise of
anything its “flash.” As has been remarked in a note to an
earlier Assembly, the allusion is to the lightning-flash of a cloud,
from the aspect of which the Arabs prognosticated rain. The


tt


NOTES. 829


4


name Barka id enables the author to make an indifferent play on
words. The derivation of the word wX.© given by Sherishi is that
Adam was expelled from Paradise; but afterwards God relented
towards him and restored him on this day ; which was thence-
forth called a,c, because Adam was restored (ane) to fayour
upon it.

dis rites, bounden or of free will. —According to ‘the commen-
tators the obligatory rite, Which no Moslem might neglect, was -
the giving of alms at the end of the fast; while that which was
optional, though praiseworthy, was to attend the public prayer
on the day of the feast. The usual meaning of fard is an
observance commanded in the Koran, or by the most weighty
tradition ; while neff relates to something recommended as be-
coming in a believer, and undertaken spontaneously ‘by him.
For the literal meaning of the latter word, see Ta rifat, p. 265.
But the limits of obligation varied according to the interpretation
of the Doctors, and one commentator interprets the passage
according to the rite of Ash Shafii't, to which Hariri belonged.

In new apparel. —This is a Tradition originating with ‘Ayisheh,
who related that the Prophet had said, “ It is incumbent upon
all of you besides your suit (of two garments) for common
use, to have a suit for Friday and for the Feast.” Compare
Koran vii. 29.

Brought up its horsemen and its footmen.—Paraphrased by
De Sacy, “‘ accompagné de toute sa pompe et de tout son éclat.”
It may, however, be here taken literally, though used in a meta-
phorical sense in Koran xvii. 66. See notes to Hariri’s Preface.

A pair of cloaks, or overalls, worn by beggars, instead of the
usual ,!;!, or waist wrapper, and ‘\o,, or wrapper for the whole
body, which made up the i>, or dress.

Like a goblin, es i is explained to be the female of the race
of Jyé, the male being-called -CSe. The Ghil is well known
from the tales of the Thousand and One Nights. It was a malig-
_ nant demon, of a nature akin to the Jinn. It would light a fire
_ to attract travellers in the desert, and then assume various and


330 NOTES.


horrible forms, which either killed the wanderer with fright, or
made him powerless against its attacks. But if his courage was
proof against these terrors, it would not hurt him, and he sat
and warmed himself by its fire. De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 480.
Mohammed denied the existence of these beings, or rather of
their so murdering mankind. Jinn, however, are expressly men-
tioned in the Koran, and give their name to the 72nd Sura.
When a man was lost in the deseft, the belief was that he
had been carried off by Ghils. Compare the proverb, More
wandering than Sindn: Arab. Prov. II. 17. The c+ b5 was
akin to the Ghal. From the Arabian Nights it would appear
that the “Afrit was, in the popular estimation, a being of superior


* nature and more formidable powers.


*


. Each simple one.— Each that appeared as if he could be easily
imposed upon, and cheated of his money by the arts of the men-
dicant couple. . A long dissertation on the word ,..); is given by
De Sacy in the Chrestomathie.

Sure I have pecome crushed, etc—The metre of these verses is
<> the first metre of the third circle or —Ji=4| 510. Its mea-
sure is ,jjcliv wreclie ijiclis, twice. It is, however, rarely


found complete; the usual measure being that of the present


- verses which is ‘y;e*. Of the Wsle-; there enter into this metre


oss and Wi, making .jelty and eclle. An instance of the
latter occurs in the sixth line. ,

To kin or-lord.—This rendering of ,J{ is authorized by Sherishi,
and sdems the most reasonable. It is certainly better than “ mi-
serly.” De Sacy translates “les grands et les puissans.”

The. garb of the verses, i.¢., the elaborate dress of assonance
and*rhyme in which they were arrayed.

A fee to an informer is lanful.—To one who is employed to
make a discovery, or to find lost articles. These words have re-
ference to the prohibition of Mohammed against paying money
to a divineress, &a\S, to discover anything lost, or any secret, by
magical rites. But it was still allowable to give a fee to one
who should obtain information by legitimate means.


NOTES. 831


The Return,—I have thus rendered sal wid by which Mos-
lems express the exclamation “We belong to God, and to Him
we return.”

There remains not any pure.—The measure of these verses is
the third L4,* of the baw which is deaie pe. It is of the
variety called ate,

Not any of worth. Muclecontroversy has arisen on the law-
falness of +3 in this sense ; and Hariri himself in the Durrah
has been cited as a witness against it. But whether it be chaste
Arabic or not, there can be no doubt that Hariri has used it both
in the Fourth Assembly and here in the sense of “ valuable, of
worth.” De Sacy, who gives the passage from the Durrah in his
Chrestomathie, points out that it does not really condemn the use
of the word in the sense here attributed to it.

Perdition on thee, Wretch, —Jki is the feminine form for
blaming, and ae the masculine. The former is indeclinable
with esr; but only as a vocative. De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 527.
Compare also Alfiyeh, verse 595.

Both of the prey and the net, etc.—By these ‘nstaahor Abi:
Zayd means to say ‘Shall we not only receive no alms from this
company, but also lose the written petitions by which we are ac-
customed to obtain them?” A handful to the load is a proverbial
expression for #2 upon il, or in an opposite sense luck upon luck.
The word &b| signifies a bundle of fire-wood or dry herbage ;
hence a great bundle of anything, and in this sense it is used in
Koran cy. 3. “ Hast thou not seen what thy Lord has done with
the Men of the Elephant (the soldiers of Abraheh the Abyssinian); ;
how he made their strajagems to err, and sent upon them birds in
bundles or heaps?” But Baydawi epys that Jwbl! is here a
plural noun without a singular, meaning ia heaps. By some
Ababil has been erroneously supposed to be the name of the birds.

A mite.—A small unstamped piece of metal used as a coin.

The polished, the engraved.—These words are adopted from the
Mo allakah of ‘Antarah, v. 37. “‘ After the heat of the noon

subsides, I drink of old wine gotten by the polished, the en-


332 NOTES.


graved.” The epithets, however, in the opinion of some, apply
to the goblet, so that the sense is “I drink of old wine from’
the polished, the engraved.” (Mo allakat, edition of Fr. Aug.

Arnold, page 156).

It troubled my heart.—The sentence is here the fail to ele
and , ld is the mef‘dl.

I might test the quality.—Literally, that I might bite the wood,
as an Arab bites a piece of wood to test its soundness for making
an arrow or lance. In the Thirty-seventh Assembly it is said,
Henceforth be not hasty in censure, nor plane the wood till thou
hast bitten it; that is, proceed not in a charge until thou hast
made sure that it is well founded. Firdseh is originally skill in
judging of a horse, faras ; and secondarily, the art of physiog-
nomy, or of discovering the disposition of men from their face
and form; and then discernment generally. A similar art was
that of 453, the skilful in which discerned the tribe and pedi-
gree of a man by his bodily form and features. Compare Forty-
ninth Assembly, p- 664, De Sacy’s edition; and Tayifat, p. 177.
He who divined the future of a man from bodily signs was
called, according to Maydani (Arab. Prov. II. 182), usjle ;
but this is a name for any diviner. The art of Kiydfeh was
_ hereditary in the tribe of Methhij: note to Hamiaseh, Vol. II.,
part 2, p. 245.

Save by treading on the necks of the congregation, a thing for-
bidden in the law.—It is forbidden to break through the rows of
worshippers, and, as it were, to tread on their necks while they
are making their prostrations. This prohibition is derived from
the Prophet, who said, ‘‘ Whoso treads on the necks of the people
on the day of Congregation (Friday) is¢making for himself a
bridge to hell.”

Ibn ‘Abbds.—‘Abad Allah, the son of ‘Abbas, the son of ‘Abd
al Muttalib, the son of Hashim, of fhe tribe of Koraysh, was
cousin to Mohammed, and the most eminent doctor of the first
age of Islam. He was born three years before the Hijra, and
consequently was thirteen years old at the death of the Prophet.
The year in which he died is variously stated, the extremes


NOTES. 333


being 68 and 74 of the Hijra according to Sherishi. Another
“account makes him to have died in the year 67, in the 81st year
of his age. He had been blind from his 30th year, but pos-
sessed great knowledge and acuteness, and so accurate a memory
that he handed down 660 Traditions of the Prophet. He was a
man of great physical beauty, and was so careful of his appear-
- ance that he dyed his hair with henna. One said of him,
“When I saw Ibn “Abbis I said, ‘He is the handsomest of
men;’ when he spoke I said, ‘the most eloquent;’ when he
discoursed I gaid, ‘the most learned.’” His remarkable sagacity
was supposed to be due to a prayer of Mohammed in his favour
when he was a child: “Teach him wisdom, and give him in-
crease of knowledge and science.” Te was called by the
Moslems the ‘‘ Doctor” and the “Sea” (of learning). It is
related of him that he saw the angel Gabriel twice when in
company with the Prophet. On one occasion he saw a man
with the Prophet whom he did not know, whereupon he asked
who it was. The Prophet said, ‘‘ Hast thou seen him?” “ Yes,”
replied Ibn ‘Abbas.’ “That,” said Mohammed, “is Gabriel ;
surely thou shalt lose thy sight.” This calamity accordingly
fell upon him while he was still a young man. He was said to
have observed in verse—
God has taken the light from my two eyes,
But set their light in my tongue and my heart.

Some of his recorded sayings have merit. He was an advocate
of change of study. He said, “ When I am tired of the orator
I take up the poet.” On the accession of ‘Ali he gave him
prudent advice as to his treatment of Mu‘dwiyeh, which, un-
fortunately for the new Khalif, was not taken. (Ockley). He
was the most liberal of the early Moslems, for he lectured not
only on the Koran and law but on grammar, on the Days of
the Arabs, and on poetry, giving a day in turn to each; and to
him is especially due the preservation of the early Arab poetry.
He was for a time governor of Basra under the Khalif ‘Ali.

Jyés.—Ab’ Wathilet lyis ibn Muawiyet ibn Korrah, called
_ Al Muzani, was Kadi-of Basra at the beginning of the second


334 NOTES.


century of the Hijra. He is celebrated in Arabic tradition for
his wonderful acuteness, of which a number of stories are related,
so that you say of a very clever person, More intelligent than
Iyds (Arab. Prov. I. 593). Ibn Khallikén says of him, “ He
was renowned for ready expression and for penetration, and the
acuteness of his mind was proverbial; the persons of merit who
spoke their language with elegance considered him as their
chief; his conjectures were verified by the events, and in the
management of affairs he showed great dexterity. It is he to
whom Hariri alludes in his Seventh Assembly. He was ap-
pointed Kadi of Basra by ‘Omar ibn “Abd al ‘Aziz, and his
grandfather Iy4s was one of the Companions of Mohammed.”
Of his acuteness Ibn Khallikan relates the following anecdotes :
Being at a place in which something happened which caused
alarm, and where three women, whom he did not know, were
present, he said, “One of them is pregnant, another is nursing,
and the third is a virgin.” On inquiry it was found that he had
judged rightly ; and when he was asked how he came to know,
he replied, “In time of danger persons lay their hands on what
they most prize: now I saw that the pregnant woman, in
her fright, placed her hand on her belly, which showed that she
. was with child; the nurse placed her hand on her bosom, by
which I knew tha€ she was suckling ;,and the gesture of the
third proved to me that she was a maid.” Tearing a Jew ridi-
cule the Moslems for believing that the inhabitants of Paradise
are to eat food and yet not pass it away, he asked him if all that
he ate passed off in that manner; and on the Jew replying that
God converted a portion of it into nourishment, he said “‘ Why
should not God convert into nourishment the whole of the food
eaten by the inhabitants of Paradise?” Being one day in a court-
yard, he said that there was an animal under one of the bricks ;
the people having raised it found a snake under it. He was
asked how he came to know that it was so. He said that among
all the bricks in the pavement there were only two under which
any dampness appeared, so that he knew there must have been
something underneath that breathed. Other anecdotes of the


NOTES. 335


oe

same kind follow. Maydani tells of him ‘that, hearing a dog bark,
he said the dog was tied to the brink of a well. When this was
found to be the case, he explained that he had first heard the bark
and then the echo. Two men came before him, of whom one ac-
cused the other of not restoring some money that he had committed
to him, while the defendant denied that he had received any at
all. The Kadi asked the plaintiff where he had given it to the
defendant. He answered that it was under a certain tree. The
Kadi told him to go to the tree, so as to refresh his memory by
the sight of it. While he was gone, the Kadi asked the defend-
ant whether ‘he thought his adversary had reached the tree:
“Not yet,” said the man unconsciously, “for it is a long way
off.” Thus his deceit was exposed. On one occasion he was
worsted by a witness, A man was testifying about a.garden,
and Tyas, having reason to suspect him, asked how many trees
there were in the garden, The man, in return, asked the Kadi
how many beams there were in the roof of the court, and the
Kadi could not tell. :

His conductor.—The conductor, or driver of the camels, is
called »le{, though he be behind them, because he guides them.

The third prop of the pot.—The Arabg of the desert place two
stones close to the slope ofa rock, and on these they rest the pot ;
the rock itself being the third prop. The “third prop,” became a
proverbial expression, to signify anything heavy or inconvenient ;
and is thus applied to the old woman whose company was un-
desirable. It is the more appropriate as she made up the trio
which repaired to the house of Harith. See De Sacy, in
Chrestomathie Arabe.

Yes, by the Watcher from whom no secret is hidden !—I have
adopted this rendering on the authority of Sherishi; but not
without hesitation. It seems, however, to present fewer objec-
tions than any other. In the first place 3, cannot refer to
the old woman, but clearly refers to God ; for Hariri would not
have been guilty of the impiety of jesting with so solemn a
phrase as the Watcher from whom no secret is hidden. If this be
_ 80, we must either accept the trivial idea that the old woman and


336 NOTES.


God accompanied them, or translate the phrase as an oath. It
is common with Hariri to indicate a thing by alluding to some
quality of the Deity which is in accordance with it. Thus in
the Tenth Assembly: ‘I adjured him to say whether he was
Abi Zayd,” “‘ Yes,” he answered, “‘ By Him who has permitted
the chase!” meaning, “ By Him who permitted the chase! you
have before you Abi Zayd, the hunter.” Compare the Forty-
first DeeemDy where Abi Zayd, speaking of hig clever son,
says, ““ Yes, by Him who brings pearls from the deep!” in
allusion to the boy’s improvisations. In the present case the
mention of God, as one from whom no secret is hidden, indicates
that the old woman would be an inconvenient spy on their
actions.
_ The Farkadén are two bright stars in the Little Bear. The
four which form the square of either Bear are called Ujixi, the
Bier ; the others are called U2) col), the Sons or Followers of
the Bier ; cols being here the plural of , ux!) since the word
refers to irrational objects. The stars called Farkadan are, I
believe, the two nearest the pole-star. The pole-star is called
05,1 Usd. There can be little doubt that the Great Bear
is mentidned in the Book of Job under the names Y and
_ Wy; ix. 9 and xxxviii. 32, Our translation “Canst thou
guide Arcturus bes his sons?” would be more properly ‘ ‘ the
Bier with its sons.” See 7hesaurus of Gesenius.

As if his mouth were full.—Literally, as if he had an impe-
diment that prevented him from speaking.

Since time, etc.—Metre tawil.


THE EIGHTH ASSEMBLY.


Ma‘arrat an No'mdn, or No'mén’s Bane, is the name of a
town in the north of Syria, formerly called That al Kosar.
It received its new name from Noman ‘ibn Beshir, one
of the Companions (of the Prophet) and governor of Hims


NOTES. 337


(Emessa), after he had lost a son there. in its neighbourhood
were the tombs of ‘Omar, son of ‘Abd al ‘Aziz, and of Seth, son
of Adam. It is celebrated as the dwelling-place of the poet
Abt ‘1 “Ala.

The two excellencies.—Various interpretations of this phrase
are given, but it is generally taken to mean appetite or relish for
* food, and sexual desire.

The ben tree.—This tree, which produces the ben nut and oil,
is of erect and shapely growth, with long, delicate branches,
and is used by the poets as a similitude for the stature of youths
and maidens. Imr al Kays describes his mistress Hirr, “‘ White,
beautiful, tender, like a shoot of the ben tree breaking into
leaf.” Diwan, p. 43.

Smooth of cheek.—ss is the cheek or part extending from
the circuit of the eye to the part where the beard grows; it is
used also to signify the side planks of the litter, and the side of
a tract of high and rugged ground. (Lane). Hence, it may
possibly be applied here to the side or length of the needle.
But it is perhaps better to. suppose that as. is a masdar with the
meaning to mark or furrow, and the sense as regards the needle
will then be smooth and even as to the furrows which it makes.
Or 4% may be a noun signifying, like oars |, the furrow itself.
Baydawi, Koran lxxxyv. 4.

Patient to labour.— ~yg0 has not the feminine form, because it
is fa il with the meaning fa‘il ; for fa'dl only takes the 4é when
it has the meaning of mef zl, like 44, applied to a she-camel, or
Hla toaewe. “Abi Mohammed accuses the higher classes =
Irak of speaking incorrectly when they say 5,05 i\,<\ or d=- 5),
for the epithets of intensity are changed from their Aacaal form
to indicate the peculiar sense in which they are used; and ju.0


applied to a female has a masculine form, as dw\< and als

applied to a man have a female form.” Sherishi. This is, I con-

ceive, a better explanation than that of De Sacy, who says, “‘ Il

semble que dans ce cas le $ ajouté a Ja fin de ces adjectifs verbaux

soit destiné 4 les transformer en des noms d’ individualité; en
22


338 Ore: 7


sorte que ille signifiergit proprement un savant unique en son
genre.” *"
duly. —jys, 18807. . The “use of the Syrian months appears
to have been common among the Moslems of Irak, no doubt be-
’ cause they were more in accordance with the seasons.’ Moham-
‘med having abolished the ae ‘or ancient Arab intercalation
shortly before his death, the Moslem year is hopelessly unfitted for
practical life. For an account of this intercalation see Mcmoire
sur I’ Histoire des Arabes avant Mahomet, par M, Sylvestre de
Sacy, extracted from the Mémoires de l’ Académie pias: des
Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, vols. 47 and 48. .
Understanding and discretion.— jis as applied to the girl 4 isa
noun with the meaning wnderstanding ; applied to the needle it
_is a masdar meaning to hold fast. _,e “rein,” applies'.tq the
discretion with which she could “rein” her, caprices, and to the
long “rein” or string which the needle draws through the cloth.
A hand with fingers.—The meaning of 3, as, applied to the
eer, is to hem the border of anything after it has been basted,
(ee or Js. Sherishi says Wi and Wy 2 -d3 are two well-known
processes in tailoring ; tlie latter appears to mean the quilting of
a garment by sewing between it’and the lining a layet of cotton.
_ Pique as with tangue of snake-—As applied to the girl fhis
probably means that she was witty, or satirical ; as applied to the
needle it simply relates to the pricking: of the ila 8 ‘opr by
itg point.
" She was displayed i : blackness and whiteness This yelsts to
' the contrast of her black hair and eyebrows with the white of
her skin. In the Second Assembly it is said of # maiden, “ Night
lowered on the morn,”, meaning that her’ bleck - ‘hain drooped
‘over her shoulders. OF it ; may 1 refer to'the contrast between the
Black and white of the ‘eye, which when ‘very marked was,
esteémed a' great beauty by the Arabs. Such a contrast is
expressed by the word ye which means “ intense whiteness of
the white of the eye, and intense blackness of the black pereess
with intense whiteness or "fairness of the rest of the person.”


NOTES. 339


Lane. ‘\j> Aourt is a maiden possessing this quality. In the
Tenth peony it is said, “ Swear by Him who ha’ adorned eyes
with yee ” i.e. contrasted blackness and whiteness,

She drank (or was watered) but not Srom cisterns. —It “is
difficult to discover any meaning in these words’ as applied to
the slave girl. As applied to the needle, the words mean either
that it is bedewed with thé perspiration of the sewer's brow or
hand, or that,when the cutlér fashioned it he threw it red-hot
into water to temper it. ‘

* Now trath-telling, now beguiling; now hiding, now peeping
Jorth.-—By the description that follows the author desires to
express the archness and coquetry of the girl, as well as her


“habitual goodness and obedience to her master. As referring to


Oe tieedle” ¢~ ¢7 ‘is a synonym of bls, he’ sewed ; gos means
“to double or fold one part of a garment or piece of cloth on
another.” The othet plays on words will be sufficiently intelli-
gible from thé double translation given in the text.
Forced on her too hard a work—returned her to me broken


Lin health i, 3 Jaot sile silly aS3 tel” Glee US Bi


_ sembly, p. 79 of De Sacy’s Hariri.


NpSlue bls StL Zt 9 Fh ee gt Wlail das. SeeLane
sub voce, eh 7! .o

A compensation, —For the special names applicable’ to varidus
forms of payment, see ‘the’ commientary on thé Seventh As-

More truthful than the Kata. ~The Kata j is a bird about the
size of a pigeon, which flies i in * flocks, and utters but one sound,
Kata, Kata, whenge its name, Thé proverb, More truthful than
the "Kata; i is derived, “according” to Maydani (Arab. Prov. I. Z40),
from its constadt repetition of:one and the same cry, which tells
its name. He cites a verse of the poet Nabighah to the effect
that if one asks the Kata its name, it replies Kata! and is there-
fore a truthful bird, Another explanation is that the Kata is
never found save where there is god pasturage and water, so
that the sight of the bird is an unerring indication to the travel-


340 NOTES.


ler in the desert that he is near what he seeks. The former
opinion is supported by several verses from the poets. Komayt
says, ‘‘Speak not falsely, for the Kata speaks truly; though
each man, in pedigree, arrogates what does not belong to him.”
For the latter opinion the authority of Al Asma‘t is given. The
sureness of the Kata in finding its way back to its nest after long
flights is alluded to in the beginning of the Twenty-third As-
_ sembly: “I crossed rocky places, to which the Kata would not
find its way.” The poet Ash Shanfara, in the celebrated kasideh,
called Lamiyet al ‘Arab, boasting of his speed of foot, says, “The
ash-coloured Kata, though it fly to the water all the night, while
- its (wing-beaten) sides resound, does but get my leavings.” In
the notes to this passage, given in Dé Sacy’s Chrestomathie, a
long account of the Kata may be found. See also “ Chalef
elahmar’s Qasside,” by W. Ahlwardt, Greifswald, 1859, p, 183,
where the subject would seem to be exhausted.

Of equal birth as regards either kin.—That is, whose father
and mother were both of pure Arab blood, and whose birth was ©
consequently most honourable. One who was the son of a free-
born Arab and a slave mother was‘called ...<*. As applied to
the pencil, the meaning is that the pencil could be used at either

. end to place the kohl on the eye.

Tracing his lineage to Al Kayn.—Kayn was a branch of the
Beni Asad. The Commentator tells us that Belkayn is a con-
traction of Benfi 1 Kayn, like Belharith and Belhojaym. As
applied to the pencil Kayn signifies a blacksmith or cutler. The
word .y3, “a smith,” Syriac Lix.o, is related to the Hebrew PP
or }'D, “to beat,” hence to hammer iron, The word &3, in
Arabic, signifies a singing or playing female slave; the deriva-'
tion of which, according to Aba ’l Faraj, is that “the daughters
of Cain first made musical instruments and sang to them ;
whence, in the Syriac tongue, a song is called 4.5, with hesreh,
while the Arabs called the singing girl &.3, with fethah (Gese-
nius). The plays on words which follow are sufficiently ex-
plained by the two translations in the text.


NOTES. : 341


Rarely visited his wives save two by two.—The same idea is
expressed in one of the riddles of the Forty-second Assembly :

What is it that marries two sisters. openly or secretly, and there is no
fault to find with him for it ?

When he visits one wife, he visits also the other, and if other husbands
show their preferences ‘he shows none.

He increases his attention and affection as they grow gray, and this is
indeed rare among husbands. .

The answer to this is a oki pencil, which is always used to
apply the pigment to both eyes at once, and which is the more
used as the eyes grow older and require a higher adornment.
The custom of painting the lids of the eye, as it exists in Egypt
at the present day, is described as follows by Mr. Lane, in
the first Chapter of his Modern Egyptians :—‘‘ Eyes more
beautiful can hardly be conceived; their charming effect is
much heightened by the concealment of the other features, and
is rendered still more striking by a practice universal among the
females of the higher and middle classes, and very common
among those of the lower orders, which is that of blackening
the edge of the eyelids, both above and below the eye with a
black powder called ‘kohl.’ This is a collyrium commonly
composed of the smoke-black which is produced by burning a
kind of ‘liban,’ an aromatic resin. Kohl is also prepared of
the smoke-black produced by burning the shells of almonds.
These two kinds, though believed to be beneficial to the eyes,
are used merely for ornament ; but there are several kinds used
for their real or supposed medical qualities; particularly the
powder of several kinds of lead ore, to which are often added
sarcocolla, long pepper, sugar-candy, fine dust of a Venetian sequin,
and sometimes powdered pearls, Antimony, it is said, was
formerly used for painting the edge of the eyelids. The kohl is
applied with a small probe of wood, ivory, or silver, tapering
towards the end, but blunt. This is moistened, sometimes with
rose-water, then dipped in the powder, and drawn along the
edges of the eyelids; it is called ‘mirwed,’ and the glass vessel
in which the kohl is kept, ‘mukhulah.’”


He lent me a needle.—Es verdient bemerkt 2u werden, dasz


342 NOTES.


Hariri hier, und in ahnlichen Fallen, gerade da mit den Versen
anhebt, wo die Poesie des Gegenstandes zu Ende geht, gleichsam
um durch die neue und héhere Form der Darstellung einen neuen
und héhern Schwung zu geben. Ohne diesen Kunstpriff wirde
die Folgende Auflésung des Rithselstreites héchst langweilig
geworden seyn, statt dasz sie-uns jetzt durch das komische Pathos,
womit die Bettlerlampen aufgestutzt wérden, gar anmuthig
vorkommt. (Riickert.)

The metre of these verses ise , yy a metre belonging to the
fourth circle, or 24! 5510, which has been already described.
The measure in the circle is rita Cl ynie cries twice.
Thié, however, is rare, the more usual measure being that of the
verses in the present case. The Axe is d=t=”, and the 6 is
usa, (( being the elision of the quiescent fourth letter of a


foot): thus _jleiwme becomes lexus, which is equivalent to
giv. Of the Wile;, there enter into this metre ..<, and
eS and jas ; which is the union of the former two, though it is
said that .s is not permitted in this _,,°. By the second of
these licences the ye is often made identical with the pd

I swear by the holy place.—Metre cs again. peal
pl,sl is the place called Muzdalifeh, which is divided from
Mina by the Wadi Mohassir (see Baydawi on Koran ii. 194).
It is described as a broad plain between mountains, and as sur-
rounded by ancient cisterns. It is also called p+= (without
the article like l,+), because the people assemble there, or
because Adam there met with Eve, after their fall from
Paradise. Here the pilgrims remain one night, that between
Friday and Saturday ; and here most of them collect the stones!
for casting, though it is lawful to collect them in the neighbour-
hood of the mosque of the Khayf, at Mina. After hurrying
through the Wadi Mohassir, they arrive at Mina, where they
cast the stones, lac, for the first time, and offer the sacrifice.

After his stone had dripped—After his rock had oozed.—The
meaning of these two phrases is nearly the same ; they refer to


NOTES. 343


the unwilling bestowal of a petty dole, To be moist, to drip, to
bedew, and the like, are metapors which occur continually in
the sense of liberality,

My perception—My guess. pe is the faculty of sense, by
which anything is perceived, a8 a sound or a motion: (wie is
the forming of a surmise or opinion without distinct proof ;
a rapidity of passing.from premises to conclusions, being the
opposite to reflection. Za rifdt.

The knowing one.— 2 <*. For verbs which unite the two
significations of slaughtering and of doing or knowing a thing
effectively, energetically, and well, see =’, Js3, e<;, =
Compare Hariri’s preface, ‘‘ We are thorough in humility.”

His following.—The word 3,s>- presents a double meaning.;
one is @ live coal, or a smokeless burning fire ; of which the
intelligent attendant, suddenly making a suggestion, may be
spoken of as the spark. The othet meaning is a large, independent
tribe, not joined in alliance to any other. The authorities given
by Lane thus define it: “ Any body of men that have united
together, and become one band, and that do not form a con-
federacy with any others; or a body of men that congregate by
themselves because of their strength and their great valour.”
The term ,»)| ols was especially applied to three tribes,
two of which became extinct by confederating with other tribes,
while the third alone remained a 3,s>-. In the present passage
it would mean the Kadi’s large following or company.

Tell me truly your camels age.—Arab. Prov. I, 710. The
origin of this proverb ia thus related: A man who was about to
sell a camel assured the purchaser that it was (} iL, that is, that
it had cut its WU or tush, and had consequently entered its
ninth year, and attained its full strength. At this moment the
camel started away, and the seller inadvertently called out to it
god, Edd, the ery by which young foals are called back. The
purchaser thus found that he was being deceived, and exclaimed,
‘Thou hast now told me truly thy camel’s age,” which words
passed into a proverb. For other explanations see Arab. Prov.
as above.


344 NOTES.


I am the Sertji.—The metre of these lines is rejez, as in Third
Assembly. e

Oh rare? 23s 5 aJ. This very idiomatic expression of ap-
proval signifies, literally, Zo God be ascribed thy milk-flow, and
was originally used by the Arabs when they passed one who
was milking his camel. It meant with them either a pious
wish that the owner of the beast might have an abundant yield,
or a complimentary remark that she did actually yield abun-
dantly. Afterwards it became a general expression of admir-
ation, answering to our “ Well done!” and was commonly used
to applaud literary compositions.


THE NINTH ASSEMBLY.


Between Farghdnah and Ghénah.—Between the two extremi-
ties of the Moslem world. Farghanah is the name of a region
and city of Mawarannahr or Transoxiana, and is now contained
in the Khanate of Kokan. It lies close to the borders of the
Chinese Empire, between Kokan and Kashgar. It was in former
times a place of much importance, having a JS» or temple of

‘the Sun, built by the Persians, which the Khalif Mo tasim
destroyed. It is described as being distant fifty-three parasangs
from Samarcand, on which it was dependent. The building of
it is ascribed to the Persian monarch Nushirvan, who transported
to it people from other cities. Farghanah was conquered by the
celebrated general Kotaybet ibn Muslim in the year 95 (a.p.
713), towards the end of the reign of Welid ibn ‘Abd al Melik,
and here too he was slain after he had thrown off his allegiance
to Sulaymin. Ghdnah, according to the Arab geographers, is
a tity of Sadan and the utmost point to which merchants travel.
According to Sherishi the starting point is at Sejelmaseh, on
the south of Mount Atlas, and to reach it requires three months’
travel, although to return from Ghinah to Sejelmaseh requires
only a month and a half, or less; the reason of this being that


NOTES. 345


the merchants trade to Ghanah with goods and heavy bales and
return with gold; and he who j journeys thither with thirty camels
comes back with only three or even two, one to ride on, the
other to carry water. The city has both Moslem and Pagan
negro inhabitants, and its merchants are 8 prosperous body.
Sherishi praises the beauty and good disposition of the women
in high terms, and quotes many poetical encomiums on negresses.
One enthusiast, Ibn Muslimeh, exclaims, “If a mole be set in
an ugly cheek it endows it with beauty and grace; how then
should the heart-stricken be blamed for looking upon his mistress
as & mole all over?”

The well-bred, the sagacious. — —y\ Wl: This is a
compound epithet, denoting an intelligent and educated gentle-
man, something like the Greek xanoxayaOos.

An ill-looking old man.—The word 4 ic “Ifrit, so well known
to the readers of the Arabian Nights, appears originally to have’
been associated with the ideas of strength, cunning, and malig-
nity ; the etymology of the word, as given by the Commentators,
is very far-fetched. Seé‘note in De Sacy’s Chrestomathie. Its
use in the sense of a powerful and gigantic gente is derived from
Koran xxvii. 39 : “ Said an ‘Ifrit of the Jinn.” It is there éx-
plained as wicked, rebellious. Baydawi.

A young matron, —De Sacy, in his Chrestomathie, says, “ On
explique le mot tues de deux maniéres, selon Ocbari; il peut
signifier une femme qui a de petits enfans, ou une femme dont la
beauté ravit tous les ceurs.” The former translation has been
adopted as supported by more numerous authorities, though the
latter would give the better antithesis to the description of the
husband.

Among his people: that is, among the people of my father,
his male kindred. In the Durrah, Hariri says that.b», differs
from ,i) in that the former is applied only to the descendants of
the same father. Anthologie. Gram. Arabe., p. 42, Texte
Arabe. Baydawi (Koran xxvii. 49) says that ba, is applied to
a number of men from three or seven to ten, while ,a) is from


346 NOTES.


three to nine. It seems in any case to be applied only to male
persons.

His habitation.—The ,.$ was originally the lower part of the
tent, an attached curtain which came down to the ground. It
was then applied to the side wall of a house, and generally to
an dbode.

Goodly show, ete.— s} is the enhancing of beauty or grace by
elegant dress. According to Sherishi 5, -is originally with
hamzeh ; that is, it is derived from usl, the teshil and idghdm
taking place that it may correspond with iS}, the meaning being
good condition, such as is produced by comfort and affluence.
According to ‘Okbari, cited by De Sacy, it means a goodly
aspect as if bedewed with water, which expresses nearly the
same idea.

| Greedy Seeding — pas signifies to eat with the back teeth, as
when the mouth is filled; <3 to eat with the front teeth, as is
done when the food is scanty. The proverb, “‘ Back-tooth eating
is reached by front-tooth eating,” (Arab. Prov. II. 245) incul-
cates patience and contentment with moderate success at the be-
ginning of an enterprise; and in a verse of a poet is made equi-
valent with, “ Be content with old clothes till you can get new
ones.” Ibn Abi Tarafeh said, “An“*Arab of the desert who
came to visit one of his cousins at Mecca said to him, ‘This is
a country where men eat with front teeth and not with back
teeth,’ the meaning of which probably is that at Mecca
moderation of conduct must be more regarded than in the desert.

Altogether destroyed.—ss\y, like as “7!, signifies literally
“rope and all;” and is an idiomatic phrase, derived from the
giving or selling of a beast. It means entirely orealtogether.

There is no concealment after distress, no perfume after the
wedding.—i.é., it is now time for business, and to make an end
of indolence and festivity. Hariri, accidentally or intentionally,
somewhat perverts the proverb nye on pas 3L<e¥ (Arab.
Prov. II, 482.) The story, which may be read there of a woman
having married a man of the name of Nowfal, after the death


NOTES. 347


of her husband “Ards, and which De Saéy has given more at
length in his Chrestomathy, and in the commentary to his
edition of Hariri, seems but a fabrication to explain a popular
saying. At any rate, Hartri clearly uses _ws,¢ in the sense of
wedding, and, perhaps, introduces the words of the proverb
without regard to its original signification.

Through the violence that was abroad in the earth.—This is an
allusion to Koran ii. 28, “‘ Wilt thou set in it (the earth) one
who will work violence in it?” It will be remembered that Abi
Zayd represents his native town to have been ravaged by the
Christians of the first Crusade, and the political disorders of
the time might explain the little attention that was paid to
learning and learned men,

Neither of us.—In connection with the disquisition on YS, _
given in De Sacy’s commentary, the student is referred to a
passage in the Durrah (p. 51, Anthol. Gram. Arabe). The
essence of Hariri’s statement is that YS is a singular noun, ex-
pressing the idea of duality, like our word “each.” You say of
two men “ each was blind.”

He looked down as looks the serpent.—This phrase is taken
from a verse of Mutelemmis, ‘‘ He looked down as looks down
the snake, and if he had seen the chance to bite he would have
bitten.” Arab. Prov. IT. 30. (5b! has the meaning to look
down in silence, a8 if considering to do or say something. The
expresaion occurs again in the Fortieth Assembly.

Hear my story, for it is a wonder.—The metre of these verses
is munsarih, which has been described in the notes to the last
Assembly.

Honour deems base.—_~u> is thus definea: “Grounds of pre-°
tension to respect or honour consisting in any qualities (either of
one’s self or of one’s ancestors) which are enumerated or re-
counted as causes of glorifying ;” and hence it signifies nobility,
rank, or quality, honourableness or estimableness, from whatever
source derived. It is said that > and to may apply to
those who have not celebrated ancestors, but —54 and x<* only
to those who have.


34 8 NOTES.


I burdened my neck.—Compare the Twenty-sixth Assembly,
“T haltered myself with debt.”

I swear by Him to whose' Ka beh the companies journey.—
Rickert ‘notices the propensity of Abi Zayd to swear on all
occasions by objects connected with Mecca and the pilgrimage,
and seems to regret this irreverent habit of the Arabs. Hariri,
however, makes’ his characters go much. further in speaking
familiarly-of sacred things, Had it not been for the relaxation
of religious discipline, such verses as those at the beginning of
the Forty-fifth Assembly, which I shall have the task of translat-
ing and explaining in my next volume, could never have been
produced, It is wonderful, indeed, that they should have been
permitted in any age of Islam.

Chaste ladies.—Of Mary it is said in the Koran (xxi. 91
and Ixvi, 12) =,3 w-c.co!. Hence some read in Koran iv.
29 and v. 7, wl.c<*, with hesreh. In iv. 28, the word is read
with fethah, and has the signification of ‘‘ married.” In other
places it means of free and lady-like condition, or continent and
chaste of life. ' Technically .,,\a>} has the meaning of being
kept legally and honourably in the marriage state. The word
corresponds nearly with our “lady.”

I imagine.—The anomalous form jis is always used by
‘Hariri as more chaste. It is said to have ‘been originally pecu-
liar to the tribe of Tay, but to have become of auch general use
that the regular form was retained only by the Bend Asad.

Thy chamber.—,d:- is the curtain by which the sleeping place

‘of a woman is concealed in a tent or room, and is applied
generally to a woman’s chamber ; a chamber has not this name
‘if a woman be not in it, says Hariri in the Durrah. The word
is very old ; see Genesis xliii. 30 ; and, in the strict Arabic sense,
Judges xv. 1; xvi. 9,12; Song of Solomon i. 4; iii. 4,

The master of thy virginity.—Literally the father. This
phrase occurs in the Preface, ‘‘ My mind is the father or lord of
its virginity.” With respect to a married woman, it is applied
to her first husband. —

The will of thy Lord.—Lord here means God and not her


NOTES. 349


husband. The word —, by itself, and hoi in connexion with
another noun, is applied only to the Deity. You may say, ‘‘ the
lord of the house,” or “‘ the lords of eloquence,” (compare Sixth
Assembly) in the sense of “ possessor ;” but ‘‘ the Lord,” or “ thy
Lord ” signifies God.

It may be that God will bring victory.—Koran v. 57.

Abi Maryam.—‘‘ Father of Mary,” according to Motarrezi,
is an expression peculiar to certain modern authors, who desig-
nate under that name the officers or ushers of a Kadi’s court.
The metre of the two lines is e,, which is formed from the
third circle, or eich ip \o, like the hezej and rejez. Its normal
measure is piel sel ills twice. The present verses
belong to the second _45,©, which is dss get ; its second
pd is is; oe, and the measure is

epleh heb lel eb
Of the Wile; there enter into this metre + and x, and
JG, which is the union of the two. They have been already
explained.

Followed excess by prayer for pardon.—The excess is the
sinful immoderation of laughter.

The latter state is better for him, ete.—Koran xciii. 4.

The repentance of Al Farazdak, when he put away Nanér,
or of Al Kosai, when the daylight appeared.—These tre two
proverbial instances of repentance; thqugh only the latter is
derived from the Arabs of the desert. Farazdak, one of the chief
poets of the post-Islamic period, was born about the year 46 of
the Hijra, and died about the year 110, under the Khalifate of
Hishim. He belonged to the tribe of Temim, to which be-
longed also the great poets Jerir and Al Akhtal; so that it was
said that before Islam poetry had set its habitation among the
tribe of Kays, but that in Islam it had migrated to the sons of
Temim. His grandfather, Sésdah was known by the honour-
able name of logy! uae, the Reviver of the maidens buried
_ alive; because once, when he was secking two milch camels


350 NOTES.


which had strayed, he came to a tent where a woman lay in the-
pains of childbirth, and knowing that if she gave birth to a

female child it would be buried alive, according to the barbarous
practice of the Arabs, he ransomed it at the price of the two

beasts. This act of generosity the poet is said often to have
alluded to in his compositions. He was eminent for his eulogis-

tic and satirical verses, and was one of the first who introduced

antitheses and conceits into poetry, thus setting a bad example,

which was afterwards only too largely followed. * Farazdak was

a nickname which he received on account of his dark com-

plexion, the word being, according.to De Sacy, a corruption

of the Persian 23;\1, which means a piece of burnt dough. Like

other poets of the time, he was a partisan of the House of ‘Ali,

and one of his chief poems is in praise of Zayn al‘ Abidin, son of
Al Hogayn. For this composition he was imprisoned in Hijiz by

Hisham, son of ‘Abd al Melik. He must have been a dissolute

Moslem, for he gave rise to a proverb, “a night of Farazdak

and Halfeh,” used to signify a nifsht spent in debauchery.

With. other rdkes he penetrated into a Christian convent; and

passed the night with a nun named Halfeh, drinking wine,

eating pork, and dressing up in the nuns’ habits. His adven-

ture with his wife Nawar is very celebrated, but is told by

different writers with certain discrepancies, She was the

daughter of one ‘Ayn ibn Dobay*’, and Farazdak had been com-

. missioned to ask her in marriage; but becoming enamoured

of her, he took her for himself. She afterwards forced him

to divorce her, and he pronounced the necessary words in the

presence of witnesses. When he found that the parting was

irrevocable, he exclaimed :


I feel a repentance like that of Al Kosa‘, now that Nawar has been put
away by me:

She was my Paradise, and I have left her like Adam when Ad Dirér
drove him forth. (Dirar is the angel of Paradise.)

I have been as one who puts out his eyes wilfully ; wwiio rises in the
morning and the sun shines not to him. (See Ar. Prov. IT. 376.) .


In the commentary of Sherishi it is said that in the same year,
110, died Al Farazdak and Jerir, Al Hasan al Basri and Ibn


NOTES. 351


|
‘Birin ; so that Basra lost at once its two hrrent poets and its two
great lawyers.

Al Kose is said ys some to have been a man of the tribe
of Kosa’, in Yemen, whose name was Moharib ibn Kays; by
others he is said to have been of the Bent Sad ibn Thobyan,
and to have been named ‘Amir ibn Harith. His story, and
all the verses which he is said to have improvised, are given
at length by Sherishi, and are translated from Motarrezi in De
Sacy’s Chrestémathy. I have space for only a very brief narra-
tive. Al Kosdi had found a fine nabdé tree, of which bows and
arrows are made, and had fashioned a bow for himself. He took
his stand in the night to shoot wild asses; he shot and pierced
one, but the bow was so strong and good that the arrow went
through the body, and struck on the rock behind. Al Koss,
hearing the sound in the darkness, thought he had missed his
aim, Another troop came by, and he shot again, with the same
seeming want of success. At last, after shooting five times,
he broke the bow in a rage. When morning dawned he saw
that five asses, lay dead, pierced with his arrows. His repent-
ance at having destroyed so excellent a bow passed into a
proverb, and it is said “ More repentant than Al Kosdi.” Ar.
Prov. II. 776. It would appear that Al Kosa‘i was less seudent
than Pandarus, who only threatened that he would burn his bow
if ever he returned home. Iliad Y. 212.


THE TENTH ASSEMBLY. ©


Rahbah.—A town on the Euphrates, between “Anah and
Rakkah. It was restored and embellished by Malik ibn Towk,
who was governor of Al Jezireh, and died under the Khalifate of
Métamid, a.pv. 873. (Caussin de Perceval. Essai, Vol. II. Pp.
383.) This Malik was a descendant of ‘Amr ibr Kulthim,
the author of one of the Modallakat, and had been in youth
an officer in the seryice of Harin ar Reshid.


s


352 NOTES.


Shaving my head.—Sherishi speaks of this practice as peculiar
to the people of the East when they took the bath. We may
conclude that it was not observed in Spain.

Slain his son.—The word «si expresses exactly the meaning
of our word assassinate. It is when one comes suddenly upon
b man, or lies in wait for him, and kills him unawares.

To refer to the Governor.—,i\:3 is commonly used in the sense
of referring to an arbitrator to decide priority, in respect of
nobility or pedigree.

Sulayk in his career —Sulayk, a 2S\ee, or vagrant robber
of the Arabs, was famous for his speed of foot. He was, like
“Anterah and Khofaf ibn Nedbeh, one of the | 4 ,2\ or mulat-
toes, hig mother being a black slave, named Sulekeh, and his father


Amir ibn Sinan of the tribe of Temim. His speed was so great


that he could outrun horses, and when the tribe of Bekr ibn Wa’il
made an incursion on Temim, and saw Sulayk, they said, ‘“ If
Sulayk sees us he will warn his people :” they accordingly
mounted two of their number on fleet horses, to take him. He
fled, and they pursued him all day without success; but the
next morning they saw by his traces that he had fallen and
broken his bow. They thought then that probably he had been


> exhausted by the first day’s course; but as they followed they


found that his footprints were still wide apart, and deep sunk in
the sand, so that he could not be overcome with fatigue. When
he reached his people and warned them, they did not believe
him, for they judged it impossible that he could have run so
great a distance. Arab. Prov. I]. 152. He was captain of
a band of from thirty to forty vagabonds, and made depredations
on the Beni Rabi‘ah, and the tribes of Yemen, sparing the
descendants of Modar. During the winter he is said to have .
filled ostriches’ eggs with water, and hidden them in the sand, so as
to have a supply in time of heat. He was at last killed in one
of his incursions by a certain Asad, son of Mudrik, shortly
before the islam of his tribe. Other Arabs have become pro-


verbial for. their speed of foot, and among them the poets


NOTES. . 853


Shanfara and Ta’abbata Sherran, also ‘Amr son of Barrdk.
‘These three were companions, and an exploit of theirs, at the
expense of the tribe of Bajileh, is given in the Commentary
of Sherishi, but is too long to relate here. It may be found.
in De Sacy’s Chrestomathie, Vol. II. p. 346. The most cele-
brated of these vagabond poets was Shanfara, the author of the
poem called Lamiyet al‘Arab. Shanfara belonged to the Bend
Azd, and led a wandering life in the utmost misery‘and squalor,
of which he boasts in the above-mentioned poem. The legend of
his death is a strange one. It is said that he vowed to. kill
one hundred men of the Bend Saléman. Whenever he met one
of them he exclaimed, ‘To thine eye!” and he shot his arrow
with such skill that he always pierced the eye of his foeman.
Thus he slew ninety-nine ; but at last Asid ibn Jabir, one of the
hostile tribe, and himself a famous runner, together with his
brother's son, Khazim the Nokmi, lay in wait for him. The
Bend Salimén tortured and killed him ; but some time after one
of them, seeing the mouldering body, gave the head a kick, and
a piece of the skull, breaking off, fixed in his foot, of which wound
he died. Thus, after death, Shanfara slew his hundredth enemy.
See in Hamaseh the commentary on verses spoken by Shanfara
before death, p. 242.

Made the boy speak.—j2-20\ is always used by the author in
the sense of eliciting a sound in order to judge of it. The
meaning here is that he made the boy speak to judge of his
voice. In the Twelfth Assembly it is said, “he. elicited the
utterances of the lutes.” The Governor did not want to hear the
defence of the boy, but the sweetness of his tones,

Adorned foreheads with forelocks.—Literally, with hair evenly
disposed over the forehead. A girl would cut off the ends of
the hair over her forehead and dispose the short locks along the
forehead soas to leave a clear space above theeyebrows. According
to ‘Ayisheh the Prophet said, “The Angels in heaven adore God
by the locks of women and the beards of men; and say, ‘God be
praised, who adorned men with beards and women with locks !’”
He also said, “ If one of you desire to marry a wife, let him
23


354 NOTES.


have regard to her hair as much as he has regard to her face.’
I cannot refrain from giving Riickert’s version of this passage, as
it not only shows the extraordinary genius of the German poet,
but also how entirely his work is an imitation and not a trans-
lation of the original :

| Da sprach der Alte dem Jungling: Sprich: Bei dem der die
Stirne geschmiickt mit dem Lockenkranz,—und die Augen mit
dem dunklen Glanz,—die Augenbraunen mit der leisen Schei-
dung,-——und die Wimpern mit der Saumbekleidung,—die Augen-
lieder mit der Schwere,—die Nasenwélbung mit der Hehre,—
die Wangen mit dem Tagesanbruch,—und das Kinn mit dem
Jugendanflug,—die Knospe des Mundes mit dem Aufsprung,—
die Saiile des Halses mit dem Aufschwung,—die Haltung des
Hauptes mit dem Sinken,—und das Lacheln mit dem Zahn-

~ blinken !—ich habe deinem Sohn nichts gethan zu Leide,—noch
seinen Busen gemacht zu meines Schwertes Scheide.—Wo nicht,
so schlage Gott mein Auge mit Decken,—und meine Wange mit
Flecken,—meine Schlafe mit der Kahlheit,—meine Rose mit der
Fahlheit, — meine siisse Frucht mit der Schaalbeit, — meine
Stirne mit den Falten,—meine Zahne mit den Spalten,—meinen
Odem mit dem Dampfe,—meine Lippen mit dem Krampfe,—
mein Feuer mit dem Froste,—meinen Spiegel mit dem Roste,—
“meinen Mond mit dem Schwinden,—meine Sonne mit dem
Erblinden,—das Silber meines Kinng mit der Schwirze,—und
das Elfenbein meiner Hiifte mit dem Schmerze! With respect
to the 5b of the Arabs, it may not be out of place to refer to the
description of Herodotus, Book III. 8, xetpovras 8€ repurpoxada,
mepiEvpourtes Tos KpoTdpous, t.e., “They have their hair clipt
round about.” This seems to have been forbidden to the
Israelites, Levit. xix. 27. See Gesenius on MND. Compare
also Jeremiah ix. 25 ;-xxv. 23; xlix. 32.

Eyes with their black and white.—Various definitions are given
of yee One says that it means intense blackness of the black
of the eye, with intense whiteness of the white thereof; another,
that it is the blackness of all that appears of the eye, as is
found in animals, such as gazelles, meaning, I presume, that


NOTES. 855


when a woman has the black of her eye so large that little or
no white appears she possesses this quality. It is also said that
‘\,,> is a woman beautiful as to the >\<~, i.c. the parts below
or around the eyes, which appear when the rest of the face is
veiled; also one, the white of whose eye appears in contrast
with the black of the kohl. The first opinion is probably the
soundest, and has been adopted in the translation. Sherishi
remarks that the poets have been lavish in their praises of black
eyes, but that the praises of a “3; or woman having blue or light-
coloured eyes is rare; although it is related by ‘Ayisheh of the
Prophet that he said, “Blue-eyed women are of good omen.” The
Arabs appear to have associated softness and Jangour with the word
ge» While 3, expressed, not only a light-coloured, but a glitter-
ing and fierce eye. Thus, when it was said to one, “Thou art
yj',” he answered, “ The hawk is,3);!.” Imr al Kays says
(Diwan, p. 34, Ar. Text):

And there rushed on him (a stag) in the morning, at the rising of the
sun, early, the dogs of Tbn Morr, or the dogs of Ibn Sinbis,

Hungry, fierce-eyed (G 3) i)» as if from ardour and hasting, their eyes
had become (bright as) the flower of the ‘adras.

The expression jax! (3);! 9», He is blue or light-eyed, is used
in speaking of’one who cherishes malice, and is to be dreaded.
A common, but not a satisfactory explanation, is that the Greeks,
. with whom the Arabs were often at war, had light eyes, so that
a “light-eyed man” came to be synonymous with a deadly ~
enemy. Compare Thirteenth Assembly, “ my light or fierce-
eyed enemy.” For a censure on light eyes compare Hamiseh,
Vol. I. p. 622; “ Maidens not light-eyed, not blear-eyed.”

_ Eyebrows with separation.—The having a clear space between
the eyebrows, so that they are not joined, expresses to the Arabs
the qualities of pleasantness and cheerfulness.

Smiling teeth with regularity. —2 is the quality of having an
opening or space between the roots of the teeth, given by nature.
The making an artificial space between them by filing or point-
ing them (}., or -\) is held to be forbidden by Koran iv. 118,
where it is said to be Satan who tempts people to “alter the


356 NOTES.


creation of God.” According to Baydawi the prohibition applies,
among other things, to the plucking out the camel-stallion’s eye
(as was done to avert the Nemesis from excessive wealth), to
tattooing the skin, and to filing the teeth.

Noses with straightness, or elevation, so that they should not
be flat, for an elevated nose is among the attributes of beauty
and princeliness.

Mouths with purity—More exactly the front teeth, or, as one
might say, “‘the mouthful of teeth.” 5 is sweetness and
coolness of the mouth and teeth. Motarrezi says, “I found in
the handwriting of my father that Ribeh was asked concerning
.the meaning of this word, and he took a grain of pomegranate
and said, ‘This is =,’ referring to its purity and the
delicacy of its juice.’ *Commentary to Second Assembly.

At the beginning of the Assembly Sherishi expatiates in his
commentary on beauty and its attributes, as described in the
terms of this oath, and each passage he annotates as it occurs
with long quotations from the poets. These it is unnecessary
to reproduce ;| but if the student desires a further acquaintance
with the Arab ideas concerning female beauty he may be re-
ferred to the proverb, ‘‘ What hast thou left behind thee, ‘ Asim?”
(Arab. Prov. II. 589), Al Harith ibn ‘Amr, king of Kinda,
desired to wed a young lady, of whose charms he had heard ;
but being a cautious prince, he first sent an old woman named
‘Asim to learn from actual inspection whether she deserved her
reputation. When she returned the king questioned her in the
above words, and she gave him a full description of the trans-
cendent beauties she had seen.

Made his head a sheath to my sword.—The word del» often
occurs in this sense; but there may possibly be an allusion to
the belief of the pagan Arabs that a bird called del» or esaw
sprang from the head of a murdered man, and cried , isin,
“Give me to drink,” until revenge was taken. This bird was
supposed to be the soul or personality of the murdered man, so
that one might translate, “‘I have not sheathed my sword in his
life.” Mohammed put an end to this superstition. The Arabs


e


NOTES. 357


considered the head the seat of life. It id, perhaps, in this sense
that Shanfara says of his enemies, “They bear away my head,
and in my head is the chief part of me, while my body is left on
the field.” Hamaseh, p. 243. The Commentator observes that
four out of the five senses have their seat in the head.

My palm shoot with greenness: my white teeth with discolour-
ation. gb is used as in the Secund Assembly as a similitude
for the teeth. Ps is applied to dates while they continue green
and small.

My rose with the o«-eye—In Lane’s Lexicon ,\ is said to be
“buphthalmum or ox-eye,” a plant having a yellow flower,
growing in spring. The meaning is, ‘may my rosy cheek be
smitten with yellowness.”

My musk with a foul steam.—The pleasant odour of my breath
with offensiveness. : ;

My full moon with waning ; literally, with interlune, the
period before the new moon, when the moon does not appear at
all, The meaning here is “ may my beauty decay and vanish.”

My silver with tarnishing—“ May my white cheeks be blackened
with the hairs of a coming beard!” The succeeding metaphors
have a similar meaning.

Tempted : or suggested to him. For the use of this word see
Koran xlvii. 27.

The pupil of my eye.—,,\ui\, literally “ the man of the eye,”
is the image that is seen reflected in the black of the eye as in a
mirror : Hebrew ji. Gesenius remarks that the same figure
is to be found in several languages, as in Persian, —S1,» and
et oye; in Greek, Kopn, kopaovov ; in Latin pupa, pupilla ; in
Spanish, la nina del ojo, ete.

Shell may get clear of chick.—A proverb attributed to an Arab
of the Beni Asad, who acting as escort to a merchant said to
him, “ When we have reached such a place shell will be clear of
chick,” meaning that there would be no more need of his pro-
tection.

As the wolf went guiltless of the blood of ihe son of Jacob.—
When Joseph’s brethren sold him they told his father that he had


358 NOTES.


been devoured by a wolf: when their falsehood was discovered
the wolf was held guiltless, Koran xii., called Joseph.

Ibn Surayj was a great doctor of the rite of Shafi*i and Kadi of
Shiraz, in Persia. His full name was Abdi 1‘Abbas Ahmed
ibn ‘Omar ibn Surayj; for his zeal and learning he was surnamed
‘The Bright Fire. His life is given by Ibn Khaljikén, who says,
“ He surpassed in talent all the pupils of Ash Shafi'i. The cata-
logue of his works contains four hundred articles. He was an
active defender of the sect of Ash Shafi‘t, and refuted its ad-
versaries ; he wrote also observations on the works of Moham-
med ibn al Hasan al Hanafi. The Shaykh Abi Hamid al
Isfarayni said of him, ‘In our knowledge of the plain points of
jurisprudence we keep pace with Abii ’1‘Abbds, but he surpasses
us in the niceties of that science.’”’ The Moslems had a notion

that every century some great man was raised up for the defence
of the faith, and it was said to him, “ God raised up‘ Omar ibn
‘Abd al‘ Aziz at the beginning of the first century after the Hijra,
that he might manifest orthodoxy and destroy innovation ; then’
God, in his thercy, placed at the opening of the next century
the Imam Ash Shafi‘i, that he might manifest orthodoxy and
force innovation to be hid; and God graciously conferred thee
on the beginning of, the third century.” He wrote verses, some
of which have been preserved, and though a hot and apparently
a rude controversialist, was not deficient in liberality to his op-
ponents. He died in the year 306, at the age of fifty-seven.
Hariri, it must be remembered, belonged to his sect.

The Wolf’s Tail.—This is the name given to a deceptive bright-
ness which appears in the heavens before the dawn, and then
passes away: it is called the ‘‘ false” or “lying” dawn. It
is not improbable that this is the Zodiacal light.

A letter of Mutelemmis.—This phrase, which is equivalent to
the classic Kitere Bellerophontee had its origin in one of the most
celebrated incidents of early Arab history; the treachery of:
‘Amr, King of Hira, which caused the destruction of the young
poet Tarafeh, author of one of the Mcallakat, and nearly in-
volved in the same fate Tarafeh’s uncle Mutelemmis, also a poet.


NOTES. 859


Tarafeh was the most perfect type of thd wild and dissolute but
gifted poets of the Ignorance. He was the son of Al ‘Abd, son
of Sofyan, son of Harmaleh, of the tribe of Bekr Wé’il, and of
the race of Modar. From early youth his genius for poetry,
and his license of tongue, were remarkable. One day, when he
was playing with the children of his age, his uncle Mutelemmis
was reciting a poem which described, ‘as was common among the
Arabs, the rare qualities of a camel. He said—

I mount a dark-red male-camel, firm of flesh, or else a she-camel of
Himyar, fleet in course, driving the pebbles with her hoof that crushes

“See the he-camel transformed into a she,” exclaimed
Tarafeh, and the phrase became proverbial to express a sudden
and inelegant transition, Arab. Prov. II. 246. Mutelemmis,
much offended, told the boy to put out his tongue. Tarafeh did
so; it was dark in colour, and Mutelemmis said, “That black
tongue will be thy ruin.” When Tarafeh grew up, he surpassed
all his contemporary poets in debauchery, and addicted himself
completely to love, wine, and gambling. His great poem was
composed on the occasion of the loss of the herd of camels
belonging to himself and his brother, which was carried off by a
hostile tribe, while Tarafeh was spending his time in pleasure.
A few verses from this composition will give an idea of his
character and his genius:


If all my tribe were gathered, thou wouldst find me at the head of a
kin that is generous, sought of suppliants.

My two companions in wine are youths noble of aspect, and at eve
comes @ singing girl to us, clad in a bright robe or a saffron-dyed tunic,

The bosom of her dress is open; she resists not the caresses of the
guests; delicate are her naked breasts.

When we say, “Let us hear thy melody,” she begins gently, with a
soft gaze at us; she puts not forth her voice:

But presently she raises her song, so that thou wouldst think mothers
be wailing over a babe that is dead.

My ever-drinking of wine ceases not, nor my pleasure, nor my selling
and spending my wealth inherited or gotten :

Until all my kindred have shunned me; I am separated from them as
men separate the sickly camel.

Yet do the poor, the kinless, not deny my acquaintance ; no, nor the
lords of the wide-stretched tent. (Though his own tribe have abandoned


360 NOTES.


him for his profligacy, yet he always has a friend among the poor whom
he relieves, and the rich who delight in his society.)

O thou who blamest me for that I seek the shout of war, and give
myself to pleasures, say, canst thou make me live for ever ?

If thou hast no power to ward off fate, leave me to enjoy before it
comes, though I squander all I have.

I swear that but for three things, which are a man’s joys, I would not
care if the visitors turned away despairing from my bed of death.

The first of these is to elude the women of my family, who would
censure me, and to drink the dark-red wine that foams as the water
mixes with it.

Another is to urge into the fight, when one in danger calls to me, a
broad-made steed, that rushes like the wolf of the ghada wood: which
@ man rouses to flight as it comes to drink.

The third is to while away a dark dall day (for then darkness is a
pleasure) with a young beauty, under a lofty-columned tent.

The man of noble spirit drinks deep while he lives ; should we both die
to-morrow, fault-finder, thou shalt know which of us will thirst.

I see that the grave of him that is careful, that hoards his wealth, differs
not from the grave of the dissolute, the spendthrift :

A hillock of earth is on each, with some fiat stones laid together.


The young poet, at length, thoroughly ruined, left his kindred
and repaired to the Court of “Amr, son of Munthir IIT:, king of
Hira, commonly called ‘Amr son of Hind, from the name of
his mother. the was accompanied by his uncle Mutelemmis,
whose real name was Jerir son of ‘Abd al Masih. ‘Amr ap-
pointed them to attend on his brother Kabis, according to the

_ Arab custom by which a man had, generally, two boon com-
panions, Kabis was a boorish prince, and treated the'two poets
with great indignity ; sometimes wearying them by forcing
them to make long excursions in attendance on him,; at others
keeping them at the door of his tent while he drank within. At
last the passionate and satirical Tarafeh made some verses upon
him, beginning :

Oh would that in place of king ‘Amr we had but a few milch-cows lowing
about our tent !


Sure K4bfs, son of Hind, ‘will ruin his kingdom ; he is an exceeding
fool.


These verses were brought to the ears of ‘Amr in the follow-
ing manner :—A certain ‘Abd‘ Amr, a favourite of thé king, had
married a sister of Tarafeh. The poet, however, had said satir-
ically of him,


NOTES. 361


There is nought good about him but his money, and that waist which is
so slender when he stands.

The point of this was that ‘Abd ‘Amr was enormously fat.
The king was one day rallying him while he was naked in the
bath, and said, “ Your brother-in-law Tarafeh must have seen you
‘as you now are when he made that verse.” “Tarafeh,” answered
‘Abd ‘Amr, “ makes verses on you and your brother as well as
on me ;” he then repeated to the king the satirical lines of the
poet on the king’s brother Kabais. Now this ‘Amr ibn Hind
was a most ferocious and vindictive prince. He had burned
alive ninety-nine men and one woman of the tribe of Temim in
accordance with a vow of vengeance he had made to destroy a
hundred of the race. This deed, which is known in Arab his-
tory as the “second Day of Owdrah,” had gained for him
the appellation of Al Moharrik, the Burner. Compare the
proverb, “ Ill-fated is he of ‘the BarAjim who approaches.”
Arab. Prov. I, 5. He now determined to destroy both Tarafeh
and Mutelemmis. Sending for them he asked them if they
desired to leave his Court. They answered in the affirmative ;
and he then told them that he would give them letters to Abi
Karib, Governor of Hejer or Bahrayn for the king of Persia.
Taking the letters, Mutelemmis and Tarafeh set out. Mutelem-
mis suspected treachery, and as neither of the poets could read,
he presented his letter to a young man in the way, and asked
him what it contained. It was a request to the Governor of
Hejer to put the bearer to death. Mutelemmis destroyed the
letter, and implored Tarafeh to fly with him into Syria. Tarafeh
obstinately ‘refused, continued his journey ‘to Abi Karib, who
arrested him, and caused him to be buried alive. Thus perished
one of the most gifted of the early Arab poets, when he had
scarcely attained manhood. He is often called /bn al ‘Ishrin,
the youth of twenty years. ‘Amr ibn Hind was afterwards slain
by the poet warrior ‘Amr ibn Kulthim, author of the Mo‘al-
lakah, in revenge for an insult offered to his mother by Hind,
the mother of ‘Amr; whence the proverb, “ Quicker to slay than
‘Amr ibn Kulthim.” Arab. Prov. II. 2383.


362 NOTES.


Tell the Governor.—The verses are of the Wiis <7, which
is a metre of the fourth circle, or dat\! sslo. This circle
consists of the primitive feet .i.clie epg yhelie, which is
the normal form of the ¢,lae. The measure of the ais is
poleli pine wile twice; the oi, of the first and third feet
being Exes” and that of the second .y,,i+." The measure of
the present verses is eu, or normal ; being of the first W,4
of the first ues. Of the Wile; -j, there enter into this metre
wet, and Wi, and JC, which is the union of the two former.
It is evident that these licences may affect any of the feet, since
in ple the b and the .§ are Lol, and also in .) pie,
the Le and the |) are  olul, the gi being a (35 i+ Sy So
that in the Wis, the foot (scl may become colle’, and


‘o pie may become rs pis. Instances of these licences
will be found on examining the verses in the text.

To seek the traces after the substance.—These words, which
have become proverbial, were first spoken by Malik ibn “Amr al
*‘Amili when hé slew the king of Ghassan. The story is told in
the commentary to the proverb: Arab. Prov. I. 221. The king,
to punish the tribe of ‘Amileh had imprisoned Malik and his
brother Sim&k. One day he called them before him and told
" them that he should put one of them to death. Each begged to
be the victim, that his brother might be spared. The king
selected Sim&k, and he was executed. While going to his doom
he improvised a poem, in which was the verse :


I swear that if they had slain MAlik I would have been to them as a
snake that watches to bite. (Two more lines are given by Shertshi).


One day their mother heard a horseman reciting these lines,
and she roused Malik to take vengence for his brother. He.
watched the king until he was on e journey with a small escort,
and then fell upon him. The attendants offered Malik a hundred
camels, the usual blood-wit for a murder, if he would spare the
king. He said, “I will not seek a trace (or, as we should say,
a shadow) after a substance,” and at once killed the king. The
proverb corresponds to sop’s fable of the dog and the bone.


NOTES. 363


The ill-fate of Al Hosayn. — The misfortunes and death of Al
Hosayn, son of ‘Ali, are too well known to require notice here.

The shoes of Honayn: that is a bad bargain or a bootless
errand. Honayn was a shoemaker with whom an Arab of the
desert haggled about the price of a pair of shoes. At last the
man would not purchase, and they parted angrily. Honayn
resolved on revenge; so he went forward on the road by which
he knew the Arab must pass and threw down one of the shoes.
The Arab, when he came up, said,.“‘ How like this is to one of
Honayn’s shoes ; if the other were with it I would take them.”
In the mean time Honayn had gone on and thrown down the
other shoe, and then hidden himself near. When the Arab
came to the second shoe he repented that he had not picked up
the first; and fastening his camel, he returned to fetch it.
Honayn at once mounted and rode off, having thus gained a
camel in exchange for a pair of shoes. When the Arab went
back to his tribe they said to him, “‘ What hast thou brought
from thy journey?” He said, “1 have brought back nothing
but Honayn’s shoes,” which became proverbial for a bootless
errand. Compare the Twenty-sixth Assembly, “I will depart
from thee with the shoes of Honayn.” This is the legend as
told by Sherishi ; but two others are given (Arab. Prov. I. 461),
in the commentary on the proverb, More bootless than Honayn.
They were all probably fabricated to explain a popular phrase,
the origin of which was lost.

Piece-meal.—Nasif al Yazaji, in his letter to De Sacy, says
that the original form is not Tae fos but fide 3 (as; and
that the first half is indeclinable as being part of a word, and
the second as containing the meaning of the elided conjunction.
Compare Alfiyeh, verse 15.

Cared not.—For the form a4) see Lane’s Lexicon, Book I.,
p. 209.


364 ' ‘NOTES.


THE ELEVENTH ASSEMBLY.


Sdweh is'a town between Rayy and Hamadan, at a distance of
twenty-two parasangs from the former.

By visiting the tombs.—Said the Prophet, “ Visiting the tombs
makes men self-denying in this world and mindful of the next.”
An authoritative Tradition of Anas says, ‘Said the Prophet of
God, ‘I forbade you once to visit the tombs; but visit them, for
they soften the heart, and fill the eye with tears, and bring to
mind the next world.’” This is the Tradition referred to in the
text. A man said to‘ Ayisheh, “ Mother of the Faithful, I have
a disease; hast thou a remedy for it?” She said, “ What is
thy disease?’? He said, “ Hardness of heart.” She said, “A
bad disease is thine ; but visit the sick, and attend funerals, and.
keep in mind-death.” It was said to “Ali, “Why dost thou
dwell near the burying-ground?” He said, “TI find them good
neighbours, and truthful; they restrain their tongues, and yet they
speak of the next world.” ‘Omar ibn ‘Abd al ‘Aziz is related to have
visited the tombs of his predecessors of the House of Omayyeh
and moralized on their being brought thus low. ‘Omar ibn al

. Khattéb (the Khalif) related, ‘‘ We went forth with the Prophet
and he took seat at a grave, and I was the nearest of the people
to him; and he wept, upon which we wept also. He said, ‘What
makes you weep?’ We said, ‘ Because thou weepest.’ He said,
‘This is the grave of my mother Amineh; I asked leave of my
Lord to visit her and he permitted me: then I asked leave that
I might pray forgiveness for her and he refused me: and I feel
the pity of a son.’” ‘Othman wept when he stood by a tomb.

A corpse; literally, one enshrouded or gathered up in his
grave clothes. Bile is a bier when the corpse is on it ; other-
wise it is (As or» ) pete
- Sepulchred the dead.—It would be more accurate to say
niched, for ss) is the niche or compartment in the side of the
grave where the corpse is placed in a sitting posture. On


NOTES. 365


the subject of funerals there is much ne information in
the Kitéb al jand’iz in the first volume of Al Bokhari.

Leaning on a staff.—Holding it in his hand as a das, and
leaning on it. For this word, see Lane. A staff was the com-
mon symbol of dignity carried by a preacher, and was intro-
duced early in Islam when it was defended by the precedent of
Moses, who carried a staff.

Let those who work, ete.—Koran xxxvii. 59. “Truly this is
a mighty gain: let each that works work for the like of this.”
These words, which refer to the happiness of the next world, are
taken by Aba Zayd as a sort of text.

As ye laughed not ...as ye walked not.—These are mansib on the
masdar. See note to Fourth Assembly on mors an earliness
beyond the earliness of the crow.

Gifts, usually applied to the present which a poet: receives

.from a prince. (De Sacy’s Hariri, p.'79). For the occurrence

to which the origin of the word is attributed, see Lane, Book I.
p- 485. The more probable explanation is that it was originally
the supply of water or provision with which a man passed from
one place to another in the desert; it then came to mean a
supply of provision, such as a host gave to a traveller for his
journey after having entertained him. Lastly, it was applied
generally to a voluntary present or largess.

The preparing of banquets.—Nasif al Yazaji, in his Critical
Epistle, finds fault with De Sacy for explaining wo by pellet.
He proceeds to mention the various names of entertainments
among the Arabs, as follows :—If it be a feast at child-birth, it is
called , » _ ; if it be for (the first shaving of) the child, it is
called dite ; if at circumcision, Jic|; ifon the day that the
child finishes the learning of the Koran, it is called s\i= ; if
on occasion of an offer of marriage, it is Ns ; if at a wedding,
daaly 5 3; if on the finishing of a house, FS, ; if on return from
a journey, 4.0 ; if at beginning the month of Rejeb, ede 5 if
for a guest, 5,5; ~if for any other cause, ddle, It is im-
possible to deny the critic’s learning, and that De Sacy uses a
word that is not synonymous.


366 NOTES.


Again no: surely ye shall learn.—Koran cii. 4.

O thou who claimest understanding.—These verses are of the
‘metre o>» which belongs, like rejez and reml, to the third
circle; the normal measure is ,,J.clie three times in each
hemistich ; but this is seldom used, the ordinary measure being
‘the repetition of the foot twice in each hemistich, as here. Of
the Wile -j, there enter into this measure ,,2.3 and i, The
peculiarity of the poem in the text is that the metre is what is
called tue. The meaning of this word is strung as beads,
and it is used to denote that a certain constant rhyme recurs
throughout, as an emerald or a piece of gold recurs at regular
intervals among the beads of a chaplet. There are various kinds
of the verses called musammatdt, and they may be composed of
lines of any metre, but they present always the same feature of
@ continuous rhyme running through the poem. It is, in fact,
the variation and lightening of the ancient monotonous, one-
, rhymed kasideh of the Arabs by the introduction of the stanza,
a change to which parallels may be found in other litera-
tures. The stanzas in the text are made up of two verses
of hezej, of which the three first hemistiches rhyme together,
and the fourth has the recurring rhyme. In analogy with
ordinary versification the rhyme of the first triplet is iden-
- tical with the recurring rhyme; the other triplets have each
its independent rhyme. Many varieties of musammatdt are
to be found, sometimes the hemistiches having the varying
rhyme are in fours or fives; sometimes, it is said, the number
changes in the same poem. The recurring rhyme is called
rma! dgnc, the prop of the poem. In Freytag’s Darstel-
lung der Arabischen Verskunst, page 406, a specimen is given
of one of these compositions, into which verses of an ancient
poem of the Hamaseh have been introduced, At a later
period the fancy of the Arabs for variations of metre produced


the elaborate poems called ole’, in which the poets of
Andalusia excelled. In these compositions the strangest liberties
_are taken with the old versification ; as, for instance, the giving


NOTES. 367


one rhyme to the first hemistiches of a geries of verses, while
the second hemistiches have a different rhyme ; the mingling of
various metres, or various forms of the same metre, in the
poem; the rhyme of the opening verses recurring, like a refrain,
- at intervals throughout the poem. Abd Bekr Yahya ibn “Abd
ar Rahman, who lived in the sixth century’ of the Hijra, was
highly esteemed for these compositions. Seven of the most
celebrated of them, gou!! .s)!,al!, have been published, together
with some modern imitations, by the American missionaries at
Beyrout. For a survey of these and other metrical eccentri-
cities, the student is referred to Freytag’s Darstellung. A
specimen of AMusammatdt is to be found in the Huthalf Diwan.
They are by Jendb, the sister of ‘Amr thi ‘1kelb. Faris Shid-
yak says that they should be read with the kdjiyeh mukideh,
. Aventures de Fariac, p. 13 of Theneb al kitab.
Strdét.—This word signifies originally a way or path, and is
used in this sense in Koran i. 5. Its special signification as the
path over which men must pass after death,—a path like a
bridge, as narrow as a hair and as sharp as a sword—is derived
from a Tradition of Mohammed, “On the day of resurrec-
tion the people shall be sent over the Path, and they shall
be scattered off it like moths into the fire, but God shall
save whom he will.” Compare Koran ci. 3. Khadijeh, and
one or two others will be excused this perilous trial. On the
form of the word there is a difference of opinion. Accord-
ing to Baydiwi, on Koran i., the primitive form is bl»,
from b pas, he swallowed, since the road or way may be said to
swallow, or devour, those who walk in it; analogous to which is
5. But the (w is changed into .», that it may correspond
with the b which is of the letters called lich. ; that is of the
letters formed by bringing the tongue in contact with the roof of
the mouth. These letters are four in number—_s, vs, &, and b.
(See his commentary on ip at the beginning of the second
Sura). By this the pronunciation was rendered more easy.
But in order that the original may not be too far departed from,


368 NOTES.


the sound of the .: is sometimes turned slightly (5) to the
sound of ; jy Which is between those of Ew and ve But blo is
according to the dialect of: Koraysh, and is the authoritative
reading. On the interchangeability of Cw and -», see De Sacy’s
Chrest. Arabe. vol.'II., p. 280; Baydawi ¢ on word guwl, at xxxi.
19 ; also Forty-sixth Assembly.

Plume him whose plumage hath fallen. —Compare Forty-first
Assembly : “ “Plume the =e of the noble if his fortune have
stripped it.” : rae
” The garb o impudence. _the Word in the text is specially
applied to the ore in which & slave is exposed: for sale. For
“ strong of sinew,” or “ strongly braced,” see Koran lxxvi. 28.

How many, Abt Zayd ?—KN pretty effect i is produced by making
Harith address the impostor in verses like his own,’ and Abi
Zayd reply in, the same nianner.


» THE TWELFTH’ ASSEMBLY.


‘e . se .
The Gliitah.—This 48 the fertile-plain in which’ the city of

Damascus is,situated. A ghitah is a low, well-watered plain ; ©
,and the name is applied ,especially to ‘one of ‘the richest spots
with which the Arabs were acquainted. Some writers ,have
rather faneifully identified the YY of Job with this place. (See
Gesenius, sb voce). A commentator says, “The Ghitah of
Damascus. is reckoned among the gardens or paradises of the
earth, which, according to Al Wahidi, are four in number; the
Ghatah of Damascus, the valley or pass of Bawwan, the
Ubulleh of Basra, and the Sughd of Samarcand.” To these the
Andalusians would add the Vega of Granada. According to Al
Asma‘i, the beautiful places of the earth were three, Damascus,
Samarcand, and Basra. Sherishi compares Damascus with
Irem thit al ‘Imad, for its beauty and splendour. Trem
with the Columns was the city which Sheddad, son. of ‘Ad,
built for himself before his accursed race was destroyed by

t


NOTES. . 369


God; it is mentioned in Koran lxxxix. G. It remains invisible
to the eyes of mortals in the degert near Aden; though God
sometimes permits it to be seen, as was-the casein the days of
the Khalif. Mu‘awiyeh, when one ‘Abi’ Kilabeh, ‘crossing the
deserts of Yemen in search’ of a ‘ran-away cathel, came upon it,
and brought back some of the jewels with which its streets are
strewed. When a place’ ig exceedingly beautiful and magnifi-
cent it is said:.to be like Trem al‘Imad. It is a Tradition that
Mohatnmed, before his, death, ‘held out to his ‘disciples the pos-
_session of Damgscus' as the ‘chief incentive to an'.i invasion of
Syria. . The Moslem legend ‘is-that the city received its” ‘name
- from its founder ‘Dimeshk, son of Nimrod, son of Canaah, or as
others say, Dimieshk, gon of Batir, son pf Malik, son of

Arphaxad, 80n of Shem, , son'of Noah. + °

Steeds.—Havving short and fine hair, which is i one of the signs
of a good breed. ° ‘

‘Freedom of arnt ; Sulness of ane Literally, i of udder.”
These metaphors are used to signify ease of life and ‘affluence.
Compare Job xxi, 24: “ His breasts are full of’ milk.” + *

+ Agreement, was completed. tonal, it became complete and
in a right state; literally, it demanded 10ss, or diminution, or
destruction ; .because these .sometimes follow completeness: or
the: 3 may be substituted for ” , the meshing being pal (Lane).

From every tribe. —The ‘largest* division or tribe of’ Arabs
descended from a commoh ancestor was called 5 ; ‘a part of
this was 41.3; a part of this again was dios; a part of this
was 3,lac 3 a part of this bk); and, lastly, a part of thig 3s.
The single’ family \ was called ww. 4

In the clans. Se appears to be a word of general significa-
tion, applied to the descendants of one ancestor, whether many
or few. It is sometimes equivalent to «5, sometimes to
é\u3, and sometimes to wet

The gate of Jayrin.—A gate of the great mosque of Damas-
cus, built by the magnificent Khalif Welid, son of ‘Abd al Melik,
on the site of a church of St. John, and stifl known as the
mosque of the Beni Omayyeh. This celebrated structure, which

24


370 NOTES.


is the exemplar after which so many great works have been
executed, both in the East and in Spain, has been so often
described that it is needless to speak further of it here. ,It
occupied the Khalif during the ten years of his reign, from’ 86
to 96 ; but did not prevent him from enriching Mecca, Medina,

| and Jerusalem with costly monuments. In Mecca’ he adorned
the Ka*beh with gold; in Medina he enlarged the mosque of
the Prophet’s tomb. Jayrin is said to be the name of an
ancient patriarch, son of the builder of Damascus. It was pro-
bably applied also to one of the gates of the city, for in De
Sacy’s Commentary we find, “ Jayrin is the name of one of the
gates of Damascus, on the eastern side,” and it is more likely
that the travellers assembled outside the city.

Tying and untying, and plaiting and twining.—Metaphorical

’ expressions, signifying the formation of schemes, complicated or
simple, and the subsequent abandonment of them.

The rosary of women.—A string of beads, used in wor-
ship to count the number of prayers “or ejaculations. The
use of this rosary is described in Lane’s Modern Egyptians.
The worshipper, at a certain ‘period of his devotions, repeats
“The perfection of 'God;” “ Praise be to God; ” and “ God is
most great,’ each thirty-three times, and he counts these repe-
titions with a string of beads. The beads are 99, and they have
a mark between each thirty-three.’ They are of aloes, or other
odoriferous or precious wood, or of coral, or of certain fruit-
stones, or seeds, &c. Chapter iii.

As the garb of monks.—Religious devotees in Iglam assimi-
lated their practices to those of the Christian monks, in spite
of a celebrated Tradition of the Prophet; “No monkery it
Islam, and no celibacy.” This Tradition is alluded to in the
Forty-third Assembly. The Prophet said to‘Akaf ibn Wadéah,
“ Hast thou a wife?” He answered, “No.” ‘“ Then,” said the
Prophet, “ thou belongest to the brotherhood of the devils. If
thou wilt be one of the Christian: monks, then keep with them ;
but if thou wilt be one of us, know that it is our custom to
marry.”


NOTES. 371


Giddiness from watchings.—Literally, the look of religious
intoxication produced by watching and contemplation.
* Zo steal a hearing.—As the devils do when they approach
heaven to listen to what passes there. It is said, in Koran xv.
16: « We have set towers (constellations of the zodiac) in
heaven, we have made them goodly to those who look thereon.
—And we guard them from every devil, cast at with stones :—
Save when one steals a héaring, and then a flame, visible to all,
follows him,”—This is the foundation of the belief that shooting
stars are darts hurled by the angels against listening demons.
Compare xxxvii. 6. I have seen it somewhere stated that a
great flight of shooting stars, no doubt one of those whose period
modern science has so accurately determined, was seen in the
time of the Prophet, and gave rise to the revelations on this
subject in the Koran, Certain days on which such phenomena
occurred were afterwards known as lala) ell.
Their secret was manifest to him.—Kither the state of conceal-
“ment departed or ceased, or else what was in a state of conceal-
ment became apparent, from cn meaning “ what is open and
apparent of land.” This is a phrase from a traditional verse of
Shikk the Diviner, one of the most famous personages of ancient
Arabia. As Shikk and Satth are often alluded to, and the latter
is spoken of in the Eighteenth Assembly, it may be as well to
give some account of them. ‘Ibn Khallikan says, in his life of
Khalid al Kasri, one of the officers of the. Khalif Hishim, ‘‘ Shikk
was @ son, of the aunt of Satih, the diviner, who foretold the
coming of the Prophet, as is related in the Sirat ar Resil of Ibn
Hisham.” He then proceeds to describe them. We learn
from him, and other authorities, that they were two deformed
beings. Shikk was only half a man, and for this reason was
called Shikk (half). He had but one cheek, one arm, and one
leg. Satih was without bones ; he was a mere mass of flesh, with
his face in his stomach, for he had neither head nor neck.
He could not sit up except when angry. He then swelled
and took a sitting posture. They received the gift of pro-


372 NOTES. ©


phecy from Zarifeh, the same who predicted to her hus-
band, ‘Amr Muzaykiya, the bursting of the dyke of Mareb.
In an extract from the book called Kitab al Joman, given
by De Sacy (Mémoires de lT’Académie Royale, Vol. 48),
the following account is given of this occurrence: “ Shikk
chad received from God only half the form of a man. Satth
was a shapeless mass of flesh; he had no limbs, and his
face was in his breast. In their time there was among the Arabs
a woman called Zarifeh, daughter of ‘Amr ibn‘Amir. - None of
the children of Adam had ever had more intercourse with Jinn,
or was more able to make them speak by divination and au-
guries. When she was about to die she sent for Shikk and Satih,
on account of their deformity, and the influence that demons had
possessed upon them, and she spat in their mouth, and be-
_queathed to them her Jinn, after which she died, and was buried
at Al Johfah.” The narrative goes on to say that they suc-
ceeded her in the functions of divination, and rose to the highest
degree of skill. Shikk died leaving behind him children. Satih
also died about the time Mohammed was born; each of them
having lived three hundred, or, as some say, six hundred years.
The prophecy of Satth respecting the Prophet is told as follows
by the same, author: The Tobbé of Yemen had a troublesome
_ dream, the matter of which he could not remember. He sum-
moned his wise men, who declared themselves ready to interpret
, if he could tell them what he had dreamed; but only Shikk and
Satih were able to tell him the dream itself. It was that a dove
had flown from a holy place, and had settled in the Tihimeh, the
sea-coast region south of Mecca; and Satth ixterpreted it to mean
that a noble prophet would arise who would destroy idols, and teach
the best of religions. According to Tabari, from whom de Sacy ,
algo gives an extract, the two diviners predicted to Rabi‘ah, son
of Nasr, a Jewish king of Yemen, that the Abyssinians should
conquer the country and govern it, that they should be expelled,
and that afterwards a prophet should arise among the Arabs,
bringing a new religion, which all men should embrace, and
which should endure in Yemen to the Day of Judgment. These


NOTES. 373


theological prophecies have obtained for the two soothsayers
great celebrity. The narrative in the Sirat ar Resi! will be
found at page 9, Wiistenfeld’s edition, Gottingen 1860. It
relates, like that of Tabari, to Rabi‘at ibn Nast. The Jinn of
this Arab divineress may be compared with the I'N of the
Israelite wizards and witches: Levit. xx. 27; 1 Sam. xxviii. 8.

Your care relieve itself: or get rid of its cause, as the egg gets,
rid of the chick. For a similar expression see Arab. Prov.
IT. 220. .

The Semdweh.—The Syrian desert, said to be called so be-
cause of the ruins and traces of the dwellings of Thamaéd found
in it; the word meaning the same as shakhs. European travel-.
lers have fully confirmed the existence of these remarkable ruins.

For carrying him; literally for balancing with him on the
same camel; one riding on the right side of the saddle, and
the other on the left. .

The Mother of the Koran is the first chapter, and is said to
be so called because it contains the doctrines or principles of the
whole book; namely, due praise to God, exhortations to duty by
bidding and forbidding, promises and threats. At Koran ci. 6, it
is said of him whose works shall be light in the balance, that his

pli is the Pit of Fire.

The Lights of his kindred, the Keys of his victory.—Under
these symbols the Muhajirin and the Ansfr are supposed to be’
_ designated.

Place me by thy mercy among thy servants who do aright.—
‘This is part of the prayer of Solomon, which he uttered when he
heard the ant bid its swarm return to the nest for fear of being
trodden by his armies. Koran xxvii. 19.

From thyself helping power.—Koran xvii. 82.

The heaven with its constellations.—These are the first words
of ‘the 85th Sura, called the Yowers or Constellations. t. a;
qupyos, is the name given to the principal constellations which
surround the heavens, as a city is surrounded by its towers. The
name is applied to the twelve signs of the zodiac, and also, it
would seem, to the twenty-eight mansions of the moon. Com-


374 _ NOTES.


pare Koran xv., 16; and xxv. 62. Baydawi, on the 85th Sura,
derives the word from eto be conspicuous, though it is evident
that the verb is formed from the noun ; and he attributes the name
to the sun and moon seeming to rest in thé chief constellations,
and go forth from them as from towers or citadels. Nasif al
'Yazaji has united the names of the signs of the zodiac in some
verses: Makamat, p. 215.

The earth with its plains —2 is a broad valley between hills,
or a path leading up to or between them. Compare Koran
Ixxi, 19 and xxii. 28, where it is rendered by Baydawi, (3 ©.

The pouring flood and the blazing sun.—Koran Ixxviii. 13.

The house-tops of “Anah.— )\b is a common word signifying
anything that appears standing in the distance, particularly a

building or its ruins. The older poets often began their song
with a lamentation on beholding the (\b of the camp or habita-
tion which had been deserted by the tribe of their mistress.
Here it is applied to the summits of the buildings of the city
appearing at a distance over the desert plain, ‘Anah on the’
Kuphrates was at an early period celebrated for its wine, which
was carried into the heart of Arabia, and inspired the wild and
dissolute poets of the Ignorance with their impassioned declam-
ation. In one of his poems, Imr al Kays says of a place from
which one or more of his beloved ones had departed,—


“T lingered, amid the traces of the camp, like one drunken, who has
been drinking of wine at early morn,

“ Of wine the first of the cask, red as the biood of gazelles ; old wine of
‘Anah, or of the vines of Shebam. ”* Diwan, p. 36, Arabic text,

The exposed and the hidden; the corded and the sealed, t.e.
the various kinds of goods they brought with them, both what was
open to view and what was corded in bales or sealed up in
boxes.

The light, the adorning, i.e. he chose only the most portable,
such ag gold and silver, and such as served for ornament, as
jewels.


The lutes.—From dgq)\ is derived our word lute.
I cling to journeying.~The metre of these verses, which are


NOTES. 375


musammatét, like those in the last Assembly, is mutekérib,
which has been already described. ;
Pride.—\i is literally the contention before an umpire on
the titles of a man or tribe to nobility or honour over others ; as
was the custom with the Arabs of the Ignorance. It was called so
because each one said, after recounting his claims to honour,
45 Fel L3!. The most celebrated mundfarah of the Ignorance
was that between ‘Amir ibn at Tofayl ibn Malik ibn Je far and
Alkamat ibn ‘Olathah, a descendant of the same Jafar, for the
leadership of the Beni‘Amir ibn Sdsdah. The two chiefs staked
a hundred camels, and applied to two men of the Koraysh,
afterwards very celebrated in the history of Islam, Abi Sofyain
ibn Harb and Abi Jahl, to judge between them. These declined,
as did also some others; but at last the task was undertaken by
Haram ibn Kotbah, who reconciled the two rivals -by declaring
that they were equal in merit. See commentary to De Sacy’s
Hariri, p. 316, and Caussin de Perceval, Essai, vol. II., p. 564.
Haram on this occasion made use of a phrase which has become
proverbial, “ Ye are as equal as the two knees of the full-grown
tawny. (#31) camel stallion which come to the ground together ;”
that is, as the knees of a good and well-trained camel. This is
often said of two things that are equal. Compare Prov. Arab.
II. 361. In the mundfarah between‘ Abbad ibn Anf and Md bad
ibn Nadlah, the judge, Damrah son of Damrah, took 9, bribe
of a hundred camels from the former and decided for him: the
judge became infamous, as the first before Islam who had taken
a bribe. On learning what had been done, Ma‘bad exclaimed,
“There is no leap left in the wild ass ;” a phrase which became
proverbial with reference to any who had had honourable
qualities and had lost them. Prov. Arab. II. 603. Compare
Hamiaseh, vol. I., p. 115, where are given certain verses
addressed to Damrah by a man whom he had upbraided. A
singular mundfarah was that between the Beni Fezirah and
the Beni Hilal ibn ‘Amir, as to which had been the more
disgraced by an act of one of their people. Among the Beni
Hilal was a man named Mokharik, who had received the nick-


376 NOTES.


name of MAdir, the Befouler, because, being of a morose and
envious disposition, he had watered his own camels at a cistern,
and then befouled with dung the little that remained of the
water in order that no others might drink. On the other hand,

a man of the Fezirah being i in company with some who were
hunting, objectum est eum asini sylvestris veretrum edisse. The
stake was a hundred camels, ‘and it was decided against the
Bent Hilal, the deed of Madir being looked upon as the more
shameful. Compare the proverb, “ More sordid than Madir;”
Arab. Prov. I. 190, An idea of the vauntings that were poured
forth on these occasions may be formed from the Mdallakah of
Amr ibn Kulthim, who celebrates the exploits and virtues
of his branch of the race of Taghlib. In the mouth of Abt Zayd,

it simply means family pride, and what we should call keeping
up a character.

A well-filled house: a house filled with the hum of visitors.
The word is originally applied to a wooded place, in which the
wind whispers through the trees, or to a place full of grass in
_ which grasshoppers and flies make a noise. vt is defined to be
the making a ‘sound i in the nose, i.e. humming. *

And rebel against the adviser.—Imr al Kays says, “See, I have
oft repelled the obstinate censurer concerning thee; him that is
sincere in his blaming, not remiss.” Mo‘allakah, v. 43.

Comes by thee.— rus is applied to an animal which turns its
right side to the spectator, passing by him from his left to his
right hand. The contrary is -». The former was esteemed
lucky, probably because the animal passing in that manner was
more easy to shoot. But some Arabs considered the c yu lucky,
and there was a difference of belief in this matter between
Hijaz and Nejd. See Lane, Book I., p. 182.

From what thicket is thy root: what is thy origin and tribe?
There may possibly be an allusion in the word (el.c\ to the five
A'yas of Koraysh; these were five sons of ‘Abd Shems, who
had all similar names, so that the question might be understood,
“ From which of the A‘y4s is thy origin?”

Arabs and foreigners.—The word ase is applied to foreign


NOTES. BIT


nations generally, but more particularly, it would seem, to the
Persians. The idea connected with it ig that of not speaking
Arabic correctly. The phrase “Ajam and “Arab occurs in the
verses which Abii Adineh (or Odayneh) addressed to his cousin
Al Aswad son of Munthir, king of Hira, urging him to put to
death the captives he had made from Ghassin. They are given
by Schultens, Afonumenta Vetustiora Arabia, ed. 1740, p. 57.
These verses were very celebrated, and were probably in the
mind of Hariri.

Like meat on the tray.—An ancient proverbial expression,
signifying the being vile and worthless, or exposed to contempt.
The proverb, “ Women are like meat on the tray,” is derived
from a saying of the Khalif ‘Omar, quoted at Arab. Prov. I. 21,
and means that they are worthless creatures and soil men’s
reputations,

The tavern of a Peecaiiion —The word Ble i is thought by
some to be derived from the Persian ails, but the more
reasonable opinion is that it is another form of ~,j\>, MIN,
ei. the shop or vault of a vintner. At Jeremiah xxxvii. 16,
where, in the English version, we read “ When Jeremiah was
entered into the dungeon and into the cabins,” the meaning of
the word is no doubt underground vaults or cells, and the
name must have been afterwards applied to the cellars where
vintners kept and sold their wine, c,jl> is the shop of a
vintner, and also the vintner himself; it is also used for any
shop. The derivation from >, because it destroys men’s
property and wounds their honour is, of course, only the guess
of a grammarian. ,

The white camels: camels of a white colour lightly mixed
with yellow.

The last darkness of night.— 235 is the setting forth on the
journey after the (,23 or halt which is made in the later part
of the night. It takes place either before dawn, or between the
first dawn and the rising of the sun.

Left together those two old ones, i.e. left the way or space free
between them; meaning, left the two free, each to do to the


378 NOTES.


other as he pleased (Lane). We left Aba Zayd and the Devil
alone together.

Jblis.—The Moslem name for the Devil, probably a cor-
ruption of diabolos, though said to be from ies because he
despairs of the mercy of God; his former name, before his im-
piety, having been (jy;\j2. It, is also said to have been Al
Hiarith, and the first child of Eve was named “Abd al Harith, in
honour of him: Zabari. According to Koran ii. 28, he was of
the number of the angels, and sinned by refusing to bow down
to Adam when he was created. God had created the angels to
inhabit heaven, and then purposed the creation of man upon
earth. He said to the angels, “I am about to place a vicar,
dils., in the earth.” They said to him, “* Wilt thou place in it
one who will work violence in it, and-shed blood?” He said,
“T know what ye know not.” Having created Adam, God told
him the names of all things, and then brought him to the angels,
and bade them ‘name them if they could. When they were
unable to do this, God bade Adam tell the names, and when
Adam had done,so, God bade the angels bow down to him.
God did this as a trial of their faith, not intending that they
should commit idolatry by worshipping Adam, but making
Adam the 4.3, or point to which the prostration should be
directed, the worship being received by God himself. All
obeyed except Iblis, who, according to repeated narratives of the
event in the Koran, refused on the ground that he was made of
fire, while Adam was only made of earth. He then appears to
have been ejected from heaven, and to have become the enemy
of man, whom he caused to be banished from Paradise. A diffi-
cult question in connection with Iblis is his relation to the Jinn.
At Koran xviii, 48, it is said, “We said to the angels, ‘ Bow
down before Adam ;’ and they all bowed down except Iblis, and
he was ofthe Jinn... . . Will ye take Iblis and his progeny
as patrans, instead of me? They are your enemies.” From
this it would appear that Iblis belonged at once to the angels and
the Jinn, though the Jinn are held to be a subordinate and a
very different race of beings, for the angels dwell in heayen, have


NOTES. - 879


no distinction of sex, and do not propagate their species; while
the Jinn, or at least some kinds of them, as the idles, the
wee, and the q»,\L3, are both male and female, and engender.
Jinn are also both good and bad, and will be judged at the last,
day. Some will go to hell, like men, Koran xi. 120, and some
will be rewarded. There are also Jinn who are Moslems, and
others who are infidels, for Khorafeh, who was carried away by
Jinn, related, when he returned, that there had been a war
between the Jinn of the two religions. Moreover, we learn from
Koran xlvi. 28, that God assembled a number of Jinn to hear
the Koran read, and that then they returned as apostles to their
race. Also in the Seventy-second Sura, called Zhe Jinn, it is
revealed that a number of them having listened to the Koran,
believed in it, and at once renounced idolatry. On the other
hand there are some that are of an essentially wicked nature,
and resemble the .»bl. Such was the “Tfrit of the Jinn
(interpreted by Baydawi as one abominable and rebellious among
the Jinn), who offered to bring to Solomon the throne of the
Queen of Sheba, Koran xxvii. 39. From this difference of
nature it is difficult to understand that Iblis was of the Jinn; for
though it is held that the Jinn, or, at least, those of them essen-
tially wicked in their nature, are descended from Iblis, who
propagated them in a miraculous manner, yet he must have
been himself originally of a different nature. Baydawi, at
Koran ii. 32, treats this question at length, and gives various
opinions, one of which is that Iblis, though an ungel by nature,
became of the Jinn by act, that is, adopted their character, which
seems to be the prevalent opinion, though the high authority of
Ibn ‘Abbas is given for the opinion that there was an order of
angels which begat children, and was called Jinn, to which order
Iblis belonged. He, like other devils, is cast at with fiery darts,
according to the curse pronounced upon him by God: Koran
xxxviii. 78. It is said that j.! is a foreign word, and that
for this reason, and also because it is a proper name, it is
imperfectly declined.


380 NOTES.


THE THIRTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


The banks of the Zonré.—Zowr’ is a name applied to the
Tigris in the neighbourhood of Bagdad, and to the city itself, or
the eastern part of it. The general name for the Tigris is
iso, the Gpan of Genesis ii, 14 and Daniel x.4; “IM being
prefixed to signify the velocity of the current. Gebenie

Trotted.—With regard to a horse it is defined as rose in his
running.

' Some children.—Plural of paucity.

That are kept jealously.—a&.ic is the most noble and precious
part of anything. Compare Tarafeh, Mo‘allakah, v. 66,—

“If death selects noble spirits, it also ‘chooses and ne away the
most precious of the miser’s hoardings.”

The word is also used of a she-camel, at v. 89.

The Heart, i.e., the centre or head-quarters of the army.
An army had five divisions deAiv, dil, dace, Spacey, and 13.

The Arms.— cd is used of the upper arm between the ‘elbow
and shoulder. By a natural transition it came to signify a helper.
The genius of the Arabic language, like that of the Hebrew, is to
form new ideas by giving a metaphorical signification to material
objects, and this character is strongly marked throughout the
present passage. ’

The Limbs.—~ jy are the members or limbs of a man by
which gain is wae as the hand, the foot, and the eye.

Turned about till back was belly.—This phrase answers to our
topsy-turvy, and denotes confusion; but it is also said, he
examined the matter “back and belly,” that is, thoroughly.
Arab. Prov. IT. 243.

Front-tooth nor eye-tooth.— 42:5 signifies one of the front teeth ;
that is, one of the central incisors, four in number. As the
feminine of 3 it signifies the she-camel that has shed the tooth
called :), that is, a camel in the sixth year. The name is also
applied to a horse in the fourth, or as is otherwise said, in


NOTES. . 381


the third year; end to a sheep or goat, or an animal of the
bovine kind in the third year (Lane), Similarly —U signifies
the canine tooth, and also an aged camel in which this tooth is
conspicuous, .

Tarnished.—}y;\ is explained in De Sacy’s commentary, a8
falling away and being reft from the possessor. But it is evident
that the series of words are all intended to express the idea of
colour. I have therefore translated as above. _5,;\ has properly
the signification of being discordant and confused in colour.

The Yellow loved one.—Compare the Assembly of the Denar.

My blue-eyed enemy.—This is usually explained to refer to the
Greeks, who were the enemies of the Arabs, and a light-eyed race. -
Thus also JludJ! x, having red moustaches, had the meaning
of hostile, as being a mark of the Greeks. It may be that as the
Byzantine Court had men of the northern nations in its service, so
blue or light eyes, and red or yellow hair, might be found opposed
to the Arabs in the fielde See further a note on the Tenth Assem-
bly. At Koran xx., 102, where it is said, ‘‘ When the trumpet
shall be sounded, and we shall gather together the wicked Bj “
Baydawi says that the wicked are thus described because this is
the most hateful colour of the eye to the Arabs, since the Greeks
were distinguished by it; and men in describing an enemy said,
“ Black of heart, ruddy of moustache, blue of eye.” But it may
also be rendered “staring,” orrather “ blear-eyed” with terror.
It appears also to describe a light, wild, glittering eye, in con-
tradistinction to the soft and languid black which the Arabs
admired. Compare Arab. Prov. II. 848, and I. 715. It seems
to have been connected with the idea of a piercing sight in the
legend of ‘Anz al Yemémeh, commonly called Zarké ’] Yemjmeh,
the first woman who used koh]. She was a woman of the pri-
meval tribe of Jedis, and when Jedis had destroyed the tribe of
Tasm, all but Ribéh ibn Murrah, this solitary survivor fled to
Hassan ibn Tobba‘, king of Yemen, and sought vengeance on
Jedis. The Himyarite army set forth, and, in order that its
numbers might be concealed from Jedis, the king commanded
that each soldier should cut down the bough of a tree and bear


382 NOTES.


it before him. This is, perhaps, the original of the story in
Macbeth. Zarki ascended an A, a fortress or‘ tower, and,
though the army was three days’ march distant, she saw it, and
called out, ‘“‘O people, either trees or Himyar.are coming
against you.” They would not believe her, and she then ex-
claimed, in the metre rejez :—

(T swear by God that trees creep onward, or Himyar bears something
which he draws along.

She then described that she saw a man mending his sandal.
The tribe still disbelieved, and in the end were surprised and
destroyed. The legend is told in various ways: compare
proverb “ More keen-sighted than Zarka ’1 Yemaémeh;” Ar.
Prov. I. 192; also De Sacy’s Hariri, commentary to Fiftieth
Assembly. For another instance of her keenness of sight see
the kasideh of Nabighah the Thobyani, in De Sacy’s Chresto-
mathie. Queen Zebbé and Basis are also described by the
Arabs as blue-eyed.

Red death. —By red death, death in war is said tobe meant.
Arab. Prov. II. 670. White death is a natural and quiet death,
with forgiveness'of sins ; and black death is a violent and dreadful
death, as by strangling, It is to be noticed that in this address
Hariri abandons rhyme ; the parts of the body, and the series of the
form (jail, giving enough of rhythm to the composition. Com-
pare Forty-ninth Assembly, where names compounded of Abia
are introduced.

Their look is a sufficient examining.—“ The eye of the horse is
as good as a look in his mouth,” is a proverb used of any one
whose aspect plainly shows his real condition. In the Thirty-
third Assembly, Abfi Zayd says, “ To you who are clear-sighted
the looking on me suffices for a description.”

A Mess.— id) is a mess of crumbled bread, moistened with
broth, and generally having small pieces of meat cut up in it,—
a mess resembling pid/aw, but made with bread instead of tice.
In the thirteenth Assembly of Nasif al Yazaji are some verses
recording the principal dishes of the Arabs; and in the com-
mentary to these it is said.that tharid is made of meat, milk, and


s


NOTES. 383


bread. Hashim, the ancestor of Mohammed, received that
name because he crumbled the bread for the tharid of the pilgrims ;
that is, because he was the first to distribute to them necessary
provisions. When prepared luxuriously with eggs and marrow,
as was the tharid of Ghassin, it was the food of the wealthy,
and esteemed above every other. It is said of “Ayisheh that she
excelled all other women, as tharid excels other kinds of food.
The word l,é is given as'synonymous with tharid.

The soul that dwells in me.—For a similar use of (53 com-
pare the Thirty-fourth Assembly. ,

Sets a mote.—The figure of a mote in the eye is used
‘commonly to express any trouble or humiliation. In the Twenty- .
second Assembly it is said of a company who are convicted of
behaving ungenerously, “ Each one drooped his eyelid over his
mote.”* So also in the Thirty-seventh, ‘‘The noble-minded man,
if his eye have caught @ mote, conceals it even from the pupils
of his own eyes.” The metaphor is ancient, for in the Moal-
lakah of Harith it is said, “If ye will be silent we will be as
those who close the eye when the motes are under their eyelids.”
Line 32.

Among thy Reciters—In the early days of Arab poetry, when
writing was almost unknown, the reputation of a, poet depended
on the number of persons whom his genius induced to commit
his poems to memory, and to recite them in public gatherings,
or in the. houses of great men. Such a reciter was called
uss!,; and many stories are current of the marvellous powers of
memory displayed. In these Assemblies Harith is supposed to
be the Rawi of Abd Zayd, as is stated by Hariri in the Preface.
Sometimes a poet was the Rawi of another; the last who was so
is said to have been Kothayyir Sahib‘ Azza, or “ the Lover of
*Azza,” who died in the year of the Hijra 105. His life is given
by Ibn Khallikén. , One of the most celebrated of these reciters
wag Abi 71 Kasim Hammad, who flourished at the close of the
first and the beginning of the second century, and was in high
favour with Welid ibn “Abd al Melik and Hisham. He was
called Ar Rawiah 4, }\, for the multiplicity of his knowledge of


Ex & 67


384 NOTES.


Arab poetry, anecdotes, and traditions. Ibn Khallikaén gives a
life of him, arid speaks of his wonderful powers. He is said to,
have first collected the Seven Mo‘allak&t, which probably owe to
him their present form. Ibn Khallikan relates that the Khalifs
of the House of Omayyeh treated him with much distinction,
and tells of him the anecdote which will be found in my
Introduction. In the Durrah of Hariri (Anthologie Gram.
Arabe) is the story of his being sent for from Irak to Syria by
‘the Khalif Hisham to inform him of the origin of @ verse
of an ancient poet. "Hammad was famous for his knowledge
_of the Days, or battles and adventures of the desert Arabs,
and all that related to their history, poetry, genealogy, and
idioms; but in the Arabic language he was not very skilful,
for having learnt the Koran by heart from a written copy,
he mistook the pronunciation of three hundred —4,,> or
words which may be variously pronounced. As manuscripts
increased the profession of Rawi declined, but it still continued
one of the chief accomplishments of the learned to know by
heart vast quantities of verse. There is a play on the verb
sy), Which I have passed over in the translation.

-L complain io God.+The metre of these lines is ay ., which
has been explajned in the notes to the Second Assembly. .This
and other similar Arab lamentations seem to.have been suggested
by the beautiful lines attributed to ‘Amr ibn Al arith ibn
Al Modad, prince of the Jorhom, at the expulsion of his family
from Mecca. Schultens, Monumenta Vetustiora Arabia, p. 1.
I may say that I totally disbelieve in the great antiquity of
these or any other extant Arabic verses,

In the ashy year —A year of drought and barrenness, when
all vegetation is dried up to the appearance of ashes.

Choking hinders me.—The full proverb is, “ Choking hinders
the verse,” i.e. “stops the way of the verse.” In Arab. Prov.
I, 340, two explanations of this proverb are given. One is that-
a father forbad a poetical son to recite, until the youth saddened,
and fell into an illness. . The father then relented, but it was too
late, and the son, in his last moments, uttered the words of the


¢


NOTES. 385


proverb. The more popular tradition ssaeibiea the words to the
poet “Obayd ibn AJ Abras. The King of Hira, Munthir ibn Ma’ as
‘Sema, had, in a fit of drunkenness, ordered his two boon-com-
panions, named Khalid ‘and ‘Amr to be buried alive. When he
returned to his senses he was filled with grief, and constructed
two mausoleums over his friends, at which he determined to
spend two days in mourning every year. He further made a
vow that one day should be called the Day of Good, and the
other the Day of Evil. The first person whom he should meet
on the Day of Good he would present with a hundred camels,
and the first he should meet on the Day of Evil he would put to
death. Ill fate brought one year to the spot the poet ‘Obayd, on
the morning of the Day of Evil. Munthir told him that he
must die, but bade him first repeat his poem, beginning “ Mal-
hdb has gone desertward mon his people; he is gone to the
open plain, and returns not,”—a poem which Munthir me
admired. ‘Obayd answered, ‘The choke stops the verse,” a
phrase which became proverbial. The poet then desired to have
wine to enliven him before death, and when he had well drunk
his veins were opened, and the two tombs washed with his blood.
This horrible act is attributed to various kings of Hira, gnd, in
the Commentary of De Sacy, to Néman, son of Munthir. The
most trustworthy narrative, however, is that of the Kitab al
Agh&ni, which has been translated by M. Caussin de Perceval,
Essai, II. 105, and to it the reader may be referred. For pro-
verbial expressions connected with the legend, see Ar. Prov, I.
25, 185, 499. In the commentary on the proverb “ To-morrow
he will be near to him who looks for him,’’ I. 118, it is aaid that
this kind of human sacrifice was abrogated by No'man ibn al
Munthir, who was converted to Christianity by the virtue and
devotion of a Christian Arab. The tale is identical with that of
Damon and Pythias. On the proverb ‘‘ The wolf is bye-named
Abi Ja‘deh,” see De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 662.

The forelocks shall bow down.~—God is called the Master
of thy forelock, in the First Assembly. In Koran xi. 59, it is
said “ There is no creature but he holds it by the forelock,” and

, 25


386 NOTES.


in lv. 41, “The wicked shall be known by their mark; they

shall be taken by the forelocks and the feet.” These expres-
sions may owe their origin to the usage of the Arabs, who

gloried in possessing the forelocks of their enemies, as an
American Indian glories in his scalps. They were said to cut off:
the hair of prisoners before they released them, and to carry it
home in their quivers, as a token of their own victory and the
abasement of their adversaries. See the proverb, “More unlucky
than Khowta‘ah.” Arab. Prov. I. 687. In the life of Imr al
Kays, from the Kitab al Aghni, it is said that when Hojr, the
father of the poet, was slain, he bade that his arms, camels, and
goods should be given to the one of his sons who did not afflict
himself at his death. The messenger came to NAfi‘, the eldest,
and told him what had happened, on which Nafi* threw dust on
his head. The messenger came then to another, who did like-
wise ; and so he came to all, and found none who did not afflict
himself. At last he came to Imr al Kays, the youngest, whom

he found drinking and playing with a friend at 0; (probably
dice). The messenger said, “ Hojr is dead,” but Imral Kays said
to his friend, “Play on;” and they played till the game was

over. ¢Imr al Kays then inquired the cause of his father’s

death, and, having been told, exclaimed, ‘“‘ Wine and women

are forbidden to me, till I have slain a hundred of the Bend

Asad, and cut off the forelocks of a hundred.”

The faces of the assemblage shall be black and white.
God has said that in the day of judgment there shall be faces
white and black; that is, the faces of the believers shall be
lighted with joy, and those of the infidels black with despair.
Koran iii. 102.


Cleft our hearts in pieces.—Compare commentary on Moal-
lakah of Imr al Kays, v. 22.


A-stretch.—i\,5\ signifies to stretch out the neck as one
does when about to drink water at a stream, and then to stretch
forth the neck in expectation of anything. The word answers to
our “ a-tip-toe.”


NOTES. 387


Her .cloak.—The W\J= is a woman’s wide outer garment,
enveloping her whole body.

Oh! would I knew.—The metre of these lines is Has, which
has been explained in the notes to the First Assembly.

One mind by vinegar and another by’ wine,—i.e., each mind
in one way or another.—Compare Arab. Prov. II. 628, and
Hamiseh 598, Arab. Text. It may also mean “with good or
bad,” since the Arabs of the desert figured these two qualities
by wine and by vinegar, which is the corruption of wine.

Being at one time Sakhr, at another time the sister of Sakhr.
—The most celebrated female name in Arab poetry is that of Al
Khansa, the sister of the warriors Sakhr and Mu‘dwiyeh, and
famous for her elegies on the two brothers. Her name was
- Tumédir, and she was the daughter of ‘Amr, son of Harith, son of
Sherid. .... son of Sulaym. The name Khansa, (having a
‘turned-up nose like the gazelle or the wild eow), was given her,
as some say, by Durayd iba As Simmah, her rejected lover.
-Mu‘dwiyeh and Sakhr, her brothers, were two of the chief men
of the tribe of Sulaym. In their childhood their father ‘Amr
-had shown them to the assembled Arabs at the fair of ‘Okaéz, and
proclaimed them, amid the assent of all, to be the two noblest
boys of the posterity of Modar. Years after, Mu“awiyeh had met at
‘Okaz a certain Hashim son of Harmalah, of the tribe of Murrah
of Ghatafan ; and a quarrel had arisen between them. When
the sacred truce was at an end, Mudwiyeh determined to attack
the Beni Murrah. A battle was fought which is known in
tradition as the first Day of Howra, and Mudwiyeh was killed by
Durayd, brother of Hashim. Hashim himself was thought to
have been killed, as he had been unhorsed and his mare had
galloped into the ranks of the Beni Sulaym; but Sakhr having
during the ensuing sacred month of Rejeb gone among the Bend
Murrah, discovered that he was still alive, and was informed that
he and Durayd had killed Mu‘awiyeh. ‘“ Have ye buried him?”
asked Sakhr. ‘ Yes,” said the brothers, and in costly stuff
of Yemen, which was purchased for five-and-twenty young


388 NOTES.


camels.” “Show me his tomb,” said Sakhr. When he was
conducted to it he wept, so as to excite the scorn of the Arabs,
who held it not good that a hero should show signs of sorrow.
“‘T weep thus every night,” said Sakhr, “ and know no repose
since Mu‘dwiyeh is dead.” This passionate affection for each
other distinguished the family. Khans& bewailed her brother in
elegies, and Sakhr prepared to avenge him. When the sacred
month was over he penetrated into the camp of the sons of
Murrah, slew Durayd, and then escaped by the fleetness of his _
mare, which was that which had formerly belonged to Hashim.

Some of Durayd’s kindred pursued, but were repulsed by the

Bend Sulaym. This is called the second Day of Howra. In the

Beitrige zur Kenntniss der Poesie der alten Araber, of Theodor
Néldeke, some verses are to be found composed by Al Khansa

on the death of Mu‘awiyeh. They have all the spirit of ante-

Islamic poetry ; and, as far as can be judged from such frag- -
ments, justify her high reputation. These events took place

about ten years before the Hijra, at the time when Mohammed

had just entered on his religious career. Sakhr did not long:
survive his brother. Being at feud with the Bend Asad ibn

Khozaymeh he made an incursion upon them, and carried away

a number of their camels. The Beni Asad pursued and came

- up with the spoilers at a place called That al Athl. The com-

bat which took place is called the Day of That al Athl. The

companions of Sakhr fled from him, and hé was wounded by a

lance which drove a ring of his breast mail into his body. He

regained his people, but sickened, and lay Jong helpless; for

though the wound seemed to heal, yet the place swelled, and

there grew out a thing like a wen upon it. Now Sakhr had a

wife named Bathileh or Sulayma, whom he had carried off by

force from the Beni Asad; and one day he overheard a woman

ask her how was her husband. She replied bitterly, “‘ He is

neither a living man to be hoped in, nor a dead one to be for-

gotten.” Then Sakhr knew that she was weary of him. But

when they asked his mother, he heard her say, “ Hope with me,

he will recover.” Then he inrprovised these verses :—


NOTES. 389


The mother of Sakhr is not weary in her jattendance ; but Sulayma
is weary of my bed and my seat ;

Whosogver esteems a wife as a mother, let him not live but in misery
and scorn.


Then, resolved to linger no longer, he bade them cut out the
ring, which they did, and he shortly afterwards died.

It was on Sakhr that the principal elegies of A] Khans& were
composed. Her Diwan is still extant, but only in manuscript.
Fragments of it may be found at p. 516 of De Sacy’s Hariri, and
in Néldeke’s Beitrdge, The courage, generosity, and hospitality
of the warrior are praised in impassioned verse. “ With one
hand he was strong to smite, with the other free to bestow.”
When the lance-points crossed he handed round the cup of death, ~
he was a defence when his people were dismayed. Who now is .
there to entertain guests when the north-wind blows, while the
echo replies, and the cold forces the camels to seek the pens?
Thus lamented Al Khans& for many years; so as, at last, to
incur the reproaches of those who thought her grief too long-
lived. In the eighth year of the Hijra the Beni Sulaym made
their submission to the Prophet, and joined his forces to the
number of a thousand warriors, at the head of whom waa‘ Abbas
ibn Merdas, the son of Khansé. She came with her son, and
was received with great respect by Mohammed, to whom she
recited her poetry. It now remains to give some account of the
personal history of this heroine. Though her poetry was
elegiac, she was, if the Arabs are to be believed, proud and
masculine in. temper, and with little delicacy, even if judged by
the standard of her own primitive age. At the fair of “Okéz,
the poet An Nabighat ath Thoby&ni erected for her a red leather
tent in token of honour; and in the contest of poetry gave her
the highest place, above all but Al A'sha (Maymin al A’sha the
Great, son of Kays). ‘ If 1 had not heard him,” said Nabighah
to her, “I would say that thou didst surpass every one in
poetry. Verum confiteor te omnes mamillis preditas (scilicet
JSeeminas) superare.” Cui illa superbissimé, “ Nec minus omnes
testiculis preditos.” She was first married to Rawahat ibn ‘Abd
al ‘Aziz of her own tribe of Sulaym, and afterwards to Merdas


390 NOTES.


ibn ‘Amir of the same tribe. She was probably a widow for the
second time when she attracted the admiration of Durayd ibn
As Simmah, one of the most celebrated heroes and poets of the
time, and held by the Arabs to be the equal of ‘Antarah in
genins and knightly prowess. But he was about sixty years old
when he beheld the young poetess in a light undress applying
pitch to the sores of her camels. He fell in love with her at
once, and sang—

Greet ye Tumadir, O my companions; halt here and dwell; your
halting here is all I seek.

I have ne’er seen or heard till to day that one anointing scabby camels

In common garb should be beautiful, putting the pitch on the sore
places ;


With bare arms smearing the pitch, as the perfume is ameared on a
striped vest of Yemen.


- Khansa, however, was not inclined to wed him, and Bere
him, after ascertaining, by an indelicate expedient, that -he had
lost the strength of youth. Caussin de Perceval, Essai, II. 549.
In her later years, after the establishment of Islam, she knew
‘Omar and ‘Ayisheh, who rebuked her for persisting in her
grief for Sakhr. From an anecdote told of her behaviour at
her daughter’s marriage in Hammer-Purgstall’s life of her
(Vol. I., p. 550) she appears to have been of an imperious and
- unamiable character when advanced in years. It may be noticed
that the words of* Durayd, “putting the pitch on the sore
places,” became proverbial to express the putting of anything
in the right place, or making an apposite observation : compare
Thirty-eighth Assembly, near the beginning.

In the commentary to the proverb ‘The wild ass is stopped
in his rush” the full legend of Sakbr and his wife is given. It
is there said, “ Alii referunt virum quendam uxorem Sachri, que
e marito tedium cepisset, interrogisse Num poder venditur ?
(erat enim pulchra et magnis coxis predita mulier) eamque
respondisse Certé/ brevi tempore,” by which she meant that
she was only waiting fur her husband’s death to marry again.
When Sakhr heard these words he swore that he would kill her;
and when she entered he said, “Gite me my sword.” She gave


NOTES. 391


it to him, and he tried to strike her with i, but his strength failed
him. He then recited the verses of which tie first two have been
translated above. In these verses occura the phrase “The wild
ass is stopped in his rush” or “leap,” which became proverbial.
Arab. Prov. II. 251. In the Forty-fifth Assembly Hariri makes
Al Khans& proverbial for contentious eloquence. The judge
says.to Abii Zayd’s wife, “If Al Khans& were to dispute with
thee she would be silenced.” Some eulogistic words on Sakhr are
given at Arab. Prov. I. 31. Some verses by Sakhr are to be
found at Hamaseh, p. 489.


THE FOURTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


The City of Peace.—According to Sherishi, Al Mansdr called
Bagdad the City of Peace, because the Dijleh (the Tigris), had
been previously called the Valley and River of Peace. In the
commentary on the Thirteenth Assembly he gives the varieties
of the name as olae and oldu, and Jiu, and Jay, and alae,
and Olas, and clit. Maghdad is also a form, the letters B and
M being easily interchanged in pronunciation, as Mecca, Becca :
Koran iii. 90. It is said of Al Asma’, that he always spoke of
the City of Peace, because it was said in & Tradition that in
Persian Bagh is an idol and Déd is a gift, which made an im-
pious or ill-omened name. Gibbon notices that the Byzantines
adopted the name Eirenopolis.

The pilgrimage of Islam.-—This is the haj which every
Moslem ought to perform once in his life, in one of the three
months Shawwél, Thi ’] Ka‘dah, or Tha ’1 Wijjah, the three last
months of the Arabian calendar. It is distinguished from the

, or mere visit to the holy places, which is optional though
iaelioriona: The command on the subject is given decisively,
Koran ii. 192, e¢ seqg, and xxi#.27. The orthodox teachers are
not unanimous about the exact days of the three months. Ash
Shafi‘l prescribes the two former months with nine days of Tha ’]


392 NOTES.


Hijjah, while Abi Hanifeh allows ten days, and Malik the
whole of this last month. But it is in all cases necessary that
the pilgrim should be present at a khotbah, which is recited on
Mount ‘Arafat, on the afternoon of the 9th of the month Thi ’1
Hijjah. It is useless to attempt to describe here the multifa-
rious ceremonies of the Aajj. A sufficient account of them will
be found in Freytag’s Kinleitung, p. 418. It is called the
Pilgrimage of Islam, because it is one of the pillars of the
religion. Said the Prophet, “Islam is founded on five things,
and the Pilgrimage is one of them.” The five are, according to
Al Ghazzali, (Pocock, Specimen, p. 294): The confession that
there is no God but God, and that Mohammed is the Apostle of
God; Prayer; Alms; Pilgrimage ;' and the Fast of Ramadan.
But another opinion is that not the Shahddeh or Confession, but
‘Ablution is the first of these five ; for the Prophet meant by the
foundations of Islam the things the practice of which keeps men
faithful to it, and not the Confession, which is the religion itself.
- Fulfilled my squalor.—+5 is the state of being dirty, and
with matted hair, as one is while on the pilgrimage during —
the time that it is forbidden to shave the head or pubes,
dlasisl, to pare the nails, to clip the moustache, and to pluck
out the hairy of the arm-pits, all which things are unlawful
- during the state called ihrdm. When the pilgrims have arrived
at the spot where they assemble before entering the sacred
territory, each changes his clothes for the pilgrim’s garment
" called karim, or vulgarly thrdm, or hirdm. “This garment,” says
Mr. Lane, in his Modern Egyptians, ch. iii., “ consists generally
of two simple pieces of cotton, or linen, or woollen cloth, without
seam or ornament, one of which is wrapped round the loins, and
the other thrown over the shoulders; the instep and heel of
each foot and the head must be bare; sandals, however, are
allowed.” From this time until the visit to Mount ‘Arafat, which
follows the ceremonies in Mecca, the prohibitions mentioned
above are enforced. Furthermofe, it is unlawful to hunt any
. animal for food, during the state of zkrdém, though fishing
jou dee, is allowed for subsistence. For the interpretation of


NOTES. 393


these ordinances, see Baydawi, Koran ly. 1, et seqq., also 95
et seqq. When all the rites of the hajj have been performed, the
pilgrim quits the state of ikrdm. The doing so is called ,J¥oI,
and then the head is shaved, the nails pared, and so on, and the
pilgrim is allowed the use of perfumes, and may return to
sexual intercourse.

The definition of .t.25 given above is admissible, but as to the
precise signification of the word there are different opinions. It
oceurs at Koran xxii. 80, where it is said mss Ngaciied os which
Baydawi interprets, let them put an end to their filthiness, but
whether the word «2.2 express the state of filth, or the action of |
doing away with it by the shaving, ete., is uncertain, since the
latter would agree as well with the meaning of the verb. Accord-
ing to some authorities, .% signifies the performance of the
ceremonies of the hajj, so that the meaning of the words of the
Koran would be, “‘ when ye have performed your ceremonies.”
The notion of impurity is attached to the Hebrew MBN, Job
xvii. 6; the name Tophet, in Sept. Tapé0, was applied to a
place in the valley of the children of Hinnom which was impure
with the blood of the human sacrifices to Moloch, 2 Kings xxiii.
10; Jerem. xix. Itis, I think, even possible that Mohammed
took this, like so many other words, from the Jews, and meant,
“let them perform their Tophet,” 2.e. “ their great slaughter of
sacrifices.” The reason of this ambiguity is that the word
is unknown except from the Koran. For abundant inform-
ation on the hajj, see the Traditions of Al Bokhari, vol. I.

Indulgence.—Verbo +3, coitum significant, aut obscenum
sermonem quo ad coitum invitatur.

Khayf.—The Khayf, or slope of Mina. Compare Tenth

. Assembly, “ Those that the slope of Mina gather's.”

A leather tent.—Such is the signification of i\b. Nasif al
Yazgji, in his thirteenth Assembly, haa united the names of
habitations among the ancient Arabs in some verses. It is there
said that the Ls is of wool; the sls<* of camel’s or goat’s hair ;
the o5 of skins; the 5 pus of dry mud; the dss of cotton


394 NOTES.


cloth; the bland of ,x5, that is of horse hair; or other hair than
yg 3 the ES of brick ; the 5,25 of trees; the Wil) of. leather.

The furnace.—For another signification of (jueb, see Arab.
Prov. II. 263. The term seems to apply either to a large stone
with a hole in it, in which meat was put to be baked by a fire
made round the hole; or to stones which were made hot and
then put into water to boil it. When the Arabs had no kettle
they put water into a skin and boiled it in this manner.

The chameleon.—*\,,> signifies the male chameleon, which
follows the sun with its eye all day. It is said proverbially,
Colder than the eye of the chameleon, because he loves to gaze
on the sun, Arab. Prov. I. 743. When the sun is very hot he
becomes active and moves about in his hole. Haméaseh, p. 808,
Arab. Text. In the commentary to this passage it is said that
when young he is ash-coloured, that afterwards he becomes
yellow, and that when the sun is hot on him he turns green.

What art thou? instead of Who art thou? signifies that the
speaker has no conception concerning the person about whom he
asks. Thus Pharaoh said, “ What is the Lord of the world?”
Koran xxvi. 22.

The fragrant waving of your myrtle.—sydi expresses the
spreading of an odour by the moving or shaking of anything.
Thus Imr al Kays (Mo‘allakah v. 8) “‘ When they (his two
mistresses) stood up, the musk odour was diffused from them
like an air of the east breeze which brings the perfume of the
pink.” Compare also his Diwan, p. 35, line 11. The tree called
Wy is described as fragrant and growing in the desert. Al
Asmat denies that it is the myrtle.

The elder, the elder——The repetition is for emphasis, and
stands in place of the verb, which though only understood still
makes the two nouns mansid, as though it were said, “ Let the
elder precede.” If there be repetition the verb must be left
unexpressed, but if there be no repetition, the expression of it is
lawful. Compare Fourth Assembly, ‘Haste, haste!” Analo-
gously in English one may say “Haste, haste!” or “ Make
haste!” but not “ Make haste, haste!”


NOTES. 895


Loosed from the foot-rope.—A proverbial expression. Arab.
Prov. II. 309. It is the rope-with which the Arabs when they
halt tie up one of the fore-feet of the camel to the part above the
knee so that he stands on three legs. The meaning of bj
is he tied in a bow, or & knot that may easily be slipped, and
the hamzeh is privative. The foot-rope was fastened thus that
it might be slipped easily at the moment of starting. It is said
of a man who does not suddenly change, and whose friendships
are constant, “Thy foot-rope is not with a slip-knot.” Ara.
Prov. II. 621. The metre of these verses is rejes.

Whose beast has fallen.—Literally, ‘‘ Who has been broken
down with;” for the word camel or beast is not expressed. .
dé\>\1\ cu! is said when the ridden camel stops in her pace
from fatigue or lameness, as if doing a new or unaccustomed
thing, and & wi ,is the ordinary phrase to express ‘the losing
a beast from fatigue and the having to go on foot during
a journey. Sherishi says that a man came to the Prophet and
said, “ Give me a mount; for RY Fig The construction is of
course impersonal ; or in the language of Arabic grammarians
the jérr and mejrir & are set in the place of the agent. Com-
pare | gt Spal &bs used by the Prophet in describing his mira-
euleus j journey.

My sighing, etc.—A kind of double meaning is probably
intended here. It may be taken literally that he sighs as he
mounts each hill and weeps as he enters each dale; but there is
also an allusion to the ascending of sighs, and the flowing down
of tears.

Your grist ; your bounty.—The literal meaning is the corn
with which the mill is fed.

Dwells in sanctuary, ete—While you befriend and protect
your neighbour, so that he lives secure, you allow him, through
your generosity, to spoil and make use of your wealth. The
allusion is to the sacred places and seasons of the old Arabs,
and to the forays which they made on each other when not
restrained by these obligations.

O ye Lords.—Metre mujteth.—It is uséless to enlarge on the


396 NOTES.


precise nature of the viands mentioned in these verses. Sdmac
is said to be flour made consistent by boiling; io.5 has been
already explained in the notes to the Thirteenth Assembly ;
and 345° in the notes to the Sixth Assembly; 50.5 is a sauce
for dates, made by boiling to a thick consistency the seeds of the
colocynth. The laborious Nasif al Yazaji has introduced the
names of many. dishes of the ancient Arabs into his thirteenth
Assembly. In asking for food at Mecca the boy may have
telied on the prayer of Abraham for the dwellers or visitors at
the Holy Place, which is a command to all the faithful, “‘ Dispose
towards them the hearts of men, and nourish them with earth’s
fruits ; so may they give thanks.” Koran xiv. 40.

Through me may reward be gotten.—It is a Tradition of ‘Abd
Allah ibn ‘Amr ibn al ‘Asi, that the Prophet said, “ Whoever
gives his brother enough food to fill him and enough water to
quench his thirst, God shall put seven moats between him and
hell.” This ‘Abd Allah was of Koraysh, and was brought by
his father who was a Muhajir to Medina in early childhood. He
handed down seven hundred Traditions. Ile was one of the four
transmitters of Traditions of the same name in the first century,
who were called the four ‘Abadileh (Abdallahs); the others
were ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘dd, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas, and ‘Abd
. Allah ibn az Zobayr.

The waist-folds of the skirt.—The i> is the part of the ,\;}
(or waist wrapper) where it is tied round the waist, which part is
folded or doubled. The ancient dress of the Arabs consisted of
a op or ‘\a,, which wete wrappers for the whole body, and
an \;|, which was a wrapper fastened round the waist and
hanging down to the ankles. The two together composed a U>
or dress. The izér being only fastened above the hips might be
pulled off or drop; thus it is related of Jebelet ibn al Ayham,
the last king of Ghassan, who submitted to the Khalif ‘Omar
and entered Istam in the 16th year of the Hijra, that he made
the pilgrimage to Mecca clothed according to the command of
the Prophet, with an zzér, and without serdwil or drawers. A
man of the Fez4rah put his foot on the skirt of the king’s zzér


NOTES. 397


and pulled it off, so that his nakedness was exposed. The quarrel
that ensued ended in the flight of Jebeleh to Constantinople, and
his return to the Christian religion. The sli is described as a
kind of izér worn by women, girt round the waist in such a
manner that the upper part hangs down over the lower; the
upper part descending to the knee, and the lower to the feet; it
has iS.> and is fastened by a &% or band, which runs through
the doubled upper part. The place or part of the izdr where it is
fastened round the waist is also called s,<>. On this subject see
De Sacy’s Chrestomathie Arabe, vol. II., p. 308, second edition.
The phrase in the text is proverbial, and means “ when they were
girding themselves or preparing for departure.”

The promise of  Orkib.— Orkdb was a man proverbial among
the Arabs for breaking his promises. He is said by some to
have been a Jew of Khaybar, by others to have been an inhabit-
ant of Yathrib (either Medina or another Yathrib or Yatrib, near
Hojr, in Yemameh), or lastly a man of Amalek. It is said pro-
verbially, More promise-breaking than‘ Orkib: Arab. Prov. I,
454. It is related that a brother of his came to ask him for
something. Said ‘Orkib, “When this palm-tree shoots the
shoot is thine.” When the shoot was out the brother came
again, and ‘Orkdib bade him wait until the fruit was in the state
called Pee that is, until the dates had formed, but were green
and small. When this took place the brother came again ; but
‘Orkib bade him wait until they were in the state called 4.,,
that is till the dates began to redden; then to wait until they
were mab, or freshly ripe; and then until they were ys or
fully ripe and turning to dryness, and therefore fit to cut. When
they were in this state ‘Orkib went by night and cut them, and
gave his brother nothing. For the names of dates in their
various stages of growth, see Lane, under ») and e ; and also
the Kimis cited in Freytag’s Lexicon, under ~. . That ‘Orkdb
was held in early times to be a man of Yathrib (Medina) and of
the Ows, appears from the tradition that the mention of him as a
promise-breaker by Kab ibn Zohayr in his Burdeh, v. 11, gave


398 NOTES.


offence as a slight to the Ansir. See note to Freytag’s edition
of the poem.

A need in the mind of Jacob.—This is an allusion to the history
of Joseph. When the sons of Jacob went a second time into.
Egypt, taking with them Benjamin, their father commanded
them not to enter at one gate, but at several. This is explained
to mean that he feared on account of their beauty, and comeliness,
and their celebrity in Egypt as enjoying the favour of the
Governor, and thought that if they entered together they might
be struck with the evil eye. They entered the city as their
father commanded them, and though this could not have pro-
tected them against the will of God, tt satisfied a need or want
that was in the mind of Jacob. Koran xii. 67, 68.

Serij is my dwelling.—These verses are also of the metre
mujteth.


THE FIFTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


Black of Robe.—Ta’abbata Sherran says of crossing the
desert in a dark night, when the Ghil was abroad : :

. A moonless night ; I pierced through its robe, as the full-breasted girl
puts on her frock. De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 480.

Fantasies.—_w\yuy is the evil whispered suggestion of the
mind, or of Satan, which comes in loneliness. The verb is
applied to the temptations of Adam and Eve in Paradise, Koran
vii. 19; xx. 118; and to the suggestions of a man’s own mind,
1,15. Compare exiv,

My night-dark night.—A similar expression occurs in the Fifth
Assembly. The epithet is used of a dark, mooriless night, such
as precedes the new moon.

Enter ye into them with peace.—These are words from the
Koran, Suraxv. 46. It will be said to those who are welcomed to
the gardens and fountains of Paradise, ‘ Enter ye into them with
peace, free from fear.” In 1. 33, the pronoun refers to the same


NOTES. 399


-substantives understood. For this reason the speaker keeps to the
actual words of the Koran in addressing whoever knocked at the
door. Compare the Forty-first Assembly, where Harith ad-
dresses Abd Zayd, “‘ Woe to thee; will ye bid others to piety, but
forget to bid yourselves?” where he speaks in the plural, because
these words so occur in a Tradition of Mohammed, who on the
night of the masra saw persons who had their tongues and lips
cut off with shears of firé, and who, when asked who they
were, answered, ‘‘ We were of those who bade others to piety,
but forgot ourselves.” De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 538.

Without the guess of doubt ; or, rather, without guessing at the
doubtful or hidden. ~ This expression is taken from Koran xviii.
21, where it is applied to the vain guesses made by people as
to the number of the Youths of the Cave, that is ane Seven
Sleepers.

I took to How? and Where pI took to asking him of his
health, and where he was dwelling.

Let me swallow domn my spittle.—This is a most ancient

phrase meaning, “ Give me time to rest and collect myself.” It

is found in the book of Job, vii. 19, “ How long wilt thou not
depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my
spittle?” When Ibn Surayj disputed with Abii Bekr Moham-
med az Zahiri, the latter said, ‘“‘ Give me time to swallow down
my spittle.” Ibn Surayj answered, “ You might swallow the
Tigris before you answer me.” (Ibn Khallikan, life of Ibn
Surayj.) This anecdote Hammer-Purgstall, in his life of Ibn
Surayj, has curiously perverted.

O thou base-born.—The phrase £9 \\3 has given rise to
much controversy. It may be interpreted, “Thou who art
without a father,” that is, who hast no known father, and art
base-born,” as the phrase £9) PS 3 may be rendered, “ thou who
hast no mother, and art a foundling, picked up,” or “ who hast
no free mother, and art a .j.<”;” or it may mean, “‘ God curse,
or cease to preserve, thy father!” But whatever its grammatical
import, there can be no doubt that it is generally used play-
fully, and though in form an imprecation, or an insult, it ex-


400 NOTES.


presses fondness and intimacy, or even admiration, like SGU
al, “May God fight against thee !” or LS4\ LS1G, “ May
thy mother be bereft of thee!” which are used when a man does
anything worthy of admiration, as the reciting of some fine verses.
Similarly, it is said in praise of a good archer, 3,3) ., 3 J,
“ Let him not be counted among. his people.” — Anthologie

4 Gram. Arabe. p. 41 Ar. Text, where a verse of Imral Kays is
quoted. The meaning of the first and third of these expressions
inay be, however, “ He is so superior to every one that no one
can fight against him, and God alone must fight against him ;”
and “‘ Let him not be counted among his people, for he is far
above them.” But it is more reasonable to take them a8 a kind
of complimentary imprecation, as an Englishman might say,
“ Confound the fellow, how clever he is!” An Arab of the desert
was even heard to say to the Deity, in a year of drought,
“ Send down upon us rain, 29 41 ).” But Sulayman ibn ‘Abd
al Melik, who. heard him, put the best construction upon his
words, and considered them -to mean, “‘Thou hast no father ;”
and that the Arab was merely testifying that God had no father, ,
nor female companion, nor offspring.” (Lane.) In the forty-
seventh line of the Mo allakah of Zohayr, the phrase is evidently
a mere expletive. <) U1) is said to be for LL! 3, the J being
redundant. (See De Sacy’s Hariri p. 464.) On this point,
however, refer to Lane’s Lexicon.

I was evil in thought at his refraining..—When an Arab finds
,that his guest will not eat, he fears that he meditates some evil
“against him, and that he does not desire to bind himself by

accepting hospitality. Thus when Abraham saw that the angels
refused what he set before them he was afraid until they re-
assured him. Koran xi. 73.

Brother of empty talk.—=\»;3 are originally small ways,
branching off the main road (Sherishi); and the word must then
have been applied to wanderings or digressions of talk, and so to
vain and unprofitable speech.

Yesternight.—Hariri, in the Durrah (Anthol. Gram. Arabe,
p. 27, Texte Arabe), says that it is a mistake when ond who in


NOTES. 401


the morning is speaking of the previous! night calls it i LJ;
for from the dawn to the time when the sun begins to decline
he should say dUiS\, and only during the latter part of the day,
and during the succeeding night, should he say é>\!'. It is
related in a Tradition of the Prophet that when he had finished
the morning prayer he said to the Companions, “Is there one of
you who has seen a vision this night?” using the word iW. -
Compare “ last night” and “ yesternight” in English. The use
in the text is correct, as the conversation takes place at night.

An ally of want. —ij> is one who unites in a confederacy
with another. The word is applied to the confederacies of the
tribes, as that between Asad and Ghatafin, and that between
certain tribes of Koraysh. It here means one who is a close
companion of want.

Fulfilled its von, i.e., “come to an end.” It is said of a man,
‘the has fulfilled his vow,” when he dies, as if death were in-
cumbent upon him, as a thing vowed, and he fulfilled the vow
by dying. The original of this expression is to be found at
Koran xxxiii. 23, where it is explained as referring to those who
have fought in the cause of Islam till they have met martyrdom,
as, Hamzah, and Mus‘ab son of ‘Omayr, and Anas son of An Nadr.
Others are spoken of in the same passage as “awaiting” their
hour, as ‘Othman and Talhah. This Anas was the uncle of Anas
ibn Malik, the transmitter of Traditions.

Sunrise.—Hariri in the Durrah says that 4,5 is said of the
sun only in the winter. Anthol. Gram. Arabe, p. 28.

Pass by.—From left to right, so as to give a good shot. The
meaning is any one who might show himself a fit subject to be
practised upon.

Cornelian.—This stone is recommended by the Prophet.
‘Ayisheh and ‘Ali relate that he said, “Seal wath seals of
cornelian.”

The yellow gold.—p ,\ is apparently the Greek Bouter.

More bewildered thant a lzard.—This is proverbial; it is
said that the lizard when he wanders away from the stone under
which he lives cannot find his way back.

26


402 NOTES.


Chid me on.—As the camel driver chides or urges on his
camels by singing to them.

A driblet from my watering —This is proverbial, like (4,
vs wr, signifying little from, or instead of, much. A similar
expression occurs in Forty-fourth Assembly ; 4 yl anc Al

All the length.of that day.—Literally, all the cloud of that day,
like the shadow of that day : compare Thirty-second Assembly,

“who resolved to pass the shadow of that day.”

To let down my bucket into rivers.—To ask charity in many
places, or to endeavour to gain money. In the Forty-ninth
Assembly Abd Zayd tells his son, “‘Cast thy bucket into every
cistern,” meaning, “ get gain wherever thou canst.” ‘“ Let down
thy bucket among the buckets” (compare Seventeenth Assembly),
was a proverbial expression, meaning, “come and labour and
take thy chance with the rest ;” derived from the watering of
travellers at a well, when each man let down the bucket and
drew for himself. Arab. Prov. IT. 436.

With burning stomach.—Literally, liver. It is said in a
Tradition, “ For every dried up liver there is a recompense ;’
meaning, “For the giving of drink to whoeyetd is parched with
intense thirst there is a recompense.” From this Tradition

’ Hariri probably took the phrase s;> oS.

Advancing one foot, drawing back the other.—A proverbial
expression denoting indecision, like the one following,’“ I blow
(as a wind) and am calm.”

The Wolf’s disease is a name for hunger, because the wolf
is ravenous for his prey, or because he bears hunger longer than
any other beast. It is a curse on an enemy to say, “God strike
him with the wolf's disease | Y

Thy disorder.—'\> 3 is a fit or paroxysm, either from faves or
from mental excitement, or from the effects of inspiration, which
last kind is known to have affected the Prophet. It is here ap-
plied to the passion or anguish of the stranger.

Its blotting oyt.—I have translated according to Sherishi,


NOTES. - 403


who renders the word by ,=*. Another interpretation is “ the
perishing of science and its schools.”

What question, or proposition.—éc3 is defined in the Ta rifat
as something said of which it can be predicated that it is true or
false.

The chiefs of the schools.—Literally, the mountain peaks.

2 is a peak or a ridge of desert mountain, such as serves as
a guide to the travellers for a great distance. He means that
he had consulted those who were men of great reputation, who
were looked up to as guides by all who trod the paths of learning.

Worn-out way-marks.-—This seeond p\c\ signifies originally
the marks in the desert by which the way was known. | In early
times, or in newly-explored parts, they consisted only of the
hoof-prints and the dung of the camels, and men sometimes
found their way by the smell of the track. Thus of Honayf al
Hanitim, a man of Taym Allat ibn Tha‘labeh, it is related that,
having been carried off by Jinn in the region called Wabir which
is inhabited by Jinn, he found his way back, though blind, by the
smell of the track, so that it is said proverbially, A better path

Jinder than Honayf al Handtim. A negro slave called osscd

Jeol Do aymis of the Sands, is said to have had the same power.
Arab. Prov. I. 492. For the fate of the latter, see Freytag’s
Lexicon, sub voce. When a way was frequented they put up
stones as guides for travellers, and these received different names
according to their size. One of small size was called at,
one larger 330, one larger still spel, one larger still ol or
ws »{, the general name being ls. (Hamaseh, vol. II. pars
prior, p. 279). Thus to express that a thing was obscure and
unintelligible it was said that its track-marks or road signs
were razed out or taken away.

Lhe doctors of the ink-flasks.—,.o is a learned man of the
Jews, or of some religion other than Islam, but it is here used
generally to signify one skilful in law.

Oft a shot is mithout a shooter.—Oft he who knows not how
to aim strikes the mark by chance. The meaning is, “ Though
the doctors have been unable to explain this puzzle, yet you may


404. NOTES.


‘succeed by chance.” The origin of this proverb is thus related :
The first who used these words was Al Hakam ibn ‘Abd Yaghath
the Mankari, who was the best archer of his time ; and the reason

_ of it was that he had vowed to sacrifice an antelope on the
Ghabghab, and hunted for days but could strike nothing.
Having returned bootless, he went forth to his people and said,
“What do ye? for I am about to kill myself, if I cannot get a beast

to sacrifice.” Then said to him his brother Al Hosayn ibn ‘Abd

Yaghiath, “Slay in the place of it ten camels, but do not kill thy-

self.” He answered, No, by Allat (or Al Lat) and Al ‘Ozza

I will not harm the stumbler and leave the runaway ;” meaning

that he would not substitute a domestic beast of burden for a

wild animal. Then said to him his son Al Mot‘im ibn Al Hakam,

“Father, take me with thee, and I will help thee.” He
answered, ‘I will not take with me a weakly trembler.” Bat

his son constrained him, and they set out, and soon they met

with an antelope, and Al Hakam shot and missed; then there
came by another, and Al Hakam missed again. Then said his
son to him, “ Hather, give me the bow.” When, then, a third
came by, the boy shot and killed her. Then said his father,

“ Oft a shot is without a shooter,” which became proverbial.

The foregoing legend is remarkable fer its connection with the

- idol-worship of the Ignorance. The father of Al Hakam is ‘Abd

al Yaghith, or the servant of Yaghith, who is one of the false

gods mentioned in the Sura, called Noah, lxxi. 22: “They
said Abandon not your deities; abandon not dy, and ¢! yes ; and
yy, and igx, and J.” Bayddwi says in his commentary
that these were pious men living between the days of Adam
and Noah, who were afterwards worshipped, and that Yaghath
was the idol of the tribe of z> 4. Its worship was first celebrated
at Akameh in Yemen, and afterwards at Najrin. Allat and Al

*Ozza, by whom the hunter swears, were goddesses. The former

appears to have been one of the most ancient deities, for it is
reasonable to conclude that it is to her that Herodotus refers,

*Ovvopdfovar 8é Tov pev Avovycov Odparar, rhv && Odpavinr
Ayr; and not as Pocock (Specimen, p. 110) says, to mb IN,


NOTES. . 405


deities in general, since Herodotus is evidently speaking of a
single definite goddess. The ¢eshdid in \I\ would to a Greek
ear be exactly like the introduction of another syllable. In


Koran liii. 19, co, sal, and il.» are mentioned together. It ,
is said that Allat was a goddess of Thakif and Koraysh. She had
a temple at Will, where the worshippers made a circuit as round
the Kabeh: Mohammed sent Abdi Sofyin ibn Harb and Al
Moghayrat ibn Sho‘beh to destroy it. Al ‘Ozza was very widely
worshipped. An image of her made of the tree called byw be-
longing to Ghatafin was destroyed by Khalid ibn Al Welid,
by command of the Prophet. On the subject of these and other
idols consult Freytag’s inleitung, and Pocock’s Specimen.
With regard to-the word —«.<, it is said in the commentary to
the Hamaseh, p. 486, Arab. text: ‘They (the Arabs) made use °
of a stone to sacrifice upon, and called it asc, or Wee, with
the ‘Ain or Ghain.” Some verses are then quoted which speak
of the W-a.z of Al ‘Ozza. It is also explained, but I think
erroneously, as the name of an idol.

A man died, etc.—Sherishi says that the composer of the
puzzle speaks of a brother because a stranger cannot inherit ; and
of a Moslem, because people of a different religion cannot have
mutual rights of inheritance ; and describes him as free, because
a slave cannot inherit from the free man; and he adds, “I could
not find any of our’ Shaykhs who was aware why the word
‘pious’ was introduced, until Abd ’] ‘Abbas Al Layti informed
me that there was a subtle meaning in it, since he who has killed
anyone wilfully loses his right of inheritance.” Hariri, by men-
tioning these conditions as fulfilled, means to say that there was
no legal obstacle to the brother’s inheriting.

Her legal share. 2,3 is applied to a law which is positively
ordained in the Koran: a law that rests on the Traditions of the
Prophet is called &. In Koran iv. 14, the share of the widow
is fixed at one-fourth of the property of her deceased husband, if
he leaves no children ;. but if he leaves children she receives
only an eighth. In the answer to the puzzle it is mentioned


406 NOTES.


‘that the widow in this case received an eighth, because her
deceased husband left a grandson,

An ordinance of law.— 5ai is a standard maxim or principle
of law which is universally accepted, and which admits of no
doubt. It is applied to those propositions of the Koran of the
meaning of which there is no dispute. It is defined in the
Ta‘rifit as that which admits of only one meaning, or which
does not admit of Jy ng ; that is, which does not require expound-
ing, or admit of figurative interpretation, because it is not
dubious. (5c), signifying to set up a thing as a standard is set
up, or as a bride is raised on a seat of honour, is no doubt akin
to the Hebrew D3, signifying something set up; as a banner or
ensign on a high hill, Isaiah xiii. 2; xxx. 17; or as the pole
on which the brazen serpent was placed, Numbers xxi. 8, 9.
The metre of these verses is khafif.

Thou hast fallen on one who is knowing in it.—This pro-
verbial expression is attributed to Malik ibn Jobayr, who was
one of the Khalif ‘Omar’s generals, or else to another Malik,
the son of Jana, who was among the sages of the Arabs. Ac-
cording to Arab. Prov. II. 109, where he is made the son of
Jobayr, he made use of this phrase when some one questioned him
as to who was the first man “ for whom the staff was struck ; ”
- that is, whose garrulity and wandering in old age were checked
by his son’s striking, at his request, a staff on the ground.
Malik, who was learned in the traditions of the Arabs, said,
“Thou hast fallen upon one who is knowing in it,” which be-
came proverbial. For “ striking the staff” see Forty-ninth
Assembly, p. 655, De Sacy’s edition ; Arab. Prov. II. 548, and
I. 55. It is also said that the poet Farazdak made use of this
expression when he met Hosayn, son of ‘Ali, who was journey-
ing to Irak, while the poet was journeying to Hijaz. Hosayn
asked him what was the disposition of the people of Kufa, and
Farazdak answered, “Thou hast fallen on one who is knowing
in it; the hearts of the people are with thee, but their swords
are with the Bend: Omayyeh.”

One who is at home in it.—Literally, “ the son of its root, or


NOTES. 407


foundation,” that is, one well acquainted with its essence and
reality : a common expression equivalent to the foregoing.

As God hath commanded.—lIt is said in the Koran, xxxiii. 53,
“When ye are invited, enter.” ,

The ark of Moses, mentioned at Koran xx. 39. The ark of
the covenant is also called my, Koran ii. 249, and is said by
Baydawi to have been in size three cubits by two. The word
may thus be a figure for any very small dwelling. ey is
used in Arabic for a coffin, or the wooden case placed over a
grave ; as ,,,!)| was applied to the large coffin or hearse in which
chiefs were taken for burial: see Commentary on Mo‘allakah
of Tarafeh, line 12. The identity of these words with the
words used in the Bible, the one to designate the ark of Noah
and the ark in which Moses was exposed, and the other the
ark of the covenant, need only be pointed out.

Weaker than a spider's web ; or house.—This is also an allusion
to.the Koran. In the Sura-called the Spider it is said that
those who choose any protector but God are like the spider when
she makes her house; for ‘ the weakest of houses is the house
of the spider.” It has been objected to Hariri, that whereas
God has said, “the weakest of houses is the house of the
spider; ” he speaks in this Assembly of a house weaker than
that of a spider, thus contradicting the sacred text. But it is
observed in his justification that an exaggeration in similitudes
is not to be taken literally, and that the sin would consist in
believing and asserting as a positive truth that a house could
really be weaker than tlie house of a spider.

The proud rider on the desired steed, etc.—These are enigmatic
' phrases signifying dates and cream. ‘The rich-coloured dates
were laid upon the cream and the two were sold in the markets ;
thus the dates might be called the rider and the cream the steed.
Similarly, the cream by itself would be hurtful to the stomach,
but the dates corrected this fault, so one is called the wholesome
and the other the hurtful companion. This kind of language, as
applied to various kinds of food, was called Tofayli, a word
derived from a celebrated dinner hunter named Tofayl, of whom


408 NOTES.


an account will be given in the notes to the next Assembly.
In the Nineteenth Assembly a number of Tofayli bye-names,
eat , are introduced.

The free-born woman hungers, but mill not eat by her breasts.
—This is a proverb directed against the practising of any ignoble
art for gain. The free-born woman will rather starve than
accept the occupation of a nurse, which belongs to slave women.
This appears to have been a very ancient saying, for it is said to
have been addressed proverbially by Al Harith ibn Sulayk the
Asadi to his wife Zebba. Harith was advanced in years when
he sought her in marriage of her father, ‘Alkamat ibn Kha-
tafah. The maiden disliked the: marriage, but was persuaded
by her mother; Harith giving 150 camels, a slave, and a
thousand ‘dirhems. Some time after, as a young man of the
Bend Asad passed by, Zebb& sighed deeply, and her husband
asked the reason. ‘‘ What have I to do with old men?” she
replied. Harith then in his anger addressed her with this
proverb, by which he meant seemingly that she would , better
have consulted ; her honour by bearing her lot uncomplainingly.
He, however, repudiated her, and sent her back to her family.
Arab. Prov. I. 211.  Sherishi gives the dialogue between
se and daughter, and make Zebba’s reply to her husband to

be rd iyo SS eye call cecdolll egnitl » J be; he also
says that the occasion of her sighing was her beholding 8 num-
ber of the youths of Asad wrestling.

Forbidden the eating of usury.—It is said (Koran ii. 276,)
“They who eat (devour the produce of) usury shall not rise save
as he rises whom the deyil prostrates by, touching (or possessing
him.”) Compare iii. 125: “Eat not usury, doubling and
doubling the sum.” Compare also xxx. 38.

Press host on host.—A hyperbolical phrase quoted from a
poet, and signifying here, “‘ Mix them together.”

The voracious elephant.— More voracious than the elephant ”
is a proverbial phrase. Arab. Prov. I. 138.

Say to him.—The metre of the answer to the puzzle, as well
as of the puzzle itself, is khafif, already described in the notes to


NOTES. 409.


the Tenth Assembly. In the second lind Sherishi reads 4 290.


His observations are reproduced in the notes to De Sacy’s
edition.

The van of the darkness. er is a "part or the first part of
the night; or the darkness of the night. In Hamiseh, p. 595,
Ar. Text, it may have the last meaning. “She is like the full
moon that is in the midst of the darkness of a cold night.”

The thunder is lauding God in the cloud.—Koran xiii. 14.
This passage gives the name of “ Thunder ” to the Sura.

The dogs barked after me.—Hoariri, in the Durrah, (Anthologie
Gram. Arabe, p. 39, Texte Arabe), observes that ru governs an
accusative immediately, and that it is a vulgarism to follow it by


lis white hand.— White hand” is used idiomatically to
express an unasked or ungrudged favour, as “a black hand”
expresses niggardliness ; it also means some great action which
cannot be rivalled, so that it is said, ‘‘ He has a white hand in
this matter ;” that is, “he is most able in it.” A third signifi-
cation is an argument, or a clearly demonstrated proof. These
various meanings seem to have arisen from the passage in the
Koran, vii. 105, where it is said that Moses, before Pharaoh,
drew forth his hand from his bosom, and it was white to the eyes
of those who looked on it. The Moslems do not, like the Jews,
interpret this as smitten with leprosy, Exodus iv. 6; but as
a gift of supernatural beauty, the former colour of it having
been brown or red. The’ “hand of Moses” became symbolical
of power and ability.

The first of the morning dawned. Literally the nose of the
morning sneezed.

The caller of Blessing is the muezzin who cries | Jc im
cil. There is here an allusion to the practice of wishing
people the mercy of God when they sneeze, cws0i7. For a
mention of this usage see Twenty-second Assembly.

Hospitality is three days.—This is a very celebrated Tradition,.
although by it the hospitable practices of the Ignorance were


410 NOTES.


only confirmed. “ The entertainment of a guest is three days,
and the viaticum, 5$\>-, is a day and a night, and what exceeds
this is alms.”. The Tradition is thus explained in Lane, Book I.
p. 486. “The period of the entertainment of a guest is three
days, during the first of which the host shall take trouble to show
him large kindness and courtesy, and on the second and third of
which he shall offer him what he has at hand, not exceeding his
usual custom ; then he shall give him that wherewith to journey
for the space of a day and a night, and what is after that shall
be as an alms, and an act of favour, which he may do if he please,
or neglect if he please.”

Visit him thou lovest.—Similar counsels are to be met with
continually in the poets. For the proverb, “ Visit (only) at
intervals ; thou shalt increase friendship,” see Ar. Prov. I. 587.


THE SIXTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


The West.—By this name the people of the East denote Africa
from Tunis to Morocco; but not Andalis or Spain.

The prayer of sunset.—This is strictly speaking the first
prayer of the day, which is reckoned from sunset to sunset ;
though the morning prayer is often called the first. The time
of the prayer of sunset begins a few minutes after the disap-
pearance of the sun; the second prayer time, ‘las, begins when
the evening has closed in ; the third at day-break, read or ys ; the
fourth a little after the re, or noon; and the fifth at the poe,
or afternoon, midway between noon and dusk, Slight differences
respecting the time of these devotions divide the four orthodox
sects of Islam, but it is illegal to pray exactly at sunset, sunrise,
or noon, since this was the practice of the sun-worshippers.

Performed with completeness.—This is interpreted to mean
that it was performed in public, since a prayer in public in the


NOTES. 411


mosque is more complete and excellent than one performed in
private: or it may mean that it was performed with its full rite.

Joined to it what was optional.—That is, had added to the
fard, or strictly incumbent inclinations, the two sunneh inclina-
tions. The prayers consist of so many \s5,, or inclinations,
each with its accompanying recitations. The number of incli-
nations varies with the different prayers; but the prayer of
sunset has three inclinations which are fard, and two which are
sunneh; and the meaning of the text is that Harith accomplished
all five. :

Jofayl, according to the legend, was the father of all intrusive
guests, who come without being invited. According to Sherishi
he was Tofayl ibn Dallal the Darimi, and according to Aba
‘Obaydeh, cited at the proverb “ More intrusive than Tofayl,”
Arab. Prov. II. 838, he belonged to the tribe of “Abd Allah
ibn Ghatafin. He dwelt at Kufa, and was known by the name
of “Tofayl of the weddings,” or ‘‘Tofayl of the brides,” from
his presenting himself unbidden at marriage feasts. From him
every one who is (= )\,, that is, an intruder while péople are
eating, or ly, that is, an intruder while they are drinking,
is called a Tofayli; and from the nature of Eastern society the
race has never failed. The satirical stories at the expense of
these people are innumerable. One of them is supposed to sing:

‘*We are the people who when we are invited accept, and when we are
forgotten invite ourselves ;


“For we say, ‘Perhaps we were invited, but were from home, and the
messenger came to us, but could not find us.’ ”


Yet it is doubted whéther Tofayl ever existed, for Jab signifies the
coming on of night upon day ; and from this the name Tofayli
may he figuratively derived, as one who comes upon a company,
unbidden and unwelcome.

Choice of the young camel's hump. —\e is the flesh of the
back from the shoulders to the rump, including the hump. _j\,>-
is the young camel till the time that it is weaned. In the
Mo‘allakah of Tarafeh, v. 93, we read, “The serving maids
place the young camel on the coals and hasten to us with slices


412 NOTES.


of the fat hump.” Yet it is said, “ More insipid than the flesh
of the young camel.” Arab. Prov. II. 713.

They loosed their loops to me, that is, they rose up to me.
This phrase has its origin in the peculiar posture taken by Arabs
when sitting at their ease. The Arabg in the desert had, when
sitting, nothing to rest their backs against; it was their custom
therefore to draw up their knees to their stomachs, and then
bind their back to their legs with a garment, or a piece of cloth,
such as a turban is made of. The thing with which this was
done was called igam, and the act of doing it s=!. Or some-
times the man raised his knees in this manner and supported
himself by holding a sword in front of his legs; and sometimes
he knit his hands in front of them. Thus it was said that
Ls were “the walls of the Arabs,” that is, the things against
which they rested their backs when sitting. The word is very
insufficiently translated ‘loop ;” and, indeed, it is impossible to
render it in English. To loose the Ls naturally means to rise ;
and to bind them means to sit down. To sit in this manner is
the most: easy posture among the Arabs, and would be- adopted
in along confabulation. It is forbidden during the sermon as
tending to sleep.

The blinding lightning that snatches away the sight. Compare
‘Koran ii. 19.

- The sip of the timid bird.—In hi Thirty-ninth Assembly a
similar comparison is used: ‘‘ Not longer than the tasting of
the drinker.”

The two words are pS putt, the ordained form of saluta-
tion from one Moslem to another. The men on the Wslcl or
highest part of the barrier which separates Paradise from Hell,
shall say to the people of Paradise, ‘Peace be upon you,” Koran
vii. 44, Itis not used to a person of another religion. The giving
of this salutation to a Moslem is not an obligatory duty, fard,
but a precept of Tradition, sunneh. To return it however is
obligatory, since it'is said, Koran iv. 88, “If ye be. saluted
return a still better salutation, or at least return it.” The
former part of this command leads strict professors to repeat


NOTES. 413


the full answer, which is, “On thee be peace and the mercy of
God and his blessings; ” or at least as much of this formula as
is necessary to make it more complete than the original salu-
tation. The Tradition given by Baydawi.is that a man said to
the Prophet, “‘ Peace be on thee.”” The Prophet replied, “‘ And on
thee be peace and the mercy of God.” Another then said, “‘ Peace
be on thee und the mercy of God,” to which the Prophet replied,
“And on thee be peace and the mercy of God and his blessings.”
A third man said, “Peace be on thee and the mercy of God and
his blessings,” to which the Prophet replied, “And on thee.”
The man said, “Thou hast fallen short to me.” The Prophet
answered that the man had left him nothing further to add, and
that he had returned his wishes by saying, ‘And on thee.”
Thus this full formula which unites all that can‘be desired for a
man need not be exceeded in the answer.

The two salutations, or pronouncings of salam.—Sherishi says
that these are the salim uttered on entering -the mosque, and
that uttered at the close of the two inclinations with which it is
proper to salute the mosque; or else it is the salaém uttered at*
the prayer of sunset, and that uttered after the inclinations.
These opinions, no doubt, arise from the fact that only one salim
is necessary to the two inclinations with which the mosque
must be saluted, so that if there were two salims there would be
four inclinations, which is unusual. But the commentator cited
by De Sacy is of opinion that Hariri takes the word dud in
its ordinary sense as a salutation, so that it would be the
same as rak dh.

The messenger of lank-bellied children.—os is originally a
post-horse or mule; it is then applied to a messenger who rides
on such an animal, and, lastly, to any messenger.

Tables.—Hariri, in the Durrah (Anth. Gram. Arabe p. 29,
Texte Arabe), says that a table is not ssl. until the viands are
placed on it; that, in fact, it means a table laid with food. The
disciples said to Jesus, ““O Jesusson of Mary, is thy Lord able
to send down to us a table, site, from heaven?” where their
meaning is shown to be a table laid with food, by their adding,


414 NOTES.


“We desire to eat of it.” Koran v. 112. Until the food is
upon it, says Hariri, it is called .,\s-. This opinion, however,
is contrary to what is stated in De Sacy’s Commentary, page
360, for there ,,,!4s. is also said to signify the table only after
the food is on it. Both words mean the small table, or rather
tray, on which food is served.

Become absurd by being reversed.—The commentators have
noticed that in the Koran instances of this property may be


found as S33 3, xxi, 84; and ~% 2%, Ixxiv. 3. The
last is introduced into the author’s second sentence. It need
hardly be said that in the Koran they are quite unintentional.
The learned have discovered them as they have discovered that
‘there are two verses which contain all the letters of the alphabet,
and many matters of the same kind.

Originate virgin phrases in it.—Literally, ‘ Deflower virgins of
it.” Compare Sixth Assembly.

The men of the Cave.—The history of the Seven Sleepers,
so famous in the Middle Ages, is an article of faith with the
Moslems, since it forms the subject of the earlier part of the
Eighteenth Sura, called the Cave. According to the Qhristian
tradition, the Seven Sleepers were young men of Ephesus, who,
fleeing from the persecution of the Emperor Decius, took refuge
in a cave, and there slept through a long period of time. The
legend, like that of Endymion among the ancients, has singu-
larly attracted the imagination wherever it has become known.
In Koran xviii. 8, it is said, “Hast thou considered that the
men of the Cave and Ar Rakim were of our signs, a wonder?”
The meaning of Ar Rakim is the subject of dispute. It was
either the name of the mountain or the valley in which the cave
was situated, or of their village, or the name of their dog, which
is mentioned at verse 17 as sleeping at the entrance of the cave,
or elge it is the name of a leaden or stone tablet on which their
names were engraved by their countrymen, who built a chapel
on the spot (verse 20); or else “the men of Ar Rakim ” were
distinct from the “men of the Cave,” who slept, for it is


NOTES. 415


related that the men of Ar Rakim were three, who taking
refuge in a cave from a tempest were shut in by the fall of a
‘ rock. Each of them prayed for help through the merits of a
good action which he had performed. ° When the first had thus
adjured God, the mountain cracked, so that they could see the
light ; when the second had spoken, it split, so that they could
distinguish each other, and when the third had spoken, it opened
and they were delivered. Bayddwi. Respecting ‘the number of
the Companions of the Cave the Koran leaves us in uncertainty,
It is said, ‘‘ Men will say that they were three, and the fourth .was
their dog ; that they were five, and the sixth was their dog, con-
jecturing what is hidden ; and they will say that they were seven,
the eighth was their dog. Say, My Lord knows best their num-
ber; there are but few who know concerning them.” Nor is
the exact duration of their sleep determined, for it is said, ‘‘ They
remained in their cave three hundred years, laud Walajly 5”
which is explained by Baydawi to mean that opinions differ
as to whether they remained three hundred or three hun-
dred and nine years. According to the same Commentator
(verse 21) the opinion that they were seven in number is
the most correct; the names of six of them,and of their
dog are given on the authority of ‘Ali: the six were royal
counsellors, and the seventh, whose name is not given, was
a shepherd who accompanied them. Some of the names are
seemingly corruptions of Latin or Greek. Ibn ‘Abbas, cited by
. Sherishi, gives the names differently ; the dog, however, in both
versions is Kitmir. This dog has been reckoned by some among
the seven most celebrated animals ; the others being the hudhud
or lapwing of Solomon, which brought him the news of the Queen
of Sheba (Koran xxvii. 20); the camel of Salih; the cow of
Moses, which gives a name to the second Sura; the fish of
Jonah; the serpent of Eve; and the peacock of Paradise. The
history of the people of the Cave was one of the twenty-eight
subjects on which the Jews of Khaybar, at the instigation of Aba
Jahl and Welid ibn Moghayrah, questioned the Prophet. They
sent five learned men thus to prove him, and Mohammed, though


416 NOTES.


nothing had been revealed to him on the subject, answered, in
the presence of the Koraysh, that he would give the due replies ;
trusting that Gabriel would bring him the explanations from
God. But he forgot to add, “if it please God,” and, to correct
him, God left him fifteen days without any divine help, so that
his enemies triumphed over him. At last, at the end of the
fifteenth day, Gabriel brought to him the verses of the Koran
which answeréd the several questions; but there was also re-
vealed at the same time the following, ‘‘ Say not of anything ‘I
will do it to-morrow,’ without adding, ‘if God will it” ” These
words occur in the history of the Cave, Koran xviii. 23, and bear
witness that this history was one on which the Prophet was
entirely uninformed, at the time when he rashly accepted the
challenge of the Jews. For the history of these questions see
Tabari.

Blame him who wearies of thee.—It will be observed that in
these sentences only the twenty-eight letters are considered, and
that no account is made of teshdid or tanwin, or even of the
hamzeh, in sueh a word as *l> -y, although it is essentially a
letter.

He who completes the kindness.—On the meaning, of Hz,
compare the verses at the end of the Sixth Assembly.

To mould and break, etc.—i.e., to form sentences, and then to
reject them, on finding that they were deficient; to be at one
moment ready to solve the difficulty, and at the next unable to
utter a word.

I seek food.—That is, I seek a solution of the diffieulty from
those around. ‘The word is used in a saying of ‘Ali, which is
interpreted to mean, “ When the Imim seeks for a word or an
explanation, give him one.” You say (4)! sab, when the
reader of the Koran stops (through ignorance what reading to
give to a particular word), and you explain to him and give him
an opinion ; on the other hand, he »skx:| when he solicits this
help. A somewhat similar use of the word occurs in the Thirty-
first Assembly, p. 890, De Sacy’s edition: “Their seeking to
taste of his speech.”


NOTES. 417


My breeze fell.—i.e., my efforts were piven up in despair.

- Jyds has been spoken of in the notes to the Seventh Assembly.

There is One learned, etc.—These words are from Koran xii. 76,
and refer to the stratagem suggested by God to Joseph, of hiding
his cup in Benjamin’s sack.

Bestow on the needy.— Metre rejez. The letters of these
verses are the same whether read forwards ur backwards, though
this is effected by counting the augmentative ef which makes the
glntl of the last syllable.

Excellent are this company.—Metre kdmil, which has been. de-
scribed at the Fourth Assembly.

Princes in bounty-—I have thus translated in accordance with
Shertshi, who renders ¥,lie by Jl, making (J,2+ a form of
J.3, in use among the people of Yemen. It-is said. in the
Twenty-seventh Assembly, ‘‘I sojourned with Arabs who were
as deputies of princes ;” meaning noble-spirited men. The title
J.5 is explained at Assembly Kighteen. This rendering is the
more consistent with the sense, since Abii Zayd praises the com-
pany both for their cleverness and their liberality.

Sahban would be as Bakil.—F¥or the former of these two
persons, who is always spoken of as the pattern of eloquence, see
the Fifth Assembly. Bakil was a man of Rabf‘ah, or, as it is
otherwise said, of Iyéd. He had an impediment in his speech for
which his name became proverbial, so that it is said, More tongue-
tied than Bakil. Once, when he had a fawn under his arm,
which he had bought for eleven dirhems, ‘he was met by people
who asked him how much he had given; he stretched out his
arms and opened his fingers to express ten, and put out his
tongue to express one. The fawn which was under his arm
made its escape. When censured for his stupidity, he is said to
have answered in verse that a man could not help his own stu-
pidity, and that when afflicted with it, it was an advantage to him
not to be able to speak fluently. Ar. Prov. II. 146.

The glooming has now set in.—These words are derived from
the Sura called .;\a!, at the end of the Koran. (ju2 signifies

to be overflowed or obscured, as the night by darkness or clouds,


27


418 NOTES.


or the eye by tears. It is said by some to apply there to the
eclipsing of the moon. (Baydawi.) Sherishi also renders the word
by “ moon,” and quotes a Tradition of ‘Ayisheh, that the Prophet


one night, looking at the moon, said to her, “ Commend thyself


to God from the evil of this; for this is sd, lol juld!, the
thoon which is becoming eclipsed.” I have preferred to render
it “ glooming;” ‘but if it refer to the moon it may mean merely
that the moon had set. - ;

' Between me and my house.—On the repetition of .., when it
is joined to a pronoun so as to form but one: word with it,
read the lucid explanation of Hariri, in the Durrah; Anthol.
Grammat. Arabe, p. 44, Texte Arabe.

Distraction. — ib is described as fear and delirium caused by
hunger. It is ased also to express angry petulance, or caprice
of mind.

Emptiness, hank is a masdar.

To his peopie.—ias is the reserve or support of an army or
attacking body; a band stationed behind soldiers for them to
take refuge with in retreat.

His return.—\\, which ia one of several masdars of
I, signifies, according to some, only the returning to one’s
family at night. .

, The seed-plots of advantages: the nurseries, the place where
something is planted. This word is used in the sense of a bride
from whom’ oflspring is expected at Assembly Thirty-nine,
unless, indeed, we have to read there (w,lee, without the point.

When thou hast got the plucking.—Metre mutekdrib.

Accost with “ Give now,” etc.—The meaning of this is, ‘ when
you ask, endeavour to get the favour instantly granted, but
when you are solicited, put off the asker as long as you can.”
It is said proverbially, “‘ When he begs he urges, and when he is
begged of he puts off.” Ar. Prov. I. 41. In the Thirty-seventh
Assembly it is said ‘“‘ Remains there one who when he is asked
for food says, ‘Take?’ ” At p. 509 of De Sacy’s edition, some
verses of Al Bohtori are quoted, the last of which expresses a
similar idea.


NOTES. | 419


What is postponed from thee.—i.¢., what is only due at some
fatare time. JoT Y, ote ¥ signifies neither present nor future
wealth.

In thy ‘heart.—, els, which is Ji from +, is a word of
various meanings, but seems here to signify the pericardium ;
the integuinent (siz) of the heart. It is also said to signify
the core of the heart or the heart’s blood.


THE SEVENTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


In its heat. —wy Sli is the ardour of the horse for the ° gallop,
and thence the gallop itself.

Cast in his bucket among the buckets.—Ar. Prov. II. 436.
See also notes to Fifleenth Assembly. Compare also Ar. Prov.
IT. 260.

Thinner than a reed.—Hariri, in the Durrah (Anthol. Gram.
Arabe p. 31, Texte Arabe) says that a reed-is only called
when it is cut for writing; so be», which occurs a few lines baok,,
means only the thread or string of a necklace.

The shears.—Sherishi reminds us that eh in the Durrah,
censures the use of » psie, and (|i, which, aa they
signify instruments that ‘are made up of 2 double blade, should
be used in the dual, as ylie>. Yet Sherishi, though acknow-
ledging that the dual is the more usual, and the preferable form,
gives instances of the use of the singular. The shears are called


dry because they are used but seldom, and lie rusty daring the


greater part of the year.

To lay low all he aimed at.—_ rol is said of one who strikes
and kills the game on the spot; _ sl of one who strikes it so
that it escapes, and lingers for some time. To eat the latter is
forbidden, since it is held to come under the prohibitions of
Koran ii. 168 and v. 4. There is also a Tradition of the Prophet,
“ Bat what thou hast struck so that it was killed at once, and

_ leave what thou hast struck so that it lingered.”


420 NOTES.


Until the quivers were empty.—This metaphor for the exhaus-
tion of a store of conversation has already occurred. According
to some there is a difference between the two names for a quiver,
dao and SS, the former being a large and wide quiver, with a
cover to it, intended for the wooden arrows, called W145, which
were used by the Persians; while the latter is of leather, made
to hold the Arab arrows of reed, J. Other names are pio,
which occurs in Assembly Twelve, and is said to mean @ quiver
of wood or of skin ; ..,,5, which consists of two pieces of wood,
joined together, and 4d3,, which is a leathern bag for arrows.

Or the word ‘ Silence’ were incumbent upon them.—The sense
of these words in the original is obscure. The Commentator
cited by De Sacy explains them by the passage in the Koran,
‘* When the Koran is read listen to it and be silent,” vii. 203.
The meaning in that case would be, ‘‘ They were as speechless
as if the duty of listening to the Koran were incumbent upon
them.” But the phrase 26, lS mele cdo, Koran x. 96,
means “ those on whom the word of God is established and fixed
that they should not believe” (Baydawi). Also J,@l Go ail

eel is, Koran xxxvi. 6, has a similar meaning. The pas-
ee in the text may therefore be rendered, “‘ As if a sentence or
judgment from God of silence had been established against them.

The term of grace.— 33e\\ Jo-\ is technically the term which
must elapse before a repudiated wife can be sent away: Koran
Ixv. 1-6. Je\ is also used in speaking of the time which
should elapse before she marries again. The NAMING, in the
text is simply, “I have given you your full time.”

The tether of delay.— J, is ihe Tong rope by which animals
are tied when grazing.

Lill rub the spark.—In De Bacy’ 8 Commentary it is said
that to give to -a3 the sense of blame is a mistake; but I can-
not but think that the ambiguity was presentto Hariri’s mind,
who is fond of surprising the reader by such plays of language.

The light of cheerfulness.—The primitive meaning of rls
is the foretokens or earnests of anything ; and it is used in this
sense in the reversed reading. Then it was applied to the


NOTES. 421


streaks of light which the dawn makes in the night, and which
are earnests of the coming morning. Hence in the text it
signifies the bright gleams of a cheerful countenance.

Eloquence in speech is witchcraft to hearts.—This is taken
from a traditional utterance of Mohammed: “Some eloquence
(or exposition) is as witchcraft.” The occasion on which it was
spoken is given with the proverb. Arab. Prov. I. 1.

Self-restraint.—¢ 5, is defined in the Ta rifit as the abstaining
from what is doubtful for fear of falling into what is forbidden.

The ornament of rulers is hatred of defamers. — Mohammed
said, ‘ie who defames his neighbour to the Prince injures his
Prince, his neighbour, and himself.”

Excellence is in the hand of God; He gives it to whom he will.—
These words are from Koran lvii. 29, where they are used as a
rebuke to “the people of the Book” or of “ writing,” that is
the Jews and Christians, who possessed Scriptures, and despised
the Prophet’s revelation. Harith consoles himself for his in-
feriority to Abi Zayd by reflecting that literary gifts are in the
hands of God. .

Ido not take forfeit of my pupils; as 1 do from my unsuc-
cessful competitors. As Harith was only a listener, not one of
the contenders in the strife of eloquence, but an humble learner, *
Abt Zayd will not take a present from him.

Be Abé Zayd.—That is, I hope and believe that thou art Aba
Zayd. The Prophet seeing Abi Therr al Ghafari, at a distance,
before he could well distinguish him, said, “ Be Aba Therr,”
‘that is, “I hope that thou art he,” or “ God ordain that thou be
he.”

He declared the Power of God and our return to Him.— 34>
or .Jigm signifies he ejaculated aly 3} 353 3, Jy> 3 (There is no
strength and no power but in God). =| signifies he ejacu-
lated .yerl, a1 Ul, all G] (We belong to, or are in the hands of,
God, and to Him we return). These are exclamations uttered at
the befalling of calamity.

Time hath drawn his svord.—The metre of these verses is (lef


422 NOTES.


and they belong to the third ye which is iyie d=t= and its
first 3 ,< has is nga ihe measure ce

It is to be noticed that Gach line ‘ants with, 4,6 taken in a
different sense.

Loose our loops: to rise up. See Sixteenth Assembly.

We went asunder like the bands of Saba.—The allusion here
is to the most famous event in early Arab history, namely,
to what is called el J, or the bursting of the dyke of Marib,
in Yemen, by thich the reputed descendants of Saba were
scattered to the extremities of Arabia, and into Syria, and Irak.
The subject has been almost exhausted by Sylvestre de Sacy,
in the masterly essay which is contained in Vol. xlviii. of the
Mémoires del Académie Royale des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres.
To this work, and to the. Arabic texts which the learned author
has published with it, the student who desires full information
on the subject is referred. It-will be here necessary to give
only such a brief narrative as will explain the allusion in the
text. According to Arab tradition, there was in Yemen or
South Western Arabia a large and fertile country inhabited by
the descendants of Saba, ... Mas tdi describes it as distin-
guished above all others for its rich fields, its gardens and its
meadows, its buildings and canals, its fine trees and plentiful
rivers. In this happy country, which was called the land of
Saba, there was situated a great city called Marib, which was
the capital of its kings, a powerful race of monarchs, who had
defeated all their enemies. But all this prosperity was artificial.
The country had been originally uninhabitable, on account of the
frequent inundations ; since the forrents rushed down from the -
mountains, sweeping harvesta and cattle before them. But
Lokman, son of ‘Ad, he who is called “ Lokman of the Vultures,”
and who must not be confounded with Lokmfn al Hakim, son of
Béurd, of the children of Azar, who was sister’s son to Job, or,
as others say, son of Job’s maternal aunt, and who was a witness
of the power ef God in giving David the skill to make coats of
mail (Baydawi on Koran xxxi. 11), became king of the country,


NOTES. 423


after the destruction of the race of “Ad. For an account of
“Lokman of the Vultures,” see Tabari, at the history of the
prophet Hid. This Lokman turned the channels of some of the
_ Tivers, and gave them an outlet to the’ sea; to restrain the rest,
he constructed between two high mountains, at the mouth’of a
ravine into which the waters precipitated themselves, a strong
‘dyke, which caused the floods to form a great basin or reservoir.
In this dyke were openings through which the husbandmen
drew off supplies of water for their fields, and the country of Marib
became fertile, populous, and rich. This prosperity endured for
ages. LokmAn himself is said to have lived three thousand five
hundred years, having been granted by God a life equal in
length to the lives of seven vultures, each of which lived five
hundred years. His life only came to an end when -the last
vulture, which was named Lubad (oJ) died. At last the country
came under the government of ‘Amr ibn ‘Amir Muzaykiya, or
the Zearer, who was so called because he tore up, every evening,
the ii>, or pair of garments, which he had worn during the
day ; for his pride was such that he would not wear them again,
or suffer another to wear them. A more probable derivation is
that he 3+ or “‘tore away” the people from their settle-
ments. This‘ Amr descended, according to Mas‘ ddi, from Saba,
through Kahlan and Azd. He had a wife named Zarifet al
Khayr, who was a divineress of great skill, and who at her
death left her Jinn, or familiar spirits, to Shikk and Satth;
as has been noticed already in the history of ‘Shikk. In
his time there arose a fear that the dyke would give way.
‘Amrain, brother of ‘Amr, who was also a diviner, received
presages that the people would be scattered into distant coun-
tries. Zarifeh dreamed that a great cloud covered the country,
out of which came thunderbolts that destroyed all they fell upon.
She declaimed her dream to her husband in prophetic rhythm ;
and her frenzy was such that they held her fast till she grew calm.
Afterwards, when her husband was absent and giving her cause
for jealousy, she went to seek him, but three moles stood upright
_ before her; a tortoise turned on its back in her path, and the


424 | NOTES.


trees were agitated without a wind. She forced her way into her
husband’s presence, and in a prophetic frenzy declaimed, “ By
the light and the darkness ; By the earth and the heaven; Surely
each tree shall perish ; And the waters shall return as in the
times that are past.” ‘Who hath told thee that?” said ©
‘Amr. “The moles,” she answered in the same strain, “ have
shown me years of calamity, in which the son shall separate
from the father.” In the end she bade ‘Amr go and examine
the dyke, and if he found a rat making holes in it, be sure
that the destruction would come to pass. He went, and found
that it was so, and told what he had seen in some verses
of the metre rejez. ‘Amr then determined to quit the country ;
but being desirous to obtain a good price for his property he
devised a stratagem which would give him an excuse for selling
it, without telling. his people that it would soon be worthless.
He made a feast, and contrived that he should be struck by a
youth who was present. When he had received the blow he
declared that he could never bear such an insult, and that he
would dispose of all he had and depart. When he had arranged
his affairs he revealed what was to happen, and d general emi-
gration took place. God then sent great rains which burst the
dyke, and ruined the country of Marib, Such is the legend.
‘Before proceeding to discuss the historical event on which it
rests, it will be as well to cite the passage in the Koran concern-
ing it, and the opinions of the commentators. At Surg xxxiv.
14, it is said, ‘Saba had in its dwelling a sign of our power ;
two gardens, right and left: we eaid Eat of the gift of your Lord,
and be thankful to him: your country is a goodly one, and your
Lord is forgiving. But they turned aside (from thankfulness)

and we sent on them the Sayl al ‘Arim, and for their two gardens |
we gave them two with bitter fruit, and the tamarisk and scanty
lotus.” In this’ passage bss is interpreted to be any bitter
fruit, or to be the fruit of the kind of trees called yt. With
respect to pc, it is interpreted by Baydawi as “ troublesome,”
or “disastrous,” or as “a violent rain,” or “a rat,” the word
“torrent” being put in annexion with ‘rat,’ because a rat bored


NOTES. 425


through the dam which Bilkis had constructed for them, and by
which she kept in the water, having left orifices according to the
wants of the inhabitants ; or else it is a high bank, founded as a
dam ; in which last case it is the plural of a» ee, which means
heaped up stones ; it is also said to be the name of the valley
from which the torrent came. These discordant opinions con-
duce to the belief that »,< was a word of the language of Yemen,
the meaning of which was not understood by Koraysh. It is,
however, the prevalent opinion among the learned that »,<
means a dyke, and to this the analogy of the Hebrew lends
weight. In the song of Moses, Exodus xv. 8, it is said YO"Y3
DD. For M53, a heap, see Cant. vii. 3; and Ruth iii. 7.

Of the epoch of the bursting of the dyke of Marib it is im-
possible to speak with accuracy. It took place probably more
than a century after the birth of Christ. Marib is mentioned
by Pliny as a flourishing city in his time; and even Baydawi,
with all his orthodox respect for tradition, admits that the ca-
lamity occurred between the time of Christ and Mohammed.
Other writers also speak of it as having occurred in the i;3,
a name applied pre-eminently to this period. De Sacy, review-
ing the various narratives and genealogies, places it between
150 and 170 av. M. Caussin de Perceval, Essai, I. 87,
inclines to a somewhat earlier epoch, the beginning of the
second century. But respecting the emigration which took
place we are in less doubt. The tradition related by Mas adi
is that ‘Amrin, the diviner, indicated the direction that each
family should take according to its strength and courage.
Those who followed ‘Amr Muzaykty4 himself journeyed to the
land of Akk, which is on the sea coast in the northern part of
Yemen, and were received hospitably by the tribes. Here they
established themselves, according to Mas ddi, near a pool called
Ghassan, from which they afterwards took their name; and here
“Amr died. He was succeeded by his son Tha labeh, in whose
time, or soon after it, the emigrants, who were called from their
ancestor the Bend Azd, came into the district of Mecca, and
either destroyed or greatly reduced the power of Jorhom. Some


426 NOTES.


"of the descendants of Azd settled in the country of “Oman.
These were, according to Mas adi, the men of whom ‘Amran
said, ‘‘ Ye who have a far-reaching purpose, and a strong camel,
and @ new provision bag,” that is the boldest and richest of
the people; and they were called afterwards Azd of ‘Oman.
Others, less enterprising, settled among the Kurds in the country
of Hamadin, under WAdiah son of “Amr. They became con-
founded with that people, and hence the tradition that the Kurds
are the descendants of ‘Amr Muzaykty& Others repaired to
Mina in the Nejd, which is the same as Sirih. These obtained
the name of 5,5 0;! because of the divisions which subsequently
reigned among them. After the death of “Amr the emigrant
families who went with him divided and settled in various
countries. The family of his son Jafneh established itself in
Syria. Ows rer) and Khazraj, sons of Tha labeh, fixed them-
selves at Yathrib, afterwards called Medina. Malik settled in
Irak. The tribe of Tay went to the Nejd. The history of these
emigrations is very obscure; but it is sufficiently established
that many of ‘the most powerful tribes of Arabia and the
northern country, including the royal race of Ghassin and the
Khozé ah at Mecca, came from Yemen. It has been conjectured
with great probability that political causes, as well as a falling
off in the fertility of the country, may have been the cause of
this celebrated emigration.

The Arabic writers generally make Saba the son of Yashjob,
the son of Ydrob (who was the first person who spoke Arabic
or made it clear by the c-\,c}) the son or descendant of
Kahtén. Saba had the name of ‘Abd Shems (servant or
worshipper of the sun), and he begat two sons, Himyar and
Kahlin. This genealogy shows that they consider the Him-
yaritic Arabs of the south to be identical in race with the
ancient Sabwans. The name of Saba is, no doubt, of
very great antiquity, since at Genesis x. 28, Sheba is made
the son of Joktan, whom the Arabs identify with Kahtan.
There is another Sheba the son of Raamah and grandson of
Cush mentioned at verse 7, with whom the former must not be


NOTES. 427


confounded. This Sheba son of Raamah kas, like Sheba the
grandson of Abraham, a brother called Dedan, from which it
would seem that two different genealogies have been attributed
to a single race.


THE EIGHTEENTH ASSEMBLY.


With travellers.—According to some, S}, is applied only to
those who are mounted on camels, and he who is mounted on a
horse is called (wl, of which the plural in use is Us, as the
owner of, or attendant on, mules, asses, or elephants, or the rider
on one of these animals, is called Jie, so, Jki, the plural being
formed by the addition of §. But others deny this, and quote
the verse of Imr al Kays— ‘

F psd Bll ese Vyolaly etl 1,5) tat
“When they mount their horses, and put on their breast-plates,
the earth grows hot though the day be cold :” Diwan, p. 42.
This, it is said, is a proof that S) can be applied to horses.
But Sherishi points out that the former opinion is, after all,
correct, for the Arabs, when they use KS, alone, apply it
always to the riding on camels; and if riding on any other
. animal be intended, the name of the animal is mentioned, as in
the verse quoted, Hariri, in the Durrah (Anthol. Gram. Arabe,
p. 54, Texte Arabe), says that IS, ought not to be used of a
mixed body or train of animals, since it applies to camels only ;
and so —S\, signifies exclusively one who is mounted on a
camel. But he admits that Al Khalil ibn Ahmed allows WS,
and 46 4 to be applied to people mounted on any kind of
beasts, the difference between the two words being that the latter
is applied to a more numerous company than the former. In
accordance with this high authority, I have translated —S,
simply ¢ravellers.

The Bent Nomayr.—Nomayr descended from Ghatafan,
- through Khasaf, Hawdzin, Bekr, Mudwiyeh, Sa'sa‘ah and


428 NOTES.


‘Amir, They dwelt in the plains beyond the mountains which
separate Tihimeh from Nejd, and extended as far north as
Yathrib (Medina). The sons of ‘Amir were Hilal, Ghani,
Rabi‘ah and Nomayr (see Caussin de Perceval’s Genealogical
Tables, No. X., part A.), and the sons of Rabi‘ah were “Amir ibn
Rabi‘ah, Kilab, and Ka‘b. Though having this celebrated kindred,
Nomayr refused to ally itself with another tribe, and hence is
known as one of the three al cls. The derivation of
¥ a> is doubtful ; but it is applied to a tribe which is strong enough
to depend on itself, and will not form alliances or confederacies
with any other; so that to say of the sons of Such an one that
they are a 34> means that they are strong and able to defend
themselves. Sherishi says, “The Bend Nomayr are a tribe of
the Bend Sa‘sa‘ah, and one of the 4 of the Arabs, and the
most noble of the families of Kays son of Ghaylin (Ghatafin
issued from Modar by Kays ibn Ghaylin). Now the Jamrit of
the Arabs are three, and were called so because they multiplied
among themselves and no others mixed with them, for +7 in
the speech of the Arabs signifies collecting together 3 these were
the Beni Nomayr and the Bend ’] Harith ibn Ka'b and the
Beni Dabbah (son of Udd son of Tabikhah son of Elyas son of
Modar). Two of these became extinct, the Bent Dabbah by
‘ confederating with Ribib, and the Beni ’] Harith by confederat-
ing with Methhij, and Nomayr alone remained. One of their
poets has said,

*Nomayr are the Jamrah of the Arabs ; they cease not to burn in war.
To understand this verse it must be borne in mind that so
signifies a “‘live coal” as well as an independent tribe. Yet
with all this pride of race it dues not appear that they played
any pre-eminently distinguished part in early Arab history.

Wealth and worth.—This is the best rendering I can find for
this phrase, which belongs to the class known as ¢ls|. The
two words have almost the same meaning, if Fo) be considered
to be, like 5», a supply of anything which one bas acquired.
When used negatively the phrase means that a man is poor and
useless, Arab. Prov. II. 634; and here the sense may be that


hid


NOTES. : 429


they were a prosperous and serviceable people. But Sherishi —
gives to » the metaphorical sense of friendship, which is con-
sistent with the meaning of ae a8 8 masdar; for the latter
signifies the bringing in provision for one’s friends or fellow
travellers; so that the phrase may mean in the text well-to-do
and liberal people.

Making a marriage feast.—ia., is used especially in the sense
of a feast at a wedding; compare a note to Assembly Eleven.
diols is any feast to which persons are invited. dist is the
general multitude ; those who, aa it were, troop or hurry in to a
feast when they are invited. See Commentary, p. 373, De
Sacy’s edition. die 5420 is a general invitation as opposed to
5,5 5900, a select invitation. :

Both of settled land and of desert; otherwise called
pul Jal, the people of mortar, that is, those living in perma-
nent houses; and yl Jal, the people of goat's or camel's hair,
that is, those living in tents made of such materials. Accord- -
ing to the commentary on a verse in the Hamiseh, p. 670,
Arab. Text, (1,¢ was a man who was of the pure race of the
Arabs, whether he lived in cities or in the desert ; while I, r |
were those who dwelt in the desert, whether Arabs by ae or
not; and one of the latter was a Vet. The Commentator
quotes a verse, “They call us —,c3!, but W,I| is our name.”

Both the important and those of no account.—Both those
whom it was necessary to invite, as his own relatives and
friends, and the chief merchants of the caravan; and those who
might have been neglected, as the servants and drivers,.and the
lower class of people. This is the explanation of Sherishi, and
is obviously more reasonable than the others given in De Sacy’s
Commentary.

Of one hand and two: What was soft and might be eaten with
one hand, as ¢harid, and the like, and what needed to be broken
or pulled to pieces by using both hands, as meat. This ex.
pression is ascribed to Hassin ibn Thabit, who, being blind,

_ was at a feast of the Ansar or Moslems of Medina with his son


430 NOTES.


Abd ar Rahm4n. When the tharid was set on, he said, “ My
son, is it of one hand or two?” “Of one,” answered his son,
and Hassan put forth one hand to eat it. When the roast meat
came he asked the same question, and being told that it was of
“two hands,” he abstained ; thinking, it would seem, that he
could not cat or tear it decently from the dish like the others,
Hassin ibn Thabit was one of the chief poets of the days of the
Prophet, and one of the three who sang his praises in opposition
to the satirical poets on the other side. The other two were
Kab ibn Malik and ‘Abd Allah ibn Raw&hah. He died a.x. 54,
at the age, it is said, of 120 years. Details concerning him
will be found in Caussin de Perceval’s Essai; the reader may
also be referred to Hammer-Purgstall’s Literaturgeschichte. A
great number of his verses are to be found in the Strat ar Resiil,
and a fragment in the Hamiseh, p. 737, Ar. Text. It was to
his poetical powers that the conversion of the tribe of Temim
was mainly due, since he vanquished their chief poet in a
mufakharah. Like Horace, he was more eminent for his poetry
than for his courage on the battle field; and his cowardice lost
him the favour of the Prophet, who was also incensed against
him as one of the calumniators of ‘Ayisheh in the ‘affair of
Safwan ibn al Mo‘attal. When ‘Ayisheh’s innocence was re-
vealed to Mohammed (Koran, xxiv. 11) he ordered Hassin and
some others to receive each eighty strokes with a rod ; a punish-
ment which is still inflicted by Moslems on those who falsely
accuse a woman of adultery.

Tesnim, a fountain in Paradise. At Koran Ixxxiii. 27, it is
said that the wine of the blessed shall be mixed with Tesnim,
‘a fountain at which those who are brought near (to God) shall
drink.” According to Baydawi, it is called Tesnim from the
loftiness of its position, or the nobility of its draught. He, how-
ever, considers that a distinction is made in the text between the
wee and the rest of the people of Paradise ; and that the
meaning is that the former will drink of the fount of Tesnim
unmixed, and the latter mixed. In Freytag’s Lexicon it is said
that the fount of Tesnim flows over the place called wie. It


NOTES. 431


is elsewhere defined as the highest and noblest of the drinks of
Paradise.

ts train.— 2 with hesr is a bevy or flock of women, or of
birds, like the Kata, or of deer; and ps with /eth is a herd
of grazing camels.

Revenge !—A cry of those who call on their fellows to take
blood revenge for murder. A verse of Hassdn ibn Thabit is ag
follows: ‘‘ Speedily shalt thou hear in their dwellings ‘God is
great! Oh the revenges for ‘Othman ;’” or, Oh, ye avengers
of ‘Othman; that is, the cry of those who shall take revenge
for ‘Othman: Another reading of this verse is 4, said to be
a transposition from 3,. See Lane, Book I. p. 322. The
meaning of the author is that the guests prepared to set upon
the sweetmeats as men rush to their revenge.

As the lizard from the fish.—The lizard was supposed not to
drink ; but, when thirsty, to open his mouth to the wind. So
the Arabs said, “ I will not do so and so until the lizard goes to
water ;” and the phrase “‘ Quenching thirst more easily than
the lizard,” became proverbial. Arab. Prov. I. p. 573. In the
Thirty-eighth Assembly, it is said, “ Praise and parsimony can
so ill be united, that this may be thought a lizard and that a
fish.” In the Fiftieth Assembly the author describes Basra
from its maritime position as a place where ships and camels
meet, where the lizards and fish come together. Both (45 and
> signify large fish.

As Kodér among Thamid.—Thamd is many times mentioned
in the Koran as one of the ancient peoples who were destroyed
for their wickedness. At ix. 71, it is said, ‘“ Have they not
heard of those who went before them, the people of Noah and°
‘Ad and Thamid, and the people of Abraham and the inhabitants
of Midian, and of the subverted cities?” (the Cities of the Plain).
Again, at 1. 12, “ Before them the people of Noah and the men
of Rass (See Baydawi on xxv. 40), and Thamdd, and ‘Ad, and
Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot, and the people of 2Q\\ or «C$
(Midian), and the people of Tobba’ (Baydawi on xliv. 36)
_ treated prophets as impostors.” Thaméad are said to have been


432 NOTES.


inhabitants of Al Hijr, in the country between Hijiz and Syria,
where to this day dwellings hewn in the stone are to be found,
which, according to the Koran and to Moslem tradition, be-
longed to Thamid. Koran xv. 80. The passages of the Koran
on which the tradition of the destruction of Thamad is based,
dre, firstly, vii. 71-77, where it is said that God sent to
Thamid their brother Salih, who gave them the sign of a she-
camel, which they killed, and were themselves destroyed by an
earthquaké. Baydawi, in the commentary on this passage, makes
Thamad to be the son of ‘Abar, son of Aram, son of Shem,
son of Noah; but he also cites an opinion that the tribe received
its name from the scarcity of water, 40 being a scanty pond
of water. The pedigree of Salih he gives as son of ‘Obayd,
son of Asaf, son of Masih, son of ‘Obayd, son of Hathir,
son of Thaméid. Secondly, Koran xi. 64-71, then xxvii.
46-53, not to mention other frequent references to the story.
An account of the destruction of Thamtd, based on these pas-
sages and on tradition, is given by Baydawi at vii. 76; but the
complete legend will be found in Tabari, whose narratives in
this as in so many other cases subsequent authors only repeat
with variations. Thamid lived in the country which, had for-
merly been inhabited by ‘Ad, and hollowed the rocks for their
‘dwellings. They were idolaters, and God sent to them their
brother Salih to convert them. They challenged him to go
forth with them on a feast day, and to call upon his God, while
they called on their idols; and promised that if he should be
answered while they were unsuccessful, they would worship his
God. They fruitlessly called on their idols, and then angrily
“bade him give them a sign. “Thou art but one of the
wizards; thou art but a man like ourselves; bring a sign if
thou be: of the truthtellers.” Koran xxvi, 153. Salih asked
what sign they desired, and they said, “ Bring out of that rock
a she-camel and her foal, of a red colour, which shall walk and
graze.” The rock opened and the camel came forth. Salih
said to them, “Do her no harm, lest the punishment of the
great day take hold on you,” (xxvi. 156). Now Thamid


NOTES. 433


having but one well were forced’ to be careful of their water, and
whenever the she-camel went to drink, which was every other
day, she drank the well dry. Then it was agreed that the water
should be one day for the camel, and the other for the tribe. But
it was revealed to Silih that the camel should be killed by one
who was net yet born, and that he would be a child with red
hair and blue eyes. The people therefore killed nine new-born -
children who answered this description ; till at last the prophet
became hated, and the nine fathers of the murdered children,
who are supposed to be alluded to at Koran xxvii. 49, saved
the tenth child, who was Kodar,+son of a woman named
Kodayrah: his father’s name was Salif. Then they lay in wait
to kill Salih, but God caused a rock to fall upon them. When
Kodar grew up he became an opponent of the propliet, and
undertook to kill the she-camel, which he did by houghing her,
whence he is called as\J|_j3e. The foal then disappeared, and
God destroyed the people of Thamid by a,cry from heaven.
Kodar became proverbial as one who brought evil on his race ;
so that it is said, «‘ More unlucky than the hougher of the
she-camel ;” “ More unlucky than the Red Man of ‘Ad;”
‘Ad being either confused with Thamid by mistake, or used
because Thaméid was related to ‘Ad; for some of the genealo-
gists say that Thamad was the cousin of ‘Ad. Baydawi says
that their chief was Jondo‘, son of ‘Amir, and that he believed :
and that those who opposed Salih were Thawwab, son of ‘Amr,
and Al Hobab, the keeper of their idols, and Ribab, son of Saghr,
their diviner. See his commentary on Koran vii. 76, for these
and other details.

Their sepulchres : literally, their tomb mounds; the heaps of
stones piled up over a grave. In a Tradition s,3 \yoo J)
signifies, ‘‘ Do not heap up stones over my grave, but leave it
level.”

And was free from guilt,—Having sworn that he would not
sit near the vase, he could got return without sin until it was
taken away. The respect for vows of this kind may be noticed
.in several places in the author’s work. When Abi Zayd’s host


28


434 NOTES.


in Assembly Fifteen swears that he will not let him lodge in
the house, Abi Zayd at once goes out into the rain, since it
would be a sin to induce a man to break such a vow. Also
when Aki Zayd vows that he will depart, Harith does not seek
any further to detain him.

( Glass is a betrayer.—At the proverb ‘“ More divulging than
glass,” Arab. Prov. II. 780, is a composition which Hariri
may have had in mind. It is an address by a poet, Sahl ibn
Hardin, in praise of glass, in opposition to another poet who had
indited one in praise of gold.

The witchcraft of Babylon—Compare Koran ii. 96. For

- Hardt and Marit, and their seduction by Zoharah, see Baydawi
on the passage.

Give life to one buried alive.—These words have reference to
the practice of burying female children alive, which prevailed
among the ancient Arabs. In the ‘sublime Sura of the Koran
called _» 6-!\ (Ixxxi), it is said, ‘‘ When the girl buried alive shall
be asked for what sin she was slain:” and the passage refers to
the practice which still in Mohammed’s time lingered among
the tribe of Temim, and. was only completely eradicated by the
influence of Islam. It is probable that in remote times it was
connected with the superstitious rite of sacrificing children which
was common. to all the Semites, and was practised by the Jews
up to the age of the Captivity, as we learn from the denunciations
of Jeremiah, vii. 31; xix. 5. But in later times it was ascribed
to the poverty of many of the tribes, which made them desire to
have among them only those who could bear hardship in time of
need, and to their fear of dishonour, since women were often
carried off by their enemies in forays, and made slaves and
concubines to strangers, So that at a wedding the wish to the
newly-married pair was wpodl, “GL, “ With concord and sons,”
see Assembly Twenty-ninth, p. 364, De Sacy’s edition: or
“With concord and permanence, with sons and no daughters.”
So strong was this feeling, even in the time of the Prophet, that
at Koran xvi. 59, it is used as an argument against those Arabs
who, like the tribes of Khozé‘ah and Kindneh, said that the


NOTES. 435


angels were the daughters of God. ‘‘ They attribute daughters
to God, Glory be to him (4). is used in the Koran when any
blasphemous supposition is to be repelled) ; yet they wish them.
not for themselves. When a female child is announced to one of
them, his face grows dark, and he is as though he would choke.”
Compare Koran: xvii. 42, and xxxvii. 153. . The older proverbs
show the prevalence of this inhumation of female children, and
the belief of the Arabs that it was praiseworthy. It was said
“To send women before (to the other world) is a benefit. Ar.
Proy. 1. 228. Also le Sw! ope ob! bu, “ The burying of
girls is a generous-deed,” and .i\ ee 3,‘ The best son-in-
law (or marriage relative) is the grave.” The little regard for
relationship through females among the tribes is expressed in
some verses attributed to Ghassin ibn Wa'leh, at p. 259 of the
Hamiaseh. In the commentary is quoted the proverb, “Our
sons’ sons are our sons, but our daughters’ sons aré the sons of
strangers.” From some verses of Ishak ibn: Khalaf, page 140
-of the Hamasth, we perceive the reasons which. may have
induced a father to put an end to his daughter’s days. The
poet says :—

Were it not for Omaymeh, I would not be saddened at want, nor
would J endure the gloom in the dark night.

She makes me wish to live, since I know how she will be contemned as
an orphan, when her brothers of the womb are churlish to her. (Bro-
thers by her mother but not by her father.)

I fear that poverty may some day reach her, and tear away her veil, 80
that she will be as meat on the tray. (See Assembly Twelve.)

She desires my life, but I long for’ her death, through compassion -on
her ; for to women death is the most generous guest.

Yet, with the comparative softening of manners. which took
place in the age before Mohammed, the inhumation of daughters
seems gradually to have been abandoned, It was kept up
longest in the tribe of Temim (see the proverb “ More wander-
ing than the maid buried alive;” Ar. Prov. II. 16): an evil
which is attributed to Kays ibn ‘Asim, chief of Temim, a hero
praised by Mohammed as the noblest of the Arabs of the desert :
some elegiac verses on him are to be found at p. 367 of the


Hamaseh. As Temim had refused tribute to Ndman, king of


436 NOTES.


Hira, the latter had sent his squadron of cavalry, called Dowsar,
(for which see the proverb “ More valorous than Dowsar :” Ar.
Prov. I. 198) and had carried off, among others, the daughter of
Kays. Negotiations were entered into for the restoration of the
prisoners, and the king gave leave to all who chose to depart.
The daughter of Kays, being in love with one of her captors,
refused to return to her tribe, and her father swore to bury all
his future female children, which he did to the number of ten,
and thus re-established the usage among the Beni Temim.
The story is told differently by others; see C. de Perceval’s Essai,
II. 574. Humanity, however, revolted at the practice, and rich
men would buy the lives of the female infants. The grandfather of
thé poet Al Farazdak, named Sasdat ibn Najiyeh, thus rescued
many, as has been mentioned in the notes to Assembly Nine;
compare also commentary at p. 118 of Hamiaseh. After the
establishment of Islam the practice was wholly abrogated, as
may be seen from the verses of Jez’ ibn Kolayb, at p. 117 of
Hamiaseh, where it is said, “ Since the Prophet arose men have
nourished theif girls.” On this subject, compare Pocock,
Specimen, p. 3238. nye is, like Jol» and Vail>, a masculine
form, as being an epithet particularly applicable to a female.
The Arabs believe that & charming voice would rouse the dead,
The pipes of David.—Of David it is said at Koran xxxiv. 10,
“We gave David a grace (the art of singing) ; O ye mountains
repeat with him ‘the praises of God, and ye birds.” Compare
also xxxviii. 16. The Prophet hearing one read the Koran
harmoniously said, “‘ He is gifted with the pipes of David,” the
pipes being a metaphorical expression for the yoice. Jt is
pleonastic, as in the verse cited by De Sacy; compare Lane,
Book I. p. 127. :
- Ma bad.—The life of Ma‘bad, the greatest musician and singer
of the early Khalifate, is given in the Kitab al Aghdni, p. 29,
edition of Kosegarten, and to this the student is referred. Ma‘bad
ibn Wahb or ibn Katan was a mulatto (s., and a freedman,
as some say, of Mu‘awiyeh. He was not, like some of his con-
temporary singers, of an effeminate and attractive person, for he


NOTES. 437


was brown, tall, and squinting. He died at Damascus during
the reign of Al Welid ibn Yezid. A number of anecdotes are
related of him in the Kitab al Aghani, where his superiority to
Toways and Ibn Surayj, two of his contemporaries, is asserted
on the authority of a poet, p, 31. But when Ma‘bad composed
seven songs of surpassing merit, the musicians of Mecca selected
seven from the works of Ibn Surayj, which they declared were
equal to the former. For an account of these early musicians
see the Prowmium to Kosegarten’s Kitab al Agh4ni, cap. I. De
citharedis cantricibusque Arabibus. Ma‘bad appears to have
been a scientific musician of great merit,

Isaac.—This was Ishék ibn Ibrahim, commonly known as
Ibn an Nadim al Mowsili. His father Ibrahim was a celebrated
musician of his time, but was surpassed by his more eminent
son, who appears to have been a paragon of accomplishments.
In the life of him by Ibn Khallikan it is said that he was the
companion of the Khalifs, a man of taste, and of great talents a3
asinger. He was also well acquainted with pure Arabic and the
ancient poets, the history of the poets and the adventures of the
tribes. He was born a.u. 150, and died about 235, being thus
contemporary with Hardin ar Reshid,.Al Ma’mfin, and Al Mo ta-
sim, Al Ma’min said of him that were he not kdown as a musician
he would have given him the place of Kadi, so large was his
knowledge of law. An anecdote related of him testifies to his
accomplishments. At an-entertainment he discussed with the
theologians present and worsted them ; then treated on a point
of law with success ; after which he discoursed on poetry and the
Arabic language, surpassing all the company, He then, being
somewhat elated, asked those present how it. was that he, who
could treat these sciences with as much ability as their professors,
should be known only as the master of the single art of music.
But some who were there showed him that though eminent in all
these sciences over the company present there was yet to be found
some one who surpassed him in each singly, whereas in music
he was incomparable. He wrote lives of his predecessors in the
art, and gave the highest place among the earlier ones to Me bad.


438 NOTES.


Sherishi, who gives an account of both these personages in his
Commentary, says that Ma‘ bad was the most gifted of the older,
and Isaac of the later singers.

Amay, begone.—The Arabs of the Ignorance, when they de-
sired that @ man who was on a journey should not return, were


accustomed to light a fire and call out aicml, all sal. This
fire was called o,s\ i.

Zondm was flute player to Hardn ar Reshid, who was so fond
of his performance, that he would not drink without hearing it.
According to Sherishi he invented a sort of flute or fife.

The red camels, i.e. all that is excellent and valuable. Ac-
cording to the Arabs the red she-camel could best bear the mid-
day heat, and the best were the »> and the eee or white-red.
Hence, the red camels are used proverbially for wealth. When
the head of Abi Jahl was brought to the Prophet, after the Day
of Bedr, he exclaimed, “It is more acceptable to me than a red
camel.”

Satih.—Satih hasbeen already spoken of.

The court of his Prince; or his Kayl. The Kayls or petty
princes of Himyar governed a great part of southern Arabia, as
tributaries, fromthe earliest times. They are sometimes called
‘l,0! because they generally had names compounded with Thi as
Thi’l Mulk, Thi Jadan. When the people of Hadramowt
accepted Islam, the principal Kayl of the country, Wé’il son of
Hojr, came to make his submission to Mohammed. According
to the Arabic grammarians, .J,3 is allied to .J,3 as one who
speaks or commands (De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 494), but Ibn
Khaldin condemns this etymology as fanciful (Anthol. Gram.
Arabe, p. 171 Texte Arabe), and asserts, with great probability,
that 3 is a word of the language of Himyar which was un-
known to the-descendants of Modar.

And I had no alarm.—\\ sel) le. This idiom is adopted
from the Mo‘ allakah of ‘Antarah, v. 11.

Pharaoh.—F¥or the history of Pharaoh see Koran x. 76 ;
xxvi. 9; xxviii; xl. 24, etc. He is called o,d\ 40, for the
meaning of which see Baydawi on xxxviii. 11.

He shouted, from as the voice; or he accused me, from é ao


NOTES. 439


The informer gained nought.\3% be signifies he became
Jortunate by such athing. According to Sherishi, it means he
got a iam, that is, an arrow or (ot, like -o3. The meaning,
therefore, will be, he got as his share nothing save, ete.

Now since I have explained.—Metre tanil.

Resources, old or nem: that is, inherited or acquired. Com-
pare Tarafeh, Mo allakah, v. 53

Long since sreushory vexed the Best of Mankind, so that there
was declared concerning the woman that carried firewood that
which was declared.—The 111th Sura of the Koran.is entitled
Perish, from its first word. It runs as follows :—‘ Perish the
two hands of Abi Lahab, and perish he. His riches shall not
avail him, nor his gain (or his works in which he trusted). He
shall be burned in the flaming fire: And his wife, the Carrier
of Firewood; Round her neck a twisted rope.” Abi Lahab
and his wife Umm Jemil hold among Moslems the same posi-
tion as Judas Iscariot among Christians. They are persons of
whose damnation there can be no doubt whatever, since it is
positively announced in the Word of God. It is, sherefore,
usual, when they are spoken of, to add, ‘On them be a curse.”
They were closely connected with Mohammed. Abi Lahab,
whose real name was‘Abd al‘QOzza, was his uncle, being a son
of ‘Abd al Mottalib; his wife was a daughter of Harb, and sister’
to Abii Sofyan. She was consequently aunt to Muawiyeh.
This couple were among the most fanatical opponents of the
Prophet, ‘Abd al ‘Ozza and others befouled his house with
ordure; and Umm Jemil maligned him among the Koraysh.
The carrying of firewood is explained either to mean that she
added “fuel” to the hatred of the Prophet’s enemies by her
calumnies ; or that she will carry wood-to Hell for her own
tortures. It is also said that she was in the habit of literally
strewing thorns during the night before the entrance of the
Prophet’s house, on the path where he must pass in the morning.
But it is probable that this is but a misunderstanding of a
common figurative expression. The unbelieving pair are always
-known by the names which were fixed upon them in the above


®


440 NOTES.


Chapter, “The Father of Flame,” and the “ Bearer of Fuel.”
Abt Lahab died of the disease called d..0!\, a kind of malignant
pustule, seven days after the news of the battle of Bedr reached
Mecca; his end being perhaps hastened by a blow he received in
a broil caused by his rage at the event. Strat ar Resil, p. 460.
It’ is a Tradition that Abii Lahab squinted, and that his wife had
but one eye: so apt is the popular creed to attribute bodily
defects and ugliness to the reprobate. It is also a Tradition that
the Prophet said, “ Whoso recites the Sura end, I have hope
that God will not unite him and Abi Lahab in the same abode.”

A driving forth to his devil.—This is an allusion to the words
of God to Iblis, Koran vii., after the threat of the latter to
tempt and destroy man.

He made an irrevocable divorce mith joy.—Md\ 2 is said
when a man makes the divorce with his wife to be absolutely
separating, so as to cut her off from return. He cannot then
marry her again until another has married her, and consum-
mated the marriage, and divorced her. The reader may re-
member the story of ‘Ala ad din Abi'sh Shamat in the Thousand
and One Nights.

As the infidels despair of the tenants of the tombs.—At Koran
Ix. 18, it is said, “ Associate not with those against whom God
is wroth ; who despair of the next world as infidels despair of the
tenants of the tombs.

Man is made up of impatience.—According to the Tradition in
Tabari, the angel Gabriel quoted these words to Adam when the
first man sought to rise and eat before the clay of his body was
entirely vivified. They are to be found at Koran xxi. 38. The
angel is also said to have quoted the words, “‘ Man is impatient,”
which occur at xvii. 12. When these quotations from the Koran
at so early a period in history are recorded, it should be remem-
bered that the Koran has eternally existed, though it was only
revealed to mankind through Mohammed.

There was a companion.—The following lines are of the metre
khafif. They have little merit, except as exhibiting the author’s
power of playing upon words.


NOTES. 441


A churl.—For the meaning of Wil>, see rails,

His verse.— 4 ;3 is used only of a poem that is of some other
metre than rejez.

His encomium and his satire.—The former being the description
of the maiden, the latter of the treacherous friend. For the pe-
culiar meaning of 2) 33 see De Sacy’s Commentary: arz is ex-
plained at Assembly Twenty-seven, under the phrase, ‘‘ The
two karz gatherers.”

The people of the Fire, ete.—The inhabitants of Hell. + This is
& quotation from Koran lix. 20. The speaker means that if a
glass vase had the evil qualities which offended Abd Zayd, the
silver vases now produced were free from them.

Nor count Hid with ‘Ad.—The destruction of the people of
“Ad is one of the most frequently recurring topics of the Koran,
where they are commonly associated with Thamfd, as an im-
pious race, rebellious against God. The legend is tod long to be
given in the already too extensive notes to this Assembly. But
the following references will be useful. At Koran xlvi. 20, it is
said, “ Call to mind the brother of “Ad (Hid), when he preached
to his people in the Ahkaf.” Hikf is a thin curving or winding
strip of sand, and according to Baydawi this was the name of a
region on the sea coast of Ash Shihr, in Yemen,’ that is the
country between Aden and ‘Oman, otherwise called Hadramowt.
In Mr. Palgrave’s map of Arabia, prefixed to his travels, the
name is given to a sandy region near the Persian Gulf. At
Koran ]xxxix. 5, they are spoken of in connection with Irem of the
Columns, the City of Sheddid, which remains invisible to mortal
eye in the deserts of Yemen. The reader may also refer to
vii. 63; xi. 52 (the Sura called Hid); to xxvi. 123; and liv.
18. At Koran vii. 68, the pedigree of Had is given by Baydawi
as son of ‘Abd Allah, son of Ribah, son of Al Kholid, son of “Ad,
who was son of Ows (23¢) son of Aram, son of Shem, son of Noah.
Or, according to another opinion, he was Hid, son of Shalah, son
of Arphaxad, son of Shem, and was the son of the paternal uncle
of ‘Ad’s father. The people of ‘Ad were of great stature ; Koran
- vii. 67. The ordinary form of the legend among the Moslems,


442 NOTES.


founded on the scattered passages in the Koran, is to be found
in Tabari, in the “ History of the Prophet Hid.” The people of
“Ad would not believe the preaching of Hid, and were destroyed
by a hurricane which is described at Koran Ixix. 6, as ule cp,
for the meaning of which words see Baydawi. Two of them,
according to the received Tradition, escaped, having believed
on the true God. One of these was Lokman of the Vultures,
who afterwards reigned over the country of Saba: compare
note to Assembly Seventeen. Count not Hid with ‘Ad means
“ Count not the innocent with the guilty.”

Reeite the Chapter of Victory ; that is Koran xlviii., which
begins “ We have aided thee to a conspicuous victory.” This
passage is held to have been revealed in promise of the entrance
into Mecca, which is spoken of especially as i, or else to refer
to the capture of Khaybar, or to the Peace of Al Hodaybiyeh
which gave the Prophet the opportunity of extending his power
over the Arabs; or else it may refer to the victory of the people
of Rim over the Persians, which had been predicted by the Pro-
phet in Sura xxx. The victories of Khosru Perwez had brought
the Eastern Empire to the brink of ruin, when Heraclius,
suddenly displaying consummate military talents, turned the
tide of success in the year 625, and humiliated the Persian
monarch by a series of victories. This struggle of the two
Empires for regions which were soon to become the spoil of a
third race was watched with intense interest by Mohammed,
who is said to have sympathized with the Christians as the
possessors of a revealed religion, and who was doubtless pleased
at the fulfilment of his prediction. The general opinion, however,
is that the opening of the Sura was revealed at Al Hodaybiyeh ;
and it is recorded that the Prophet, when he entered Mecca,
recited the Sura of Victory. Abi Zayd means to say “ Rejoice
in what ye have gained,” or, as we should say, “Sing the Ze
Deum.”

It may be that ye mistike a thing.—Koran ii. 213.

Both and the boy—On the nagb after , see Alfiyeh of Ibn
Malik, v. 315, and commentary. If, however, the reading be


NOTES. 443


las with “Take,” or “I give,” understood, there is a simple
conjunction. This is a phrase expressive of prodigal liberality
in giving, derived from a speech of “Amr, son of Homrain, who,
having before him some camel’s hump, cream and dates, was
asked by a hungry man for some hump and cream, and replied,
“ Both, and the dates,” which became proverbial. Arab. Prov.
II. 349 and 880.


THE NINETEENTH ASSEMBLY.


The failure of the stars.—The literal meaning of *,) is the
setting in the early morning of one of the twenty-eight
Mansions of the moon, or 4+3\ os while the opposite con-
stellation, called its 3), or watcher, is rising. The Mansions
of the moon, of which a list has been given in the notes to a
former Assembly, are constellations through which the moon
passes in her course, and the raid of each is the fourteenth from
it; thus the rakib of lb SN is ,id\; the rakib of A is
JAS. As in the course of the earth’s revolution round the sun
each of these constellations sets in the morning, while the oppo-
site constellation is rising with the sun, the year is divided into
twenty-eight ‘\,i!, to each of which is allotted thirteen days,
except to d.<'| which has fourteen, thus making up the 365
days. The auroral settings of these constellations served among
the Arabs to denote the seasons of rain, wind, or heat; just as
among the Greeks and Latins the setting of the Hyads or the
rising of Sirius indicated particular states of the weather. Thus
*s) became almost synonymous with season, and the name is
applied to the seven seasons or successions of weather or tem-
perature in the year, which are as follows: (1) s,oJ\, which is
said (Makimat of Nasif al Yazaji, p. 217,) to range from the
9th of Aylil (September) to the 18th of Tishrin al Owwal
(October). The *s) of this period is the setting of Al Faraghan
(the Fore and Hind Spoyts of the Urn) and Batn al Hat. (2)


444 NOTES.


isl, which continues from the end of the former to the 9th
of Kaéntin al Owwal (December), and its *,) is the setting of Ash
Sharatén, and Al Butayn, and Ath Thurayya, and Ad Debaran.
(3) (341, which lasts to the 18th of Nisin (April), and whose *,3
is the setting of Al Haf‘ah, and Al Han‘ah, and Ath Thira, and
An Nathrah, and At Tarf, and Al Jabheh, and Az Zubrah, and
As Sarfah, and Al “Awwa, and As Simak. (4) sal, which lasts
from the end of the former to the 9th of Haziran (June). Its
*p is the setting of Al Ghafr, and Az Zubana, and Al Iklil, and
Al Kalb. (5) cSpuall, which lasts from then to the 5th of Tem-
miz (July). Its *,3 is the setting of Ash Showleh and An
Na‘d’im. (6) awl wv, which lasts to the 13th of Ab (August),
Its *,3 is the setting of Al Beldeh, and Sa‘d al Thabih, and Sa‘d
al Bula’. (7) ‘Ty1 st>{, which lasts till the 8th of September,
thus completing the year. Its ‘ss is the setting of Sa‘d as
So'fid and Sa'd al Akhbiyeh. The days of the month are to be
reckoned according to the Old Style. The three last are periods
of heat. Of Al Busri it is said that sys, that is, it fails to
produce rain during its *,3. The word rok is applied to a hot
wind which blows during summer, by some described as a north
wind, by others as a south wind coming from Yemen ; the dis-
crepancy being no doubt caused by the geographical position of
those who used the word.

As the Arabs, in their observations of the seasons, thought
chiefly of the rain which was to moisten their parched fields, the
word *,3 became equivalent with rain, and is used in this sense
at p. 713 of the Hamaseh. “I said to him, ‘May the cloud
pour on thee with a *,i which shall moisten every pleasant
plant.’” The Commentator gives jb» as the equivalent to *,).
. So in a verse quoted in De-Sacy’s Commentary it is said :

The *y ‘of As Sim&k (Spica Virginis) and of the Pleiades ceased not to
pour on us.

The influence of each setting was held to prevail for only a few
out of the thirteen days that the setting continued. Thus it is
said that the *,; of the Pleiads is five nights, and that of Ash
Sharatin three nights. The‘, of the Pleiads was considered


NOTES. 445


the most favourable; and, according to wae the name G3 was
given them on account of the abundance of rain. But it is more
probable that this name applies to the multitude of the stars
composing the constellation. Compare the Hebrew F9'3, a
heap of stars (Job xxxviii. $1), where the translation probably is
‘Hast thou bound the knots of the Pleiads?” It falls, as has
been stated, in the time of the late autumn rain-season called
ist» ‘Those ‘1,3! which generally brought rain were called
Lad! eos stirrers up of the heaven. The belief of the Arabs
of the Ignorance that the rain was produced by the settings of .
stars was discouraged by the Moslem teachers; and from an
anecdote related of ‘Omar (see Lane’s Lexicon, article cor)
the Khalif seems to have considered that the supply of rain
was a sign that sins were pardoned, founding his opinion on
Koran Ixxi. 9.

The tract of Nasibin.——%., is a fertile tract of land in oppo-
sition to the unproductive desert, whether the former be on the
sea-coast or on the banks of a river. Of Nasibin, the well-known
_ city of Nisibis, between the upper Euphrates and Tigris, it is
only necessary to record here that, according to a Tradition
reported by Abi Hurayrah, it was seen at a distance by the
Prophet, during the Night-journey. “The earth appeared afar,
and I saw a city that pleased me, and I said, ‘O Gabriel, what
is this city?’ He said, ‘Nasibin.’ I said, ‘God hasten the
conquest of it.’” It was, accordingly, one of the first places
gained by the Moslems, having been taken in the year 18, under
the Khalifate of ‘Omar.

A camel of Mahrah.—The camels of the tribe of Mahrat ibn
Haydan, in Yemen. In the Hamiaseh, p. 783, occurs a verse in
which a noble she-camel is said to be from Hadramowt, and
selected from the camels of Mahrah. The she-camels of Mahrah
are said to have been covered by ys, about which there are
various opinions. Sherishi says that these were the stallions of
a race of small wild camels between*Oman and Ash Shihr; but
others say that they were stallions of the camels of the Jinn,


446 NOTES.


which inhabit the desert country beyond the sands of Yabrin.
The race of Mahrah, called 4 1' -Jtsill, possessed the powers
of this savage or supernatural breed, and were distinguished by
their fleetness and endurance.

A lance of Samhar.—At p. 227 of the Hamfaseh mention is
made of ‘a lance of Rodayneh ;” and the commentator explains
that Rodayneh was the wife of Samhar, and that they made
lances and straightened them for sale, and that when Samhar
was from home Rodayneh sold them.. They are said to have
lived in Bahrayn. Samhar, however, is otherwise said to be a
place in Abyssinia, where lances are made, Samhar and
Rodayneh are also said to have been people who made lances,
but not to have been man and wife, since she was the wife of
& man named W-wies. Whatever may be the truth on these
points, the names of Samhar and Rodayneh are commonly used
as epithets for lances. Imr al Kays speaks of “a lance of
Samhar,” Diwan, p. 25, v. 4, Ar. Text, and three lines further
on of “‘a lance of Rodayneh, with a point made by Kd dab.”
Compare also Méallakah of Lebid, v. 50, where Samhar is said
to have lived at a place called bs, in Bahrayn. This would
connect the lances of Samhar with those of Khatt, which are also
celebrated by the poets. Hamiaseh, pp. 26 and 231. In the
commentary at the former page it is said that hs is the coast
of Bahrayn and ‘Oman.

Hill draning me up from dale.—The conceit of a gram-
matical allusion need only be noticed.

Won a portion.—This is the technical term for winning at
the game called jue, which has been explained in the notes
to a former Assembly. Each man turned or shuffled about
the arrows, \,2, and when his arrow won this phrase was
used. (jis is also used in this sense by the Arabs, as in the
passage of Ezekiel before referred to. See Lamiyet al ‘Arab,
verse 29. :

Lay down my neck in it.—The metaphor is from a camel
lying down to rest. ,,\,5- is the under part of the neck, which
the camel lays along the ground.


NOTES. 447


Stumbling with the crazed, etc.—In secordance with the
suggestion of Sherishi, I have given a double meaning to L.«,
according to the word to which it refers. The primitive mean-
ing of Lt is to deat; and it is secondarily applied to the
purblind she-camel, which beats or strikes the ground with her
foot, and so stumbles, as well as to him who beats a tree for its
leaves, to use them as fodder ;. and, metaphorically, to him who
gets money out of people by begging. Thus the senses of
stumbling or wandering recklessly, and of making gain by
importunity, are united in the same word.

My single lot had become twofold.—Another allusion to pus.
Harith had said that to arrive in Nasibin was one prize, and
now the presence of Abi Zayd doubles it.

Abi Yahya is a hinyeh or bye-name of Death. Yahya is the
Arabic equivalent to John (the Baptist), but the signification
seems here to be Zhe Father or Lord of the Living, from _>,
Death being he who is mighty over every one who lives.

His pledye was forfeit.—As one who had not paid in time the
debt for which he had pledged his property. This is equivalent
to saying, “his term had run out.”

Bewildered, ete.—Metre mutekdrib. :

The old wine.—So Imr al Kays says, that when his mistress’s
tribe had departed, he remained “as one drunk with wine.”
Diwan, p. 36, v. 11.

We took seat about his bed.—There are several Traditions of
the Prophet concerning the visiting of the sick, as ‘‘ Whoso
visits a sick person, and sits with him for an hour, God will give
him the reward of a year’s good works ;.” and “ He who visits a
sick person enters into God’s mercy, but if he takes seat by him,
he is whelmed by it.”

Look on this, the offspring of the moment.—Literally, “ Look
on her, the daughter of the hour.” The ‘‘ daughter of the hour”
is a name for extemporised poetry. Abd Zayd, seeing the
anxiety of his friends, desires to show them that he is not so ill
as to have lost his power of improvisation, and, calling gn them
to take notice, proceeds to recite some excellent verses. _J:>|


448 NOTES.


is used especially of.the looking of a bridegroom on his un-
veiled and richly appareled bride.
God has saved me.—The metre of these verses is em which
has been explained in the notes to Assembly Two. But the
5 here is the third of the first (49,0, and suffers the iL.
called pe, which is the dropping of & 3y,20 as, at the end
of a foot; so that oN ynie becomes ys. The last feet of
the two hemistiche’ are consequently eels and we respec-
tively. ‘
Death forgets me not.—Though the sentiments here expressed
are common enough among poets and moralists, yet the reader
may compare the Mo‘allakah.of Tardfeh, v. 68, “ By thy life,
Death, while it fails to strike a man, is only like a slackened
tether of which the end is kept in hand ;” .c., however long &
tether Fate may give to a man’s life, he will be one day checked.
The guarded, domain of Kolayb.—Wi'il, conimonly ‘known
as Kolayb Wail, was one of the most famous personages of Arab
antiquity. He descended from W4’il, through Taghlib, and was
son of Rabi‘ah, who about 140 years before the Hijra was
one of the chiefs of the Beni Taghlib. Besides Kolayb Wa'll,
Rabi‘ah had ,two other children, the poet Mohalhil and a
daughter, Fatimeh, who became the mother of the poet Imr al
Kays. At this time the tribes of Bekr and Taghlib paid tribute
to a sovereign of the race of Himyar, and being unable or
unwilling to continue the payment, prepared to revolt. But the
rising being foreseen the people of Taghlib were attacked, and
Kolayb and his brother Mohalhil made prisoners, The descend-
ants of Ma‘add, who, though accustomed to fierce wars amongst
themselves, would unite against a foreign adversary, (compare
Arab. Prov. II, 198), were roused to arms by Bekr and Taghlib,
the two brothers Kolayb and Mohalhil were delivered, and under
the leadership of Rabiah the sons of Ma’add defeated the people
of Yemen in the battle of Sullan, and gained their independence.
After the death of Rabi‘ah, his son Wa’il succeeded, and again
defeated an army of Yemen, on the Day of Khozaza, usjijee
Wail was then raised to the chiefship of a confederacy of


NOTES. ) 449


Arabs, and was the greatest potentate of the Nejd. His greatness
is proverbial among the Arabs, so that it is said “More potent
than Kolayb Wa'il.” .Arab. Prov. II. 145. The “ guarded
domain” was the land which he was accustomed to take for
himself wherever he thought fit. The legend is that he used
to lame a dog, and place it-in the midst of any field or meadow
that pleased him; and wherever the sound of the barking could’
be heard, all others must abstain from pasturing their camels or
-sheep. - From this dog it is said that he was called Kolayb;
either because people misunderstood the story, or applied the
term “ Little dog” to him as a nickname. He set dogs on
those who used a well before him; no man might cross the
spot where he sat; no fire might be lighted near his own ; and he
imposed a strict game law, by declaring, whenever he chose, that
“the game of such ® place is under my protection,” (or cov-
enant). Once, when he was walking in his domain, a lark flew
away from her eggs at his approach, upon which he said, ‘“ Fear
not; thy eggs are under my protection.” Then he iyprovised in
rejes :
Oh lark ! the valley is open to thee in this pasture land; So lay thy
eggs and sing ;
And peck what thou desirest : The fowler is far from thee, so be glad :
Yet sure he will take thee some day; beware ! .


For the rest of the history of Kolayb, his death, and the war that
followed, see the Twenty-sixth Assembly, at the words “the war
of Al Basis.” Some lines by Mohalhil on his brother Kolayb
are to be found at p. 420 of the Hamiaseh, and in the com-
mentary is a narrative of the events which led to his death.
Mohalhil’s elegy on his brother is said to have been the first
specimen of the kastdeh, or regular poem.

The light of to-day.— ly is used here like dle in
Assembly Fifteen.

Make alliance with him by a day-sleep.—Literally, “join
his cord or rope;” an idiom used of forming an alliance with
any one by marrying a daughter to him. The original idea is
that of attaching a camel to a man’s rope, that is, of presenting


29


450 NOTES.


him with the camel. The meaning of the text is, “ Give drowsi-
ness, which is a persevering suitor, the day-sleep that it
demands.”

The Traditions handed down.—Awong the Traditions of the
Prophet, recommending the day-sleep or siesta, is the following,
by Anas ibn Malik, “ Help the wakeful devotion of night by
sleep in the day.” Also of the same Traditionist : “Take the
day-sleep, for Satan takes it not.”

God smote upon the ears.—This is taken from Koran xviii. .
10, where it is said of the Sleepers in the Cave, ‘“‘ We smote
upon their ears (with deafness), in the Cave a number of years.”

We washed hand and foot for the two mute prayers.—These
expressions are explained by Hariri in the ¢efsir at the end of
the Assembly. The ¢ ,\S\ of an animal are the thinner parts
of the leg, above the foot, and in man the wrists and ankles.
The “two mute prayers” are those of noon and afternoon,
because the recitation at them is under the breath.

The Fathgr of Indwelling. —All these “Tofayli bye-names
and Sifi metonymies” are explained by Hariri himself in the
interpretation which he has added to this Assembly. The
Father of Indwelling is Hunger, because he dvedls in and holds
his seat in every stomach.

The Father of Assembling is the ,,\5 or round table on
which food is brought in; so called because it gathers together
the food or the guests,

The Father of Pleasantness is white bread as being the most
delicate food of its kind ; and it is patient at every wrong because
it undergoes grinding, kneading, and baking.

The Father of Lovingness is kid’s flesh, called so ‘from. its
savouriness ; the burning and torment are during the roasting.

The Father of Acuteness is vinegar: the Futher of Help is
salt, the Futher of Comeliness signifies vegetables; a play on
words being possibly intended, since \Jas> means also melted
fat, or gravy, which would run from the meat on to the vegeta-
bles. The Mother of Hospitality is the food called Sikbaj, so
called because it is the principal dish given to guests, The
Mother of Strengthening or Restoration is the food called Hariseh,


NOTES. — 451


because it contains wheat, which is called thé Strengthener. The
Mother of Joyfulness is the food called Jithabeh, apparently a
kind of pie. The Father of Dignity is the food Khabis, and
is called so from-its high price. The Father of Loftiness is
the food called Falathaj, which is made of honey, and has this
title also on account of its costliness. The Tivo Rumourers are
the ewer and basin, which, rattling as they are brought along,
rumour the close of the entertainment. The rising of the camels
is the removal of the table. The Father of Softness.is alkali, for
washing. The Futher of Generosity is the perfume: or incense,
which was used at the close of the feast. The Chosroes referred
td is Khosru Perwez who is one of the exemplars of magnificence
and luxury among the Arabs. It is said by the commentators
on this passage that he was the first for whom s7hbdj, the Persian
LS&s, was cooked, and that none fed of it without his permission.
This monarch who, after a career of success against the Eastern.
Empire, rivalling that of his predecessor Khosru Nushirvan,
closed his reign in defeat and shame, deposed by an impious son,
appears from authorities more trustworthy than Moslem tradition
to have carried Persian luxury to its highest point. His wars.
being the subject of a prophecy in the Koran, he has an enduring
reputation. His splendour and his love for the beautiful Shirin,
who was a present to him from Cesar, are often celebrated by
the poets, as in the Shah Nameh and the odes of Hafiz, and
form the subject of many romances.

Farther explanations of these fanciful names are neédless here.
So far as they can be understood they are interpreted by
Shertshi, most of whose remarks have been introduced into the
text of De Sacy’s commentary.

Despair not in calamities.—Sir William Jones quotes these
beautiful verses as a specimen of Eastern moral poetry (Poeseos
Asiaticee Commentarii, cap. xiv.), The metre is kdmil.


452 NOTES.


THE TWENTIETH ASSEMBLY.


I was making towards.—The texts from which a3 derives its
technical meaning of an ablution with sand are Koran iv. 46 and
v. 9, which may be rendered, “ Have recourse to, or make
towards, good sand or earth.”

Mayydférikin is a town of Diyar Bekr, thirty parasangs from
Nasibin. On account of its length the adjective formed from it
ig Fariki.

Who blows on knots, i.e. a magician. This phrase is derived
from the Sarat al Falak, at the end of the Koran. “I seek a
refuge with God from the malice of women who blow on knots.”
Baydawi explains it as follows :—‘‘The malice of women who
are enchantresses, and who tie knots in strings, and blow on
them as an enchantment. «+.u is a blowing such that spittle
comes from the mouth. It is said that a Jew enchanted the
Prophet with eleven knots in a cord, and hid it in a well; the
Prophet became sick, and the .,Uij<0 (the Suras (;\i! and
util, which have ‘eleven verses between them), descended
from Heaven, and Gabriel informed the Prophet of the place
- where the enchantment was hidden. The Prophet thereupon
sent ‘Ali, who brought the cord, and the Prophet repeated
over it the two chapters; at each verse that he repeated a
knot was unloosed, and when the whole were unloosed he was
relieved.” Hence, the meaning of Hariri may be that Abi
Zayd had in his bearing the malicious cunning of a wizard.
Baydawi, however, gives another explanation of oll as
meaning women who by their wiles loosen the determinations
and defeat the purposes of men; and who, as it were, spit on
knots to soften them, and make them easy of unloosing. If
Hariri took the passage in this sense, it may mean that Aba
Zayd accosted with the confidence of one who can solve any
riddle and circumvent any antagonist. The latter sense is
perhaps the more apposite.

The sheep.—o% was the name of an undersized species of


NOTES. 453


sheep in Bahrayn, with an ugly face and short legs. It is used
as a similitude for mean and contemptible persons. A poet

_satirizing a family of Temim says:—*% O Fokaym, ye basest of
Temim: if ye were sheep ye would be nakad ; if ye were water
ye would be froth ; if ye were wool ye would be refuse.” See
the proverb, “‘ More vile than nakad,” Arab. Prov. I. 513. The
author means that Abfi Zayd greeted like one accustomed to
make his living out of noble and mean.

Habeo, amici.—The measure of these verses is the first W,2
of the first (2,5 of the gy; the (2,6 being Ure digits
and the 2,3 being Wiy3ye csylee, as in the Second Assembly.
Sir William Jones has honoured this piece, which he had pro-
bably met with as an extract, by comparing it with the lament
of David over Saul and Jonathan. In his specimens of Oriental
elegiac poetry, he says, “ Bellissimum est in hoe genere poema
in vicesimé Haririi Mekama, quod integrum subjiciam.” He
then gives the translation, and proceeds :—“ Hee elegia non
admodum dissimilis esse videtur pulcherrimi illius earminis de
Sanli et Jonathani obitu: atque adeo versus iste,

‘Ubi provocavit adversarios nunquam rediit a pugne conten-
tione sine spiculo sanguine imbuto ;’

Ex Hebreo reddi videtur,

‘A sanguine occisorum, a fortium virorum adipe

‘ Arcus Jonathani non rediit irritus.’ ”

Sir William may be pardoned, since the purpose of Hariri was
to show his wit by imitating the sublime elegiac strains of the
ancient Arabs ; and the English Orientalist was no more de-
ceived than the company who are represented-as bestowing their
charity on Abii Zayd. Following Sir William Jones’s example,
I shall ask the reader to compare Hariri’s verses with those
which are attributed to Ta’abbata Sherran in the Hamaseh,
p. 382, but which are probably the composition of that Arabic
Macpherson, Khalf al Ahmar. The _3\\\ Wl contains many
passages of a like import. The poem of Imr al Kays, beginning
“Approach, ye two, to the old dwelling in ‘As‘as,” Diwan,
Pp. 34, is also worthy of attention.


454 NOTES.


Victoria a celo, ete.—Koran lxi. 18. These words were a
battle-cry of the early Moslems, being taken from the above
Sura, which is called the “ Line of Battle,” and exhorts believers
to the jihdd, or war against infidels. They are used in the
marriage ceremony with the same allusion as in the present
verses. ;

Gratus fuit.—Was saluted with the greeting Wiis Clee,
May I be thy ransom.

Incurous formd.— Koran xxxvi. 68. A seeabek irreverent
allusion.

If there were a thong to my staff.—This is a proverbial
expression, equivalent to ‘If I had power or means.” A thong
passing through a hole in the handle of a staff enables a man
to grasp it more securely.

Mirages of the plain, white shingle of the hollow.—That is,
ye who give a deceptive hope of bounty which is not fulfilled, as
the mirage at a distance makes the traveller believe that water is
near; or as a layer of white pebbles is taken for silver. For
words signifying the mirage or kindred phenomena, see
tes, ST, ack, ald, Gast! ld. The word deiy means
a hollow where water collects, and, with the more common
and chaste form dsis, a patch of ground or a plain, differing
Jrom what is about it. In the latter sense the plural is said
to be wit. A piece of ground thus diversified by pebbles is
called ‘lei 3,1.

Fold his cloth over its rent, and keep his splayness of tooth
Srom inspection..-Metaphorical expressions signifying the con-
cealment of another’s fault or imposture, Arab. Prov. II. 38.
ge is the irregular growth of the teeth, or their unequal length.
The epithet is applied to an eagle, because the upper part of
its beak is longer than the lower (De Sacy’s Hariri, p. 243), also
to a talon, because it protrudes, p. 240.

God fight against thee.—A term of playful imprecation, which
hag been already spoken of in a former note.

The scout who lies not to his people.—“ The scout lies not to
his people” is @ proverbial expression. The oi!, was he who was


NOTES. | 455


sent on by a tribe on the march to search for pasturage or water,
and he lies not because his interests are the same as theirs.
Arab. Prov. JI. 525. This proverb was used by Noman, son of
Zowra, in the address by which he sought to induce the Beni
Bekr to yield to Khosru Perwez. Caussin de Perceval, Essai,
Vol. II. p. 177.


THE TWENTY-FIRST ASSEMBLY.


Right from wrong.—The best explanation of the original
expression is that Ja? is the twist of a rope towards one’s self,
and 10 the twist away from one’s self; so that it might be
translated, ‘‘ what to take and what to leave.” Sherishi renders
it “what to turn to and what to turn from.”

Rayy.—The seat of government of the region known under
the Khalifate as Daylam was a place of much importance during
the most flourishing time of the Arab sovereignty, and under the
House of Seljuk. It was called Rayy al Mahdiyeh, since the
Khalif Al Mahdi held his court there for many years during the
reign of Al Mansir, and there was Hardn ar Reshid born in
the year 145 or 149. Rayy was conquered under the Khalif

“Omar by Kab ibn Kurt, the Ansiri. The derivative adjective —
formed from Rayy is Razi, as Marwazi, from Marw. This city
was the birth-place of Ibn Faris ar Razi, the poet and gram-
marian, whose life is given by Ibn Khallikin. It is related
of Ibn Faris that he was the instructor of Badi* az Zeman, the
author of the Makamat, which Hariri took as his model. It is
further said that he wrote a treatise on the meaning of words and
that from it Hariri took the idea of his Thirty-second Assembly,
in which a hundred legal questions that turn on the double
meanings of words are proposed. According to Tabari the city
of Rayy was founded by Husheng, one of the primeval kings,
and the first who sawed wood, and made doors, and dug metals.
See the early part of his Chronicle.


456 NOTES.


Loosed the loops of error, i.e. had risen from it. Sym, 28
has been before explained, is that by which an Arab, sitting on
the ground, draws up his legs to his stomach so as to support
himself, though there be nothing to lean against. See Sixteenth
Assembly, ‘‘ They loosed their loops to,me,” #.e. they rose.

Good from evil.—This is the virtual meaning of the phrase
ch wt Gal, of which so many etymologies are given in the
commentary. The expression belongs to the class which the
Arabs call cbs, and of which they make ‘constant use, as may
be seen from many examples in the present work. It is ana-
logous to our helter-skelter and namby-pamby, and it may fairly
be believed that in many cases the secpnd element had no
original meaning, but was added as a rhyme to the first. Com-
pare joes jab at the end of the Tenth Assembly ; piel and

33) a little later in the present. But the lexicographers
always strive to give a derivation if possible. In the present
case those propounded are all very unsatisfactory; and it is
better to consider it a phrase formed in the mouth of the people,
of which no true etymology can be given.

One morning.—For the use of the word \3 compare De Sacy’s
Commentary at the beginning of the Nineteenth Assembly. It
is mansub as a zarf. In four cases the masculine \9 is used ;
with some portions of time it is improper to use \3 or Hu, but
in all cases it refers only to past time, so that it would not be
lawfal in such a phrase as “I will go some morning ” or “ some
day.” .

Lon Sam‘ tin.—This was a celebrated preacher who flourished
about a century and a half before Hariri. He was born in the
year 300 of the Hijra, and died in the year 387. He resided at
Bagdad in the time of the Khalifs Al Muti’ ]’illah and At Tai
Villah. He was a man of great eloquence, to judge from the
effect he produced on his hearers, but was no ascetic, for when
one asked him how he, who exhorted others to piety, should
feed delicately and wear fine clothes, he anawered that if a man
felt himself at peace with God while doing these things they
were lawful to him. He appears to have been endowed with


NOTES. 457


great tact, for Sherishi relates the following narrative of Abt’t
Tahir Mohammed ibn ‘Ali al ‘laf: “I went to see Ibn Sam‘tn
and found him on his chair in the congregation, and as he
preached, Abi’! Fath, who was sitting by the side of the chair,
was overcome with drowsiness and fell asleep. Then Abd’
Hasan (Ibn Sam‘din) stopped for a timo until Abi’] Fath woke
up and raised his head, when he said to him, ‘ Didst thou see
the Apostle of God in thy dream?’ ‘ Yes,’ said Abi’] Fath.
‘It was for that reason,’ returned the preacher, ‘that I stayed
my discourse, that I might not interrupt thee in thy converse.’”
The same commentator tells an anecdote which shows the
dangers to which men of note were exposed for their political
opinions. A servant of the Khalif At Ta’i‘ l’illdh relates that
the Khalif one day bade him go and bring Ibn Sam‘fin to the
palace. ‘TI saw,” said he, “that the Khalif was angry, and he
was much feared when in that condition on account of his
severity, so that I was concerned for Ibn Sam‘fin. When he
arrived I informed the Khalif, who took his seat in the hall, and
bade that he be brought in. When he entered he made saluta-
tion and began a discourse. And his first words were, ‘ It is
related of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali son of Abi
Talib (God accept him);* then he mentioned a Tradition of him,
and went on preaching on this tenor until At Ta’i* wept, and his
sobs could be heard, and the handkerchief which was to his eyes
was wet with tears. When Ibn Sam‘fn had ceased the: Khalif
I gave it to him, and he departed. When I returned to At Tai,
handed me a packet, with perfumes and other things for him, and
I said, ‘Master, I saw thee incensed against Ibn Sam‘in, and
through his coming hither thou art calmed ; what is the reason ?’
The Khalif answered, ‘Complaint was made that he had spoken
ill of ‘Ali (whom God accept), and I wished to be convinced ; and
if the thing had been true I would have killed him; but when he
came before me he opened his discourse with the mention of * Ali,
and by the Blessing on him, so that I knew he was innocent.’ ”
It must be remembered that it was the traditional policy of the
‘Abbasides to exalt ‘Ali and his House at the expense of the


458 . NOTES.


Omayyides, and to paint in the darkest colours not only
Mu‘awiyeh and his son Yezid, and such guilty instruments of
their ambition as ‘Obayd allah ibn Ziyad, but the whole of the
reigning House, and those who served them. The men of letters,
as well as the religious, joined in this canonization of ‘Ali and
Al Hosayn, and this reprobation of their enemies, Indeed, it is
curious to find that, even under the House of Omayyeh, the
poets and scholars were in general partisans of the son of Aba
Talib, and the descendants of the Prophet. Abd’l Aswad, the
founder of the system of grammar, fought under ‘Ali at Siffin,
aud is said to have learned from him the division of the parts
of speech into the noun, the verb, and the particle (Ibn
Khallikén). The same side was espoused by almost all his
successors ; even those who asked and received the largesses of
the victorious family. In later times there is scarcely one of
the house of Omayyeh whom the Moslems willingly praise, ex-
cept the saint ‘Omar ibn‘Abd al ‘Aziz, who vainly sought to re-
concile the partisans of his own House and of ‘Ali. They scarcely
do justice even td so great a sovereign as Welid ibn ‘Abd al Melik:
though in his lifetime he rewarded the genius and received
the praises of two such highly esteemed poets as Al Farazdak
. and Jerir. It would have been strange if a popular preacher of
the fourth century had really slandered one who was then the
chief hero of Islam. The life of Ibn Sam‘dn is given by Ibn
Khallikén, who says that no such preacher had again appeared.
He was the author of a book of Traditions ; among the speci-
mens of his pulpit eloquence is the following: “ Exalted be God,
who has enabled man to speak by a piece of flesh (the tongue) ;
to see by a piece of fat (the eye); and to hear by a piece of
bone (the ear.)” :

With a breast-hunch.—_j4s3 signifies the protrusion of the
breast, together with a hollowness of the back, and is the oppo-
site of a>, which is the ordinary hunchbackedness. In the
book of which the French title is “La Vie et les Aventures de
Fariac,” written a few years since by Faris ash Shidyak, a
Syrian possessed of an extraordinary knowledge of the Arabic


NOTES. 459


vocabulary, there will be found at p. 344 a list of more than
200 names of bodily defects and ailments. This author, whose
purpose is either to instruct the reader or to display his own
knowledge, makes it a practice to introduce into his compositions
as many recondite words as possible, which he duly explains
according to the best authorities. The book, whatever may be
thought of its literary merits, is no doubt very useful to the
Arabic student, and deserves to be well known. I would par- -
ticularly draw attention to the twelve pages of names of gar-
ments and materials for clothing at p. 807, as this is a subject
which has been chosen by a European scholar, M. Dozy, for a
separate work. The immense number of names, or rather
epithets, for a handsome woman according to her various points
of beauty, given at p. 241, may surprise even those who are
accustomed to the boundless resources of this extraordinary
language. For (ass Firis gives the signification mentioned
above. See p. 348 of the book (Paris, 1855. Benjamin
Duprat, Libraire de l'Institut).

The cap and the cloak.—The Kalansuweh, or high-crowned
cap of a dervish or preacher, and the Taylasdn or cloak which he
hung over his shoulders. Both were Persian garments, which
are appropriate, the scene of the adventure being laid at Rayy.
The taylasan being a foreign garment, an Arab would say,
“Thou son of a taylasin!” meaning, “‘ Thou barbarian.” The
dictum of Sherishi, who lived at the other end of the world, that
the taylasin was a green garment, can hardly be relied upon ;
though doubtless green was a favourite colour. On this word,
see De Sacy. Chrest. Arabe, Vol. II. p. 269.

Son of man, or Adam.—.,y\ is mansitb through the iddfeh.
Baydawi at Koran ii. 29 says that 21 is a foreign word of the
measure of 31 and eu. The plural is eol,!.

The stumbling of the purblind beast. —This is a proverbial
expression. Such an one goes recklessly like the dim-sighted
she-camel that beats the ground with her fore foot as she goes
. along, not guarding herself from anything. It is applied to one
‘who turns from a thing as if he were not cognizant of it, or who


460 ' NOTES.


is continually falling into » thing. (Lane sub voce +.) The
verse of Zohayr there quoted is from Mo‘allakah, v.49.

To increase.—Distinguished from this is 5k, which is the
ostentation of wealth. Compare Twenty-sixth Assembly, “he
appropriated me for his ostentation.”

Thy two caves.—,\ ,\¢ like .,,4,>\ in the Forty-fifth Assembly
(p. 602 De Sacy’s edition), is interpreted to mean the two aper-
tures or channels of the body (0s e¢ pudenda) by which mankind
gratify the appetites of gluttony and lust. Such was the ex-
planation of the term by Mohammed, for when it was said to
him, “O Apostle of God, what is it that most makes men enter
Paradise ?”’ he answered, “The fear of God and goodness of
disposition ;” and when it was said, ‘‘ What sends them into
Hell?” he answered, ‘ Their two caves, os et pudenda.” It is
less well interpreted as the mouth and the belly. The Arabs
have a curious fondness for thus classing things in pairs. Com-
pare the proverb, “‘Man’s worth is according to his two least
parts,” 7.e. his heart and tongue. Arab. Prov. II. p, 658, and
Assembly 35.

Dost thou think thou shalt be left at large?—Koran Ixxv. 86 :
“ Doth man think that he shall be left at large?” Other quota-
tions from the Koran in this sermon are Ixxix. 40; and liii. 40.
The latter passage teaches the doctrine that, at the day of judg-
ment, a man will ‘have only his own works to rely upon, and
that the merits of others cannot be attributed to him. But as
the Traditions teach that alms and pilgrimage performed by
survivors are accepted for the dead, it is held that he who does
these good works does them as the substitute for the dead.

Between the lion and the fawn.— Between the strong and the
weak. Compare Twentieth Assembly, “a hunter of the lion
and the dwarf sheep.” .

By thy life.—These verses are of the metre famil, which has
been already explained. They present a fine instance of what
is called colcl or wi Ibe fyi, since in the last foot of every
line there is a une, and a J.s0, which is always the letter
— with kesreh. Furthermore each successive couple of verses


NOTES. 461


accord in having the first two syllables of the .,5 identical.
The taste for this more elaborate harmony of sound, which
certainly increases the beauty of the versification, had become
general in Hariri’s time, and had probably been increased by the
poetry of Abi 1‘Ala, who composed Luztm, or pieces in which
these stricter rules were observed, some of them being doubly, or
even triply rhymed (Ibn Khallikén). It is of very general
occurrence in the Assemblies, and is elsewhere mentioned in these
notes, but the present lines are unusually laboured. Compare
page 484, De Sacy’s edition.

Death and his stroke.—elra_ is, pectin originally the
plural of ds. It is said to signify the decreed and pre-
destined time or form of death.

The terror of his meeting, and the taste of his wormnood
cup.—Probably, “‘ of his colocynth.” ‘With respect to the terror
and the bitterness of death, the following legends are related by
Sherishi:—-Abraham (on him be peace), said to Death, “ Canst
thou show me the form in which thou snatchest the spirit of
the wicked man?” He answered, “Thou canst not bear
it,’ Abraham said, “I can, so turn aside and change.”
Death did so, then turned round again, and behold he stood
in the form of a man, with black hair erect, foul breath,
black garments, and there came out of his mouth and
nostrils a flame of fire and smoke. Abraham fainted, and
when he revived, Death had returned to his shape. Then
Abraham said, “If the wicked man in dying had to meet
nothing but thy shape it would be horror enough.” God said
to Abraham ‘“‘ How didst thou find the taste of death, O friend ?”’
(Abraham is called the JJ+, or friend of God, at Koran iv.
124, and is generally spoken of by Moslems as J\L<'\, a name
familiar to travellers from his burial place at Hebron). Abraham
answered, ‘‘ Like a skewer that had been laid in wet wool.” By
which, I. presume, is meant that it was foul and loathsome, as
the skewer is with rust; or that it was as painful as being
pierced by a rusty weapon. God said, “‘ Have I not made it
-easy to thee?” He also said to Moses (on him be peace) ‘‘ How


462 NOTES.


didst thou find death?’ He answered, “I was as a bird that is
fried in the pan, and cannot die and be at rest, or escape and fly
away.” Another version is, ‘ Like a sheep that is flayed alive.”
The use of colocynth and other plants as synonyms for the
bitterness of calamity is common among the Arabs. Al Mute-
nebbi, in the first of his poems to Sayf ad Dowleh, says, “I have
pastured on evil until its ,3\c are sweet to me.” (Dieterici’s ed.
p. 878.) In the Hamadseh wl. and pile are used together, p.
509 ; compare also p. 166. The word psc is said to signify the
colocynth when it is most bitter; but what plant is meant by
wb.» appears doubtful. I have therefore taken the liberty
to render it by “ wormwood ” which is used thus metaphorically
in English. The usual word for colocynth is Jlas>.

The day's duties pressed upon us.—This is a free translation
of the expression (Jyx3 dy i\, which is taken from the law of
inheritance. * At Koran iv. 12, the main principles of the
law of inheritance are laid down, and it is defined what share
of a deceased person’s property shall belong to each relative.
It may be, however, that the sum of the fractions is greater
than unity; and then each inheritor has to give up a part pro-
portionate to his inheritance. This is called (Jyc. For instance,
if there be three inheritors, of whom one has a right to one half,
the second to one third, and the last to one fourth of the inherit-
ance, the united portions would exceed the estate by one twelfth,
and this deficiency is made good by each foregoing a part of his
lawful share. The contrary may also take place. It may be,
for example, that there are only two inheritors, of whom one can
ouly claim the fourth, and the other the third of the inheritance,
and there remains an excess of five-twelfths, which is distributed
between them proportionately to their legal shares: see the note
on this passage, De Sacy’s ed. Vol. II. p. 122. The day, in this
ease, is compared to a deficient inheritance, because the people,
in listening to the preacher, had let one prayer-time pass and
were approaching another, so that they would have to compress
two prayers into the insufficient remainder of the day. There is
a double signification given to 4d) 5 ;—a legal division of an in-


NOTES. 4638


heritance and the legal or incumbent prayers. The difference
between _ 4,5 and (Jai, in respect of prayer, has been explained
in the notes to the Sixteenth Assembly, under the phrase joined
to it what was optional.”

Of the prompt.—Literally, of one who draws or girds up his
garments in readiness to run.

Wonderful! a man hoping.~The metre of these verses is the
perfect kdmi/, according to the Circle, and consists of icles six
times in each verse. This metre was explained in the notes
to the Fourth Assembly, where a less perfect specimen of it
occurs.

Nor cares he—,,\ after le is considered either as redundant
or corroboratory. In a verse cited by Lane, “And our habit
is not cowardice,” it prevents the government of le and leaves
the noun marfi', and is therefore held not to be a nega-
tive; but in another verse, where the noun becomes mansiib,
it is explained as a negative corroborative of lv. That ..(\ by
itself can have the force of a negative may be held as proved
by Koran x. 69 and Ixxii. 26.

The fire of war.—This is an allusion to the bale-fire which
the ancient Arabs lighted on a height to collect the tribe or
its allies for a foray. There are various traditional fires cele-
brated by the poets. The “ fire of hospitality,” _s,i\_,U, was that
which a man lighted to guide travellers to his tent, or to prepare
food for them. The “fire of branding,” »«9!_,, was that with
which the iron, »..«, was heated for the branding of a great
personage’s camels, that they might be known, and allowed
to drink at the well before others. The “fire of treachery,”
yoall 6, was lighted by a man when he had been treacherously
injured by his neighbour. The wronged man solemnly lighted
a fire at Mina, during the pilgrimage, and exclaimed, “ This
be his enemy.” The “fire of safety,” duj\ |G, was a thanks-
giving of a man’s friends for his safe return. On the other
hand, the “fire of departure” was a solemn cursing of a
man by his enemy when he set out on an expedition. The fire
was lighted, and the ill-wisher exclaimed, ‘“ Away! begone!”


464 NOTES.


Compare Eighteenth Assembly: ‘It would be, said to Isaac,
‘Away! begone!’” This was called ojJ\ 4. The “fire of the
lion” was that lighted to scare wild beasts. The “fire of the
snake-bitten,” paul 4, was lighted for the recovery of one who
had been so hurt; either as a charm, or because it helped him to
keep awake, on which his recovery depended. The “fire of ransom,”
taal yh, was lighted when women of rank, who had been made
captive, were redeemed ; for they were brought out of the hostile
camp by night, apparently to lessen their humiliation. The
“fire of praying rain” was a sacrifice in time of drought. The
“fire of hunting” was lighted to blind or confuse the deer.
The “ fire of covenanting,” Wa<*, was on the occasion of some
solemn alliance or agreement being made. See the sixth
Assembly of Nasif al Yazaji.

A lsper.—One who pronounces the sin like thd, and the rd
like ghayn. The terrors of the day of judgment are dwelt upon
continually in the Koran. Compare xxii. 1, ‘The nurse shall
abandon the child to whom she gives suck, and every pregnant
woman shall bring forth (from fear), and ye shall see the men
as drunken.” Also xxvii. 89; xxxix. 67, and in the later Suras
passim. With regard to the word -4) it is clearly formed by
onomatopeeia, the letters of which it is composed being those
‘which the speaker substitutes in pronunciation for others. Wasil
ibn ‘Atd, the founder of the sect of the Mu'tazilfin, had this
defect, and showed great cleverness in avoiding the use of words
which he could not pronounce. Thus he would say “.<
instead of Lo» for rain, _sc\ instead of »,< for blind, ine
instead of 03, for bed, and 80 on,

Viler than the toad-stool of the plain.—A proverbial expres-
sion, Arab. Prov. I. 512, where a great number of proverbs
beginning “ Viler than” are collected. Thus it is said, “ Viler
than the 0%,” or “ dwarf-sheep ;” compare the Twentieth As-
sembly : “ Viler than the egg of the earth,” that is, the ostrich’s
egg, which she lays and abandons in the desert (compare Job
xxxix, 14), an expression which was afterwards used to signify
. & foundling or vagabond, one who had no known kin or home.


NOTES. 465


What he sipped and what he supped.—The iniquities which
he permitted himself.

He shall bite his hand.—To bite the hand is significant of
confusion and repentance: compare the verses at the end of the
Tenth Assembly. Thus the much discussed expression at Koran
vii. 148, means that the children of Israel fell upon their hands
and bit them, in repentance at having worshipped the calf.

Belted with authority or adorned.—The chy was a broad
belt or stomacher worn by women. Sherishi renders the word
by pase “girt.”

Neglects the life to come, ete.—Koran lxxv. 20.

And when he bears rule walks in the earth to do violence in it.
—This is from Koran ii. 201. Hariri takes ca |,3 in the sense of
“to bear rule,” though in the original passage the eontext
shows that it may be better rendered, “‘ when he turns away
and departs,” that is, ‘as soon as he has done talking piously,
and calling God to witness, he goes forth and does evil.” Bay-
dawi adopts this interpretation, but gives the other also. Hariri
probably introduced the quotation because it had furnished
a subject for controversy.

As thou rewardest thou shalt be rewarded.—A proverbial
expression, Arab. Prov. II. 354; probably derived from Chris-
tian sources, like that at p. 372. ‘As thou sowest thou shalt
reap.” The proverb in the text is given as an instance of
the figure by which the first of two verbs is expressed by the
second, the word “rewarded” being used instead of “ doest,”
for the sake of accordance and congruity : as in the verse of the
Koran, xvi. 127, “If ye avenge, avenge as ye have been avenged
upon,” meaning, ‘as ye have been offended.” Compare Four-
teenth Assembly, “‘ Reward us as we have rewarded thee.”

Showed him a sharp glance.—This is a proverbial phrase usually
applied to one who threatens or warns (Arab. Prov. II. 410) ;
also if fortune or destiny looks intently, or sharply, or sternly
on one. Thus pl é comes to mean misfortune or calamity.
Hariri, however, uses the phrase literally, with the meaning

30


466 NOTES.


“T looked intently at him.” Compare the use of the phrase at
Arab. Prov. I. 527.

The better of two guides,—Abi Zayd means that he can show
Harith what he is looking for better than Harith can find it him-
self; that is, if he is seeking to learn who the preacher is Abi
Zayd can satisfy him at once by revealing himself, which he
straightway does. P

Lam he whom thou knowest.—Metre rejez.

Their Shem, their Ham, and their Japhet.—The three sons of
Noah who entered with him into the ark; the one who refused
(Koran xi. 44) being Canaan, or, as is otherwise said, Yam.
The world became the inheritance of Noah’s three sons, the
posterity of the seventy-two persons who accompanied his family
_into the ark having become extinct, so that these three might be
called the heirs of all mankind. Shem was the primate of the
earth after his father, and, according to his father’s blessing,
became the ancestor of the Prophets, all of whom, whether
Arabs or foreigners, are of the posterity of Shem. He went as
far as Yemen and founded San‘a, and settled the middle region
of the earth from Yemen to Ash Shim, possessing the Holy
Place. From him were descended ‘Ad, and Thamad, and Tasm,
_ and Jedis, and Al ‘Amalik (Amalek), and the subjects of Ya‘rob
and Jorhom the Elder, who were called 4 a! —,«!| because
they were created speaking Arabic ; also the descendants of
Isma'tl, called del! Co,<| because they acquired the Arabic
tongue by settling among the former ; also & xx! C>,2!| who are
defined as especially the descendants of ‘Adnan; also the Jabé-
bireh of Ash Shim (the gigantic nations of Hebrew tradition),
and the Pharaohs of Egypt. It is also said that Shem was the
father of the Arabs, and the Persians, and the people of Rim,
all of them races in-whom are good qualities. Japhet was the
father of the Sakflib (Slaves), and the people of Burjin (the
Danubian Bulgars), and the Chinese, and the Khazars (a people
near the Caspian, powerful in the seventh and eighth centuries),
and Yajaj and Majaj (Gog and Magog, the races of Northern Asia),
and the Turks ; and these have no good qualities. Of the posterity


NOTES. 467


of Ham are Sind, and Hind, and all the races of the Blacks,
like Kash and the Zenj, a people whose position is very un-
intelligibly described as extending from Abyssinia to the island
or country of Wakwik (the home of Ibn Tofayl’s Hayy ibn
Yakzin), but who may be taken to be the people of Eastern
Africa; Ham also begat the Abyssinians and others. On this
subject refer to Al Mas‘idi. A useful work is Géographie du .
Moyen Age étudiée par Joachim Lelewel; Bruxelles, 1852.
“Amr ibn‘ Obayd was a celebrated ascetic (o21;) and preacher
of the time of the Khalif Al Mansir. His life is narrated by
Ibn. Khallikén ; and Sherishi gives a lengthy notice of him in
his Commentary. He was born a.H. 80 (4.p. 700), and died
about 144. He was a freedman of the Bent ‘Okayl, and his
father had been one of the prisoners taken at Cabul. This
person, who was in the police of Basra, was either a man
of indifferent character, or, from his office, unpopular with the
people, for they used to say, when they saw his son ‘Amr with
him, “There goes the Best of men, the son of the Worst of
men.” “Truly,” returned the father, “he is Abraham and I am
Azer.” (Azar was the idolatrous father of Abraham: Koran vi.
74). ‘Amr, though he prayed so constantly that his forehead
was horny from prostration, was one of the leaders of the
heterodox sect of the Muftazilin. He had been a pupil of
Al Hasan al Basri, but left him for the new tenets. “Amr
was one of the chief cultivators of scholastic theology and
metaphysics, and wrote a work on the Kadari doctrine, which
attributes free-will and optional actions to man, that is, which
allows to man, in his own actions, Kadar, or determining power,
such as God possesses over the universe, Koran xxxiii. 38>
and which He uses in the creation and government of things,
xv. 21; liv. 49. The contrary doctrine, called that of Jabr,
Constraint, is unlimited predestination, the attribution of
everything to God, and the assertion that all human actions
are produced by Physical Premotion, and are of the nature
of a spasm. It is doubtful whether the name Mv‘tazil was
first given to ‘Amr or to WAsil ibn ‘Ata al Ghazzal. Accord-


468 NOTES.


ing to one account Wasil disputed with Al Hasan on the
question whether one who has committed deadly sin could be
called a believer, and in consequence took a separate place
in the mosque to expound his doctrine? Al Hasan then said
to his pupils, “ He secedes from us;” and thus the name took
its origin. But, according to another tradition, this phrase
was first used by Abi *1 Khattdb Katddeh, who, being blind,
entered the mosque to hear Al Hasan, but fell upon ‘Amr and
some of his followers, who had just left Al Hasan’s circle and
formed one of their own. Finding from the tenets propounded
that it was not Al Hasan’s circle, he exclaimed, ‘‘ These are the
seceders,” and at once left them. From that time they were
called “Seceders,” Mu‘tazilin ; see Ibn Khallikan, life of
Katadeh. For information on this powerful and intellectual
sect, of which ‘Amr became one of the chief doctors, consult
Schmilders, Ecoles philosophiques chez les Arabes, and Steiner,
Die Mu'taziliten oder die Freidenker im Islam ; also Pocock’s
Specimen, and Shahrestani. ‘Amr, by his contempt for the things
of this world, obtained the admiration of his contemporaries, and
was much esteemed by Al Mansdr, with whom he lived on terms of
intimacy before the latter’s accession to the sovereignty. Once,
when the Khalif sent for him, he preached a sermon, reminding
him that as his predecessors had given place to him, so he must
yield the throne to others, bidding him prepare for the day
which should never be followed by another night, and warning
him that God might destroy his splendour as he had destroyed
Irem thét al ‘Imdd (the city of Sheddad, see Koran lxsxix. 6.)
He would take no largess, and carried his bluntness to the
extreme of rudeness. Al Mansir asked him if there was any-
thing he required, and‘ Amr answered “That thou do not send
for me again, but wait till I come to thee.” ‘In that case,”
said the Khalif, ‘we shall never meet.’ “That is what I desire,”
returned the preacher, and withdrew. Al Mansir then uttered
in verse :—


“ Allof you walk mincingly ; All of you seek your gain; All except
‘Amr ibn ‘Obayd.” :


NOTES. 469


The Khalif grieved much at his death, and indited some verses
on the occasion, an unusual honour for a subject.

Keep to truth.—Metre qs, as before explained.

The rolls of folding.— Letters and writings.

What locust had gone off with him.—A proverbial expres-
sion, meaning “ what had become of him.” The Arabs also say
of any one that is lost, “The ‘Anka has flown off with him.” .
Arab. Prov. II. 25. The ‘Ank&, the Persian Eyton is a
fabulous bird, which is supposed to dwell on the K4f, or moun-
tain barrier, which surrounds the world.


THE TWENTY-SECOND ASSEMBLY.


A time of quiet —i 3 is weakness, langour, intermission of
strength, and thus signifies a time when the fury of war
languishes, an interval of quiet, a truce. Its meaning as the
interval between two prophets, as betwen Jesus and Mohammed,
is founded on Koran v. 22. The frequent political disturbances
which impoverished Irak in Hariri’s time have been referred to
in the Introduction, and will be found more fully detailed in
the Introduction to the second edition of De Sacy’s Hariri.

The sons of Al Furdt were a family highly distinguished in the
civil service of the Khalifate during the fourth century. They
followed the profession of inshd’ or official writing, and rose
to the highest posts, even to the wazirate. There were four
brothers of them who attained to eminence during the reign of
Al Muktadir b ’illah, namely Ahmed abd’l “Abbas, and Abt’l
Hasan “Ali and Aba “Abd allah Ja‘far and Abd ‘Isa Ibrahim.
They were the sons of Mohammed ibn Masa ibn al Hasan ibn
al Furat, who was an agent to Ahmed ibn al Hadib the wazir of
the Khalif Al Muntasir son of Al Mutewekkil, a.u. 247. The.
most celebrated of the family was Abii ’1 Hasan “Ali, who was
three times wazir to Al Muktadir. His life is to be found in


470 NOTES.


Ibn Khallikan. He was a most gifted man, and an excellent
administrator, and, though liberal even to extravagance, amassed
great wealth. When he was dismissed for the first time, a.H. 299°
(4.D. 912), the Khalif had him arrested in his palace, and
seized on all his wealth. From that time to his reinstatement in
304 the produce of his estates to the public treasury amounted
to 7,000,000 denars. On his re-appointment the Khalif showed
him the highest favours, sending him seven cloaks of honour
and 800,000 dirhems to be distributed among his attendants.
He continued in place for two years, but was then arrested a
second time, and thrown into prison. He was restored to his
post for the third time in 311, and marked his resumption of
office by acts which have cast a stain on his memory. He
exacted large sums from many persons, and allowed his son
Abi ’l Muhassin, a violent young man, to put to death Hamid
ibn al ‘Abbas, the late wazir. He fell for the third time the
next year, when ‘it was found that he possessed upwards of ten
millions of denars, and that his landed property produced a
million of denars annually. A few days later he and his son
Muhassin were put to death by Nazik, the chief of the police.
This Abi ’] Hasan had been a simple £ét2b, and was first raised
to high posts together with his brother Abi’l “Abbas by the
Khalif Al Mo‘tadid for drawing up a financial statement. This
brother died some years before in 291. The third brother, Ja‘far,
was offered the wazirate, but declined it; it was then given to
his son Abi ’l Fath ibn Ja‘far in 320, but he was not long in
power, for Al Muktadir was murdered the same year, and the
wazir concealed himself through fear of Al Kahir, the new
Khalif. Abfi’l Fath, however, obtained subsequently the govern-
ment of Syria, and after the deposition of Al Kahir, was offered
the wazirate by Ar Radi; but finding the State in confusion he
prudently returned'to his government. The son of Aba’l Fath
was Abfi’] Fadl Jafar ibn al Fadl, called like .himself Al
Hinziba from the name of Abi 1 Fath’s mother. (Wl

means @ person or beast of short’and strong make). This Ibn
Hinzdba, whose life is also given by Ibn Khallikan, admin-


NOTES. 471


istered Egypt under the clever and strong-minded negro eunuch
Kafar, the patron and then the enemy of Al Mutenebbi, and the
subject of his praise or satire in some of his most interesting
‘poens. This family, distinguished generation after generation
for official and administrative skill, might well be spoken of
as models of excellence by one of their own profession, like the
autho For more on this subject see Weil, Geschichte der
Chalifn, on Al Muktadir b’illéh, II. 589. Sherishi gives a
specimin of Abi’l Hasan’s wit. Some of the learned were
maintahing in his presence the untenable doctrine that the letter
sin may in all cases be substituted for sdd; that, in fact, the
two letters are interchangeable. Said the wazir, ‘“‘ Do you read
in the Kyran, ‘There shall enter into Paradise edbt Be aa ow
as well is é w?’” Another story of the same kind, given
by the mmmentator, is that An Nadr ibn Shemil was sick,
and a number of his friends came to see him, among them
a certainman who was bye-named Abi Salih. Said Abi Salih
to the sict man “1% Le alll ol.” “You should use the sdd,
not the sin,” said An Nadr, “for the meaning is, ‘May God
cause the sickness to depart,’ and the sdd is according to the
speech of the Arabs.” Abi Salih answered that the stm was
always inerchangeable with the sdd, and instanced blo and
Ll ns, pio md ji. “Are you then Aba Salin?” said the sick
man. It psy be mentioned that all the words which are spelt
with eithe of these letters indifferently are given in some verses
of the 46h Assembly.

Al Katé ibn Showr, a man of the Arabs famous for his
generosity, and reckoned with Ka‘b ibn Mameh and Hatim. Of
him it isjsaid, “ No ill-fate has he who sits with Al Ka‘ka‘,”
Arab. Priv. II, 540, since it was his custom to relieve all who
visited hm. Of Ka'b ibn Mameh there are several proverbs.
It is said “More generous than Ka‘b ibn Mameh.”’ His act of
generosiy was the same as that of Sir Philip Sidney at

Zatphen, He was in a caravan in the desert when the water
ran sok so that they took to measuring it by the stone called


472 NOTES.


dis; that is, a stone was put into the cup, into which was then
' poured water until it covered the stone, so that every one might
have an equal share, This stone was called puH\ slum. When
the turn came for. Ka‘b to drink he saw a man of the tribe of
An Namir ibn Kasit look wistfully on him, and he said tq him
who was distributing, ‘‘ Give to drink to thy brother,” meaning
the man of Namir, and himself went without. The next day
he saw the man of Namir look on him a second time, gnd he
gave up his portion again. But when the time came to mount
he could not move, so they put garments over him to sare the
beasts, and left him to die. His father indited some verses to
his memory. Hence the proverbs, “ More generous thin Ka‘b
ibn Mameh,” Arab. Prov. I. 325. “Give to drink to thy
brother the Namiri,” 608. Another proverb attributedto Ka‘b,
is extant, “ This is my bleeding,” II. 867, which hq uttered
when in captivity among the tribe of ‘Anazeh, II. 90. He
had been told by the mistress of the house to Yeed the
camel to make blood-puddings for the guests. Indignant at
this stinginess he had killed it; and when rated by tle house-
wife he uttered the above saying. But this story ig ako told of
Hatim, with the addition that the lady slapped his fice, See
the proverb, “If any other bracelet-wearer had slayped me,”
II. 465. The bleeding of the live camel was only prectised, by
the hospitable in time of need. Compare Haméasel, p. 645,
“The noble man shuns perfidy, even though his fod in the
evening be a portion from the blood of vein-cutting.” \At Arab.
Prov. II. 441, is the saying ‘‘ He is not refused wh) has the
blood let for him.” I cannot ascertain whether this AlKa‘ka is
to be identified with the bold Moslem warrior of the tine of the
Prophet and the early Khalifate, who took Holwan uider Sa‘d
ibn Abi Wakkas, and negotiated for ‘Ali with Tahah and
Az Zobayr.

Plenty after want.—Compare the use of this exprgsion in
the Thirty-fourth Assembly, hear the beginning.

As the fingertop is above the finger: a proverbial exprission.

Lofty-sailed boats.—The ordinary reading at Koran ¥. 24, is


NOTES. 473


wli.%, with the ek, though, aconaing to Baydawi, both
Hamzeh and Abi Bekr read with kesr. The meaning, however, is
the same, whether the phrase be “lifted up as to their sails,” or
“lifting up their sails.” Sherishi renders the word by wley.2-+,
which Bayd4wi also gives as an interpretation, It hardly
accords, however, with the context, “on the sea, like mountains,”
or masses of rock that served as way-marks in the deserts.

Thou wouldst think it immovable.—These words are from
Koran xxvii. 90, ‘Thou shalt see the mountains which thou
wouldst think immovable, fleet as the fleeting of the clouds.”

On the deep.—Compare Mo‘allakah of Tarafeh, v. 5. It is
' there explained as the mass or bulk of the water,

Our cushion-saddle.—i), is the cushion placed on the back of
the camel, under the saddle, to ease the motion. But accord-
ing to Sherishi and the commentator quoted by De Sacy, there
is an allusion to the word (Jy, meaning a saint or favourite of
God, since people say, “ Such a man is a saint, he walks on the
water :” it being the belief that the saints have such a power.
For the definition of this word see 7é‘rifat.

Deemed his shadow to be heavy, etc.—i.e. considered his ~
presence to be disagreeable. The .).i is he who wearies you by
his company, as in a prolonged visit. According to ‘Ayisheh it
was on account of such persons that the revelation was made,
(Koran xxxiii. 53), ‘‘ When ye have eaten separate.” See note
to Fourth Assembly, near the end. When Abi Hurayrah saw
one of these he exclaimed “ Alldhumma (O God), forgive him,
and deliver us from him.” Also Jalinis (Galen) when asked
why the weight of a bore’s company was more distressing than
the weight of a burden made answer that the weight of the
former was on the heart alone, while in bearing a material
burden the heart was aided by the limbs. There is a disposition
among Orientals to make Galen a sort of sage ; compare one of
the stories in the 4th chapter of the Gulistan. The above anec-
dotes are from Sherishi.

He praised God after sneezing, but nq one blessed him.—
This usage was once common in Europe as well as in the East.


474 . NOTES.


According .to two Traditions the Prophet said, “If when one
of you sneezes or eructs he utters. the words ‘ Praise be to God,’
he averts seventy diseases, the least of which is the juthdm (ele-
phantiasis, that species of leprosy which causes the members to
fall off; a more terrible disease than baras).”” He also said, “ If
one of you sneeze let him utter ‘Praise be to God,’ and let
those who salute him in return say, ‘God have mercy on
thee,’ and let him then say, eS ets FAN} eres (make
good your condition in religion and in the world by propitious
aid and strengthening) ;” see Baydawi on Koran xlvii. 2 and 6.
It is related that when God created Adam of clay he ordered
the human soul to enter his. body. On this the dry clay
changed at once into bones, flesh, nerves, and the other con-
stituents of man’s body. Adam, awakening to life, sneezed, and
immediately exclaimed, “‘ Praise to God,” and Gabriel answered,
‘God have mercy on thee, Adam” (Tabari).

The help. which comes to the wronged.—Koran xxii. 59.
Those who only retaliate according to the injury received, will,
if injured in retyrn for the retaliation, be assisted by God.

The bye-paths of the serious and the gay.— ys” are the
tracks in a wadi, or mountain valley, through which winter
torrents flow. The first who used the expression, “The tale has
bye-paths,” that is, “there is something more to be told of
it,” was Dabbat ibn Udd ibn Tabikhah, a descendant of Modar.
The history is given by Maydani, Arab. Prov. I. 350. Dabbah
had two sons, Séd and Sufayd, and when one of his camels
strayed during the night he sent them in search of her. Sad
found her, and when he brought her back at night the father
Saw & figure in the dark, and exclaimed, “ Is it Sad or Su ayd?”
a saying that became proverbial, and is used in the sense of
‘Ia it the one or the other?” as when Al Hajjaj asked Kotaybet
ibn Muslim, on the latter marrying a wife, “Is it Sdd or
Su'ayd?” meaning, “Is it a handsome wife or an ugly one?”
Arab. Prov. I. 601. Suayd wandered in search of the camel,
and fell in with Al Harith ibn Ka‘b. The youth had on two
mantles, and Harith demanded them; when Sufayd would not


NOTES. .- AT5


part with them, Harith killed him and tock them. Sometime
after Dabbah made the pilgrimage (pagan) to Mecca, and came
to the fair of‘Okaz, where he met the murderer wearing his son’s
_ two mantles. He recognized them and said, “ Wilt thou tell where
thou gottest these two?” Harith answered, “I met a youth who
wore them and I asked him for them, and when he would not give
them I killed him and took them.” Dabbah said, “ Was it with
this sword of thine?” He said “ Yes.” Said Dabbah, “ Give
it me to look at, for I think it isa sharp one.” Harith gave
it, and Dabbah, brandishing the weapon, exclaimed, “The tale
has bye-paths,” meaning ‘‘ There is something more in it than —
thou knowest.” Then at once he slew Harith with it. And
when it was said to him, ‘‘ What, Dabbah, hast thou killed him
in the sacred month?” he answered, ‘“‘ The sword has outstripped
remonstrance,” which also became proverbial : Arab. Prov. I. 599.
Hariri’s meaning is that the conversation of the company flowed
as one subject suggested another.

The pen of correspondence, etc.—It is necessary here to render
the original somewhat freely. W—L\s may be either an orator,
choice of speech, or a wooer who wina hearts by his elegant
diction. bl is the gatherer of firewood, who puts into his
rope all that he can find, without selection; and is thus applied
to one who uses the first phrase that comes to hand without taste
or judgment. Compare the phrase, “ One who gathers wood by
night,” in Hariri’s Preface.

Johayneh for information—There is discrepancy both as to the
form of this name andthe meaning. It is read not only as
above, but also Jofayneh and Hofayneh, the former being on
the authority of Al Asma‘t. See Arab, Prov. II. 71: “ With
Johayneh is the certain information.” According to one le-
gend he was a wine-seller, in whose tavern two men had quar-
reled. When a third party had endeavoured to separate them,
one of the two had slain him. They were both arrested, and
when the judge wished to learn which of the two was guilty, he
said, ‘Bring Jofayneh, for he has the certain information.”
According to Hishim ibn al Kelbi, the story is as follows: Al


476 NOTES.


Akhnas ibn al Ka'b was a man of Johayneh, who for some
act that he committed was obliged to flee from his people.
He met with Hosayn ibn ‘Amr ibn Mo‘dwiat ibn Kilab, or, as
others say, another Hosayn of Ghatafan, who had also turned
vagabond ; and they agreed to rob together, even the men of
their own tribes. The adventure which followed is too long to
be narrated here: it will be found in Maydani at the place
cited. Suffice it to say that the man of Johayneh in the end
slew his companion, and took all the booty. In returning home
to his people, with the view of reconciling himself with them, he
passed two sub-tribes of the sons of Kays, called Meraj and
Anmar, and & woman came forth who was seeking Hosayn.
He asked who she was, and she answered, “ I am Sakhrah, the
wife of Hosayn.” He said, “I have killed him.” She said,
“Thou liest; such an one as thou kills not such an one as he:
if the tribe (or the men of it) were not away, thou durst not
have spoken thus.” Then he went home and made up matters
with his tribe, and came and stood where he might be heard,
and declaimed the following verses :—

Of how many a lion, tawny, breaking the prey, the father of two cubs,
whose dwelling is the thicket, ~

And of how many a rider, whom thou wouldest not despise if thine eyes
were to light where he had fallen,

Have I cloven the topmost skull with my sword, that he has lain
motionless on the plain ;

And his wife has sorrowed for him, wailing in the night without rest ;

Like Sakhrah, when she questioned Mer4j and Anmér, whose know-
ledge was only guessing.

She asked each band of travellers concerning Hosayn, but at Johayneh
is the certain information.

Now if any ask concerning him, know that I can tell him all clearly.

Johayneh is my tribe, a race of kings ; when they seek lofty deeds they
are not abased.

Sherishi quotes these verses differently, and makes Sakhrah
the sister of Hosayn. On hearing her inquiries Al Akhnas
utters the verses. The names of the tribes are also given as
Merah and Jarm.

Lokmdn of wisdom.—Lokman, the Wise, the contemporary of
David, is to be distinguished from Lokméan of ‘Ad, though some-


NOTES. ATT


times confounded with him even by Arabs. ‘The two have been
mentioned in a former note. Lokman the Wise is spoken of
at Koran xxxi. 11. He was not a prophet, but he instructed
his son An‘am, or Ashkam, or Mathn in the worship of the one
true God. The descriptions of him by the Arabs have a great
resemblance to those of sop. He is represented as a black,
very ugly in person, and a slave, and it is probable that the
traditions concerning Asop were, like the fables, attributed to
this mythical sage, unless, indeed, we hold the legends con-
cerning sop to be themselves late inventions, and borrowed
from the East.

Foes are vanquished.—Literally, “ the forelocks are mastered.”
The Arabs, when they took prisoners, were accustomed to cut
off the front hair and carry it in their quivers. Hence, at Koran
xi. 59, “to take by the forelock” means, to have absolute
authority. Nobles also are called the forelocks, or chiefs of the
people.

Enriches the overseer—wearies the eye.—This use of 4 in a
double sense is to be found in the opening address of the
Thirteenth.

Fraud would endure to the Day of Judgment.—This is an allu-
sion to Koran lxiv. 9, where the Day of Judgment is called the
“Day of Mutual Defrauding,” since then men will defraud or
supplant one another, the just taking the place: that the wicked
have had, and conversely.

The pen of accounting interprets.—J,t like byt is the
expounding of the real essential meaning of a thing, that to
which it comes or may be reduced. < ¢

An Abi Bardkish.—This is a bird of gaudy and changing
plumage, and is therefore used as a similitude for a clever but
unsteady writer. M. de Sacy, in his Chrestomathie Arabe,
Vol. ITI. p. 499, sec. ed., says that it is probably a species of
heron. He then gives the following description from Kazwini:
“The Abdi Barakish is a bird with a pleasant voice; its neck
and feet are long, its beak red, and it is about the size of a
stork ; its plumage changes every instant to the eye, showing


478 NOTES,


red, yellow, green, and blue. So that a poet has said, ‘ He is
like the Aba Barakish, he can take all colonrs.’” In Lane’s
Lexicon it is said to be a small wild bird, like a lark, which,
when it is provoked, ruffles its feathers, and becomes variously
changed in colour. The Abi Bardkish is used figuratively, like
the lizard Abi Kalamin, to express a person of variable disposi-
tion : compare the Latin term stedlionatus, a fraud or swindle,
from stellio, A kind of shot silk also had these names from its
changes of colour. Bardkish is an ancient Arab name. In the
proverb, “Barakish sins against her people” (Arab. Prov.
II. 89), the name is variously explained as that of a bitch,
which betrayed the place of a tribe’s retreat by her barking ; as
the wife of a king who allowed her damsels needlessly and in
jest to kindle the signal-fire for the assembling of the troops ;
and, thirdly, as a wife of Lokman of ‘Ad who persuaded her
husband to eat the flesh of the camel, so that by the voracity
of himself and his people the camels of her own tribe were
destroyed. This and numberless similar appellations of animals
among the Araba are of the nature of proper names, and may
be compared with the Renard the Fox, Ysengrin the Wolf,
Chantecler the Cock, of our medieval fables.

Save: those that believe, ete.—Koran xxxviii. 23. ot is a
word corresponding with s.\, and signifies the making one’s self
secure and trustful in God. .le is augmentative to express
indefiniteness or wonder.

After a time I recollected him.—Koran xii. 45. For the
meanings of i\, see Lane. The various readings and inter-
pretations given by Baydawi at the above passage of the Koran
cannot apply to xi. 11, where the meaning is clearly a certain time.

After whose fashioning.—Arab. Prov. I, 814. Compare
Koran, xix. 28.

Whose sprite.—The place named ji.c was a residence of the
Jinn, so that whoever does a thing wonderfully or beautifully is
said to be ‘Abkari, i.e. a sprite of ‘Abkar. The Jinn were
supposed to haunt desolate regions, particularly those which had
been the home of wicked races of men destroyed by God. Such


NOTES. 479


was the region called Yabrin, and the region called Wabar, which
lay between it and Yemen, and was named after Wabar, son of
Trem son of Shem. ‘Abkar is said to have been in the region of
Yemameh. The ‘Abkar spoken of by Imr al Kays (Diwan,
p. 26 Ar. Text), seems to have no connection with the home
of the Jinn, The poet compares the sound of the pebbles
scattered by the hoofs of his camel to the sound of coin examined
on a table in ‘Abkar. The Arabs used the word Jinn to express
the spirit or energy of a man: compare Hamaseh, p. 182,
where a poet says, “My Jinn have not fled, my file is not
blunted, my birds have not drooped from fear.” In the com- |
mentary to this verse it is said that according to Abd ‘Ala
the Arabs compare an energetic man to a Jinnt or a Shaytan.
This and the foregoing expression are taken from a Tradition
of the Prophet which is given by Sherishi as follows ;—Said the
‘Prophet, “I saw in a dream is if I stood by a well, and looked
at the people; then came Abd Bekr, and drew a bucket or
two, and grew weak with it, and God forgave him; then came
“Omar, and the bucket (454) turned into larger bucket (> 2,2)
in his hand, and I never saw such an ‘Abkart among men,
working as he worked, until the people were watered and at rest.
millaely atl) ys So ai Gis Sled! ye Bie jl
The original meaning of 5,5 is a cut or stroke, as you say of a
strong man who severs a bar of wood with his sword, “ No one
can strike his stroke.” ;

A heated eye—a ship’s companionship.—The first of these
expressions denotes anger, dislike, or,contempt; the second
is a modern phrase, meaning a short-lived acquaintance, such as
is made during a voyage, and ceases at the end of it.

The sewer, the latrina.—For the various names of this place
see what Sherishi is pleased to call a pretty story, in De Sacy’s
commentary to the Forty-seventh Assembly. The original
meaning is a garden. The metre of these verses is kdmil.

Drooped his eyelid over his mote. Was silent in shame and
repentance.


.


480 NOTES.


THE TWENTY-THIRD ASSEMBLY.


The Kata would not find its way.—lIt is related of the bird
Kata that it will leave its chicks at dawn and go to drink at a
place a night’s march off, and will return, bringing water to the
chicks, in the forenoon ; that again in the early afternoon it will
fly to the place once more, returning to bring water a second
time in the evening; in doing this it never loses its way to the
nest.

The domain of the Khalifate.—The original meaning of | «>
is a place of pasture or of water taken by some chief or power-
ful person, and prohibited to others. Thus Kolayb Wa’il,
the powerful chief of the Nejd, had his > in the district
of Kasim, and would allow no cattle to be pastured where the
sound of his dog’s bark could be heard (see note to Sixteenth
Assembly). According to the authors cited in Lane’s Lexicon,
others did this: “It was a custom of the noble among the
Arabs in the time of the Ignorance, when he alighted in a district
that pleased him, to incite a dog to bark, and to prohibit for his
own special friends or dependents the space throughout which
the bark of the dog was heard, while he shared with the people
in the other places of pasture around it. But the Prophet for-
bade this and said, ‘ There shall be no ist except for God and
his Apostle,’ meaning except for the horses employed in war
against the unbelievers, and the camels taken for the poor rate.”
In the present passage it signifies merely the Imperial domain


. or Court, that is, the city of Bagdad.


The Precinct.— 1,> is an open space round a castle, in which
horses are exercised and the public meet; or it may be a space
round a city. :

Sitting squarely. That is, he sat upon his buttocks with his
legs equally crossed, which is a dignified position, as distin-
guished from | t>-, he sat with his knees on the ground and his
buttocks resting on his heels, or on the left foot bent sideways
beneath, which is the position of those who argue together, as


NOTES. 481 .


the plaintiff and defendant in a suit; and also as distinguished
from tl, he sat on his buttocks, leaning back, and having his
feet on the ground and his knees raised.

Set his foot on high.—Set his —sS, or ankle, on high, so
that the lowest part of him may be higher than the highest part
of his companions. The word also has received the significa-
tion of honour by which a man is established and made firm, as
on his ankle; thus it is said, ‘God exalt his ka‘b,” and “ The
kab of the tribe is gone,” that is their fortune and reputation.

Made fruitful: fecundated by instruction, as the female palm
tree is fecundated by the spadix of the male, which is bruised
and sprinkled upon it, or “by the insertion of a stalk of a
raceme of the male tree into the spathe of the female, after
shaking off the pollen of the former upon the spadix of the
female.” (Lane on »'). But according to Sherishi it means
“he drank the milk of my i=,” that is, “of my milch camel.”

Broken the staff.—It was said of one who became a heretic or
introduced discord that he “ broke the staff of the Moslems,”
and shukk al ‘asa became a synonym for schism. When one
quarrelled with his tribe, and left it, he was said “to break its
staff.” TLartri uses the phrase more literally here in the sense’
of injuring, since one is injured when his staff, which is his
strength, is broken.

The white and yellow : silver and gold coin.

Did he flay, or transform, or copy.—Plagiarism, iy, forms a
division of the Arabic rhetoric, since the critics have sought to
lay down rales strictly defining how far it is admissible. A
sufficient exposition of the subject is given in the Mukhtasar al
Ma‘ani (Calcutta, 1813), p. 651. M. Garcin de Tassy’s trans-
lation of the Persian treatise had@ik al baldghah, Paris, 1844,
may also be advantageously consulted. In this and the follow-
ing notes I have referred’ to the Mukhtasar, or shorter com-
mentary, instead of the Mutawwal, or longer commentary, of
which I have a printed edition, because the former is more
accessible, and quite sufficient for the purposes of the student.
Plagiarism is divided into apparent and hidden; the former


$l


482 NOTES.


being that which one will detect by having the two passages
before him, the other that which conceals itself in an apparent
variety of thought; or, as it is defined in the Mukhtasar, the
apparent is that which borrows the whole meaning, whether it
uses all the words of the original or not. When the entire
passage is taken without a change, even in the disposition of the
words, this is blameable, for it is pure stealing, and is called
copying, or (J\su\, the arrogation to one’s self of another's
verse. ‘Abdallah ibn Az Zobayr did this with two verses of
Man ibn Ows, reciting them in the presence of Mu‘dwiyeh ;
but before he had left the Khalif’s presence, Man came in and
recited a kasideh of his composition, in which these very verses
occurred. The Khalif turned to ‘Abdallah and said, ‘“‘ Didst
thou not say that they were thine?” upon which “Abdalléh was
forced to make a weak excuse. If the plagiary change some or
all‘of the words of a verse into words of corresponding meaning
and measure, this is also blameable, being still pure stealing.
This act, according to De Sacy’s commentary, is called Pa
flaying, and the same verse of Al Hati’eh is quoted both in the
commentary and in the Mukhtasar; but, as we shall see, the
latter work gives the definition of *‘flaying” to the mere
_ borrowing of the author's meaning, without any imitation of
words. If then, according to the Mukhtasar, the plagiary uses
corresponding words, or if he takes all the original author's
words, merely changing their disposition, or if he takes some of
his words, this is called §,le\, making foray, or ¢°* transforma-
tion, a word used of metamorphosis into a lower form, as of a
man into a beast. In the two latter cases it is not essentially
blameable, and may be atoned for if the new verse be better than
the old one. In the Mukhtasar there follow examples from the
poems of Abi Temmim, Al Bohtori, and Al Mutenebbi. Finally,
if the plagiary takes the meaning alone, this is ols! occupation,
because he, as it were, comes and takes possession of the idea;
or Pa flaying, because he strips off the skin of diction which
clothed the idea, and gives it a new one of his own. Similarly,
this may be excusable or blameable, according as a better or


NOTES. 483


worse verse is produced. The species of borrowing called
cksi|, which consists in introducing phrases of the Koran or
the Traditions, which are well known, is not blameable ; nor is
uredi or the insertion of verses or hemistiches from other poets,
if it be done honestly, and without an intention to claim them as
one’s own. I may here observe that “ and ,* have a cor-
respondence in meaning, which is shared by ¢*, and zs.
According to Sherishi, the first means to change from lower to
higher, the second from higher to lower, as the metamorphosis
of a man into a beast; the third signifies the changing -of an
animal into an inanimate object, while the fourth is absolute
corruption or wasting away. Of the verses quoted in De Sacy’s
commentary as an instance of ~, Faris ash Shidy&k, who
criticises the work very severely, says that the word at the end
of the first line should be oS and at the end of the second,
is) from _.u!, he ate voraciously. He is probably right, though
in the Mukhtasar it is written _,.J, as by De Saey. See “La
vie et les aventures de Fariak,” p. 16 of last chapter. According
to Sherishi, the divisions of plagiarism mentioned by Hariri
are according to the system of Abi Mohammed al Hosayn ibn
Waki, who wrote on the plagiarisms of Al Mutenebbi, and
divided them into twenty classes, ten of which are excusable.
These classes Sherishi gives, with instances of each, but the
matter is too long to be treated in these notes.

Poetry the register of the Arabs.—This was a saying of Ibn
* Abbas, the cousin of the Prophet, and the greatest of the early
expounders of the Koran. He was accustomed to quote passages
.of the ancient poets in support of his explanations, and to say,
‘“‘ When ye have a difficulty in the Koran, look for its solution to
the poems, for these are the registers of the Arabs,” It was also
attributed to Mohammed, perhaps by the relation of Ibn ‘Abbas
himself, who desired to maintain the study of poetry amid the
early fanaticism of Islam. It is said, “God distinguished the
Arabs by four things: they have turbans for crowns, and
cam» loops, (see 16th Assembly, ‘they loosed their loops to
me’) for walls, that is as supports for their backs ; and swords


484 NOTES.


for scarves, and poetry for their registers.” This was said because
they were in the habit of referring to poems when they differed
about genealogies, wars, and the like.

Made foray.—Here Hariri uses the technical term of the
rhetoricians. :

O thou who courtest.—These verses are of the second dard
of the first “arid of the Admit, which is ¢ hiv. The measure of
the dard is pes, since the last letter of the EHS? Wy is
dropped, and the letter before it quiesces, so that the foot
becomes (jelive = .ylled. The part of each verse which the
son is accused of appropriating forms a verse in which the ‘ardd
is iye*, and the dard _sjxs, that is, of the normal ysis,
without any change from J.35 or wd.

Turned the back of the shield: became hostile after being
friendly. This expression is found again in the Fortieth
Assembly.

To draw at the same source.—The word oy, is used tech-
nically by the rhetoricians to signify the chance agreement of
two poets in thought or words, when there has been no imitation
of the first by the second. This and the following expression,
“as the hoof oft falls on the hoof-print,” are attributed to
Al Mutenebbi, who, being reproached for borrowing from his
predecessors said, “ Poetry is a hippodrome and poets are steeds,
and there may be a coincidence of thought, as the hoof oft
falls on the hoof-print.”

Verse-completing.—}\>-\_ was in all times a favourite intel-
lectual exercise of the Arabs, whose powers of improvisation
were marvellous. It is when two poets contend by one reciting
a verse which the other must follow with another of the same
metre and rhyme, and with a continuous sense; the former
then has to give a third, and so on, till it is shown which has
the greater imagination and promptitude. Sometimes one uttered
half a verse, which the other had to complete. Imr al Kays was
accustomed to challenge those who claimed the reputation of
poets to eompete with him. Once he challenged Tow’am the
Yeshkeri, and said to him, “If thou be a poet complete the


NOTES. . 485


verses which I shall utter,” and he began “ Dost thou see the
flash gleaming in the night?’ Tow’am continued, “ Like a
Mage’s fire it blazes a blaze.” Imr al Kays: ‘I was wakeful
to observe while slept Abi Shorayh.” Tow’am: “As oft as
I said ‘It now ceases’ it flashed abroad.” Imr al Kays: “ Its
sound was as a murmur in a place unseen ;” Tow’am, “ Like the
she-camels lowing wildly when they meet the herd.” The
poem is given in the Diwan of Imr al Kays, p. 4], Arab. Text.
When the poet found that he had an equal he bound himself
by an oath never again to contend in poetry. ‘Akil ibn ‘Ul-
lafeh, a poet of Koraysh, and a man in high esteem, since the
Khalif Yezid ibn “Abd al Melik married one of his daughters,
amused himself on a journey by thus improvising verses with his
son and daughter. He recited a verse, then his son followed it with
another, and his daughter with a third, all being in the metre
tawtl, Unfortunately one of his daughter's verses was as fol-
lows: “They were giddy, as though drowsiness had given them
to drink of the wine Sarkhad, the dark red wine, that (when thou
drinkest it) courses through back and feet.” The father exclaimed,
“ By Allah, thou couldst never have so described it unless thou
badst drunk of it,” and at once gave her a flogging. The son,
indignant, shot at his father with an arrow,.and left him wounded
on the ground, taking away his sister. “Akil, however, was not
displeased with his children’s spirit, and uttered some verses in
rejez, which contain a quotation from Abi Akhzam, a person who
was treated in the same way by a son, See the proverb, “I know
the disposition is from Akhzam.” Ar. Prov. I., 658, and Forty-
fourth Assembly. For the above story of “Akil see p. 646 of the
Hamaseh, in which several of his verses are quoted. Al Faraz-
dak, the poet, also practised this kind of poetical exercise.
Tenis: paronomasia or alliteration. (wc or whe signi-
fies, literally, the use in a sentence of two or more words com-
pletely or partially conformable. It belongs to the third part of
rhetoric, which is called the science of 21, the first two parts
being the science of | ilxe or significations, and the science of
wy or exposition, It would be useless to attempt here an


s


486 NOTES.


explanation of the various classes into which tejnis is divided by
the rhetoricians, who distinguish between the conformity of words
which have a common root and the conformity of those which
have not; between the conformity of words according as they
do or do not belong to the same part of speech; between the
conformity of two words and the conformity of one word with
another and part of a third ; between conformity of both sound
and written character and conformity of sound alone ; who,
in short, have analysed the art and given names to its every
variety. Those who desire to become acquainted with the
subject will find it fully treated in the Mukhtasar, p. 621. The
science of oeed the third part of rhetoric, is concerned with the
embellishment of discourse, and is divided into two parts, Spee.
and all; the first treating of antithesis, hyperbole, and the
like ; and the second having to do with words, and expounding
not only all that may be included under the head of paronomasia,
but all the artifices of thyme and orthography of which 1 examples
may be found i in Hariri’s work. See rd te 5 3), Mukh-
tasar, p. 631; ee, p. 637; dij\ye, p. 642; 5, p. 644; at,
that is the construction of a poem in which a part of each verse
may be taken away, as in the present Assembly, p. 645. In the
treatise translated by M. Garcin de Tassy mention is made
of compositions with pointed or unpointed, with joined or dis-
joined letters. The Arabs have taken great pains to record all
the instances of ¢ejnis which appear in the Koran. Most of
these, however, are evidently spontaneous and unconscious,
and are far from resembling the laboured artifices of subsequent
generations. Among these may be cited xxvii. 22; xxx. 54,
55; c. 7, 8; civ. 1. The last is rather an instance of glsl.
The word d\) is used by the Governor in the general sense
of eloquence ; but in the technical language of the rhetoricians
it signifies the first two divisions of the art of rhetoric, which
have for their object the avoiding of error in bringing our con-
ceptions to the minds of others. The treatise of Nasif al Yazaji,
called ‘Akd al Juman, is a good compendium on this subject
from its terseness and the clearness of its definitions.


NOTES. 487


‘


Dark red of lip.—A dark red, verging cn’ blackness, in the
inner part of the lip was looked upon as beautiful by the Arabs.

The winning steed~the second in the course.~-The horses in a
race had epithets according to the order in which they arrived at
the winning-post. In the Hamaseh, p. 46, Arab. Text, these
names are given in two different ways. In one list the first
horse is called sdbik or mujelli, because he makes his owner
illustrious or conspicuous ;. the second is calied musalli, because
his head is on the Lo of the preceding horse; the third, musedli,
because he consoles his owner. The fourth is called ¢4%; the
fifth, murtdéh ; the sixth, ‘ati; the seventh, mu’ammal; the eighth,
hazi; the ninth, latim, because he is driven away with buffets ;
and the tenth, sukayt. But, according to other authorities,
seven out of the ten horses were entitled to a share of the prize,
in analogy with the game of maysir ; and, the names of the first
three remaining as in the last list, the fourth was called ‘ézi/,
the fifth murtdh, the sixth hazi, the seventh mu’ammal. The
three horses which gained nothing were called latim, waghd,
and sukayt. Sherishi ascribes to Al Asmat the derivation of
musalli, which has been given, and he relates that a man versed
in the traditions of the Arabs explained the meanings of all the
terms to the Khalif Muttaki. He also quotes some verses of Ibn
al Anbari, which unite all these epithets. They are the same as
in the first list of the Hamaseh, except that haz? is placed before
mu'ammal, Nasif al Yazaji has also united them in some verses
of his sixth Assembly; but he makes the eighth horse khati,
probably a misprint. The list in De Sacy’s commentary varies
from these, and gives the name of /iski/ to the last horse. _

There is a ruddy-lipped one.—Metre tawil. s,>\ represents
the same quality as _ «ll, the having a lip of a dark ruddiness,
approaching to blackness. In some lines quoted at p. 425, De
Sacy’s ed., Al Bohtori couples .sy>\ and jy>1, “dark-lipped,”
and ‘‘ having eyes of strongly contrasted black and white,” as
marks of beauty. Tarafeh (Moallakah, v. 6) says, “In the
tribe is a dark-lipped one, like a fawn that browses on the fruit
of the ardk, wearing two necklaces of the pearl and the topaz.”


488 . NOTES.


These lines, according to the Governor’s desire, are full of plays
on words and alliterations. In connection with this kind of
composition the student is referred to the poem of At Tantarani
and De Sacy’s notes thereon. Chrest. Arabe, Vol. II.

Gathers the dew of her mouth— is, is here a masdar, with
the sense of sucking or draining. That the expression is not
to be understood quite figuratively is shown by many passages of
the Arab poets.

Like a pair of fire-staves in their case.—Hartri uses this proverb
merely to express resemblance between the two, but as commonly
used it is not significant of praise, but of contempt. See Arab.
Prov. I. 585, “A pair of fire-staves in a patched bag;” and II.
432, “ There is nothing in his quiver but a pair of fire-staves ;”
used of'weak and worthless persons. Another proverbial expres-
sion for complete equality or resemblance is, ‘“‘ Ye are as the
two knees of the male camel,” a saying uttered by Harim ibn
Kotbah, the Fezari, when he was made jadge in the mundfarah
between ‘Amir ibn Tofayl and ‘Alkamat ibn ‘Olatheh, See
De Sacy’s commentary to Twenty-sixth Assembly ; also Arab.
Prov. II. 861. The subject has been mentioned in a former
note to this volume. The calling the father and son “a pair
of fire-staves,” may have reference to the often repeated meta-
phor of eliciting a spark, in the sense of producing an original
idea.

Spends of what God has given him.—Koran xv. 7,

Pardon thy brother.—Metre kémil.

Threm me off.—,>-} is literally to startle a bird, so that it flies
away. The »>\; was one who took omens from the flight of
birds, which he frightened by making a noise or throwing a
stone. :

The Day of Fear.—The day of death or resurrection.

Roha,—Ar Roha was the name given by the Arab conquerors
to the city of Edessa, in northern Mesopotamia; a place which,
under various names, has preserved its importance from the
beginning of history to the present times. It is identified by
some with Ur of the Chaldees; and tradition acribes its found-


ex. ber
. NOTES. 489


ation to Nimrod. Natural advantages, ard particularly ‘the
large supply of water, marked it at an early period as a fit
spot for settlement, and it may contend with Damascus for
the honour of being the most-ancient city in Western Asia.
Under the Seleucid it was called Callirhoe or Antiochea. Its
monarch Abgarus is associated with a well-known Christian
legend. The position which it holds in the history of the early
Christian Church, and of the Syriac language, needs only to
be alluded to. At one time it is said to have had 300 monas-
teries. It was conquered by the Arabs in the first days of
the Khalifate, and is said by Sherishi to have received the name
of Ar Roha from Roha ibn al Belendi ibn Malik, who settled
there. It was-captured during the first Crusade, and became
a Christian principality under Baldwin, brother of Godfrey, who
ruled it from 1097 to 1100, before he became king of Jerusalem.
It was thus in Frankish hands at the time the Assemblies
were composed, and there is a propriety in making Abd Zayd
speak of it as a place of refuge. ° It was afterwards, under
the reign of Joscelin II., captured by the Sultan ‘Imad ad
Din, who committed frightful massacres. This calamity was
the chief cause of the next Crusade. Yet in the time of Abi’l
Faraj (Barhebreus) it still contained fifteen churches. It
was taken and plundered by Tamerlane in his campaign against
Bajazet. In the 17th century the Turks changed its name
to Orfa, and it is now one of the most flourishing cities of the
empire, having a population of 40,000 souls, and being the
chief entrepdt for the trade between Kurdistan and the coast.
Orfa contains a fine mosque, called the jdmi* of Abraham, and .a
little lake near the city is called the Pool of Abraham. The
river Scirtus, on which Edessa was situated, is now called Daysan.
Sohayl and Soka meet.—Sohayl is the star Canopus. Soha
is a star among the Bendt an Nash. I think it is the little star
which is close to the second of the three which form the tail of
the Greater Bear. As Sohay] is used to figure something great
and brilliant, so Soha is the example of that which is difficult
to be discerned. Compare the verse in the Thirty-second


490 NOTES.


Assembly: “How many riddles, which were like Soha in
obscurity, have become suns by my explaining.” Also in
Thirty-sixth, “ We discerned both Soha and the moon;” that
is, the obscure and the evident. To perceive this star was
looked upon by the Arabs as the test of a good eyesight. The
proverb, “I show her Soha, and she shows me the moon,”
Arab. Prov. I. 527, where it is no doubt wrongly quoted,
was uttered by Ibn al Ghazz, the Ay&di. There was in the time
of the Ignorance a very tall and beautiful woman, who was
of such great strength that she defied any man to ravish her, for
she was a virgin. Ibn al Ghazz wagered with her a hundred
camels that he would be able to accomplish this. When he
assailed her she found him of irresistible strength, and by
the time he had won the wager she was almost senseless. He
said to her, “‘ How is thy eye-sight ; dost thou see Soha?” and
she answered, in her confusion, ‘‘That is it,” pointing to the
moon. He said laughing, “I show her Soha, and she shows
me the moon,” which became proverbial. I have endeavoured,
from the two legends related by Maydani, to make a more
reasonable explanation of the proverb.

Who lent him the suit (dast).—A poor play on words oceurs
in this sentence through the repetition of the word dast. Com-

pare the verses at the end of the Eleventh Assembly.

Abi: Kayd.—The Father of Deceit.

The Imém.—The Khalif is thus called because he is the
exemplar of the people or his subjects.

Equivocate, or gloze.— Jj, is “the turning a verse of the
Koran from its apparent meaning to a meaning which it bears
or admits, when the latter is agreeable with the Scripture and
the Sunneh ” (Lane). Sherishi defines it as the making a
promise inwardly in anather sense from what the words express
to the hearer, that is, making a mental reservation.

As Samuel kept it—The Jew Samuel ibn ‘Adiya is an ex-
emplar of good faith among the Arabs, so that it is said, ‘‘ More
faithful than Samuel,” Arab. Prov. II. 828. He was lord of a
castle called Al Ablak in Tayma, a place on the south-western


NOTES. 491


border of the sandy desert which lies between the Jowf and
Jebel Shammar. The act which has made his name famous
was as follows: The prince poet Imral Kays was brought by
his feud with the Bend Asad, on whom he desired to avenge
the death of his father Hojr, into the condition of an outlaw,
eos. Pursued by the agents of Munthir king of Hira, he
took refuge among the Bend Tay; but when discord broke out
among these on his account he left them and betook himself to
a man of the Fazérah named ‘Amr son of Jabir. This ‘Amr
‘told him that the dwellers in tents could not protect him, but
that if Imr al Kays desired he would conduct him to one who
would give him a better protection than Cesar. Imr al Kays
accepted the offer, and his host gave him in charge to an-
other Faziri, who brought him to Samuel’s castle of Al. Ablak.
Here he was well received, and recited a poem which he had
composed in honour of his protector. He dwelt with him some
time, and Samuel gave him beasts with which to travel to Cesar
(the emperor Justinian), whose favour and aid against his
enemies he had resolved to.implore. Imr al Kays left in
Samuel’s keeping his daughter and all his property, of which
the most valuable objects were five cuirasses, or breast-mails,
having respectively the names Al Fadfadah, “the large;” As
Safiyeh, “the bright ;” Al Muhsineh, “the protectress;” Al
Khirrik, “the goodly or excellent;” and Umm ath thuydl,
*‘ the skirted ;” that is, probably, having skirts of mail descend-
ing over the hips. Imr al Kays repaired to Constantinople,
where he was well received by the Emperor. There is reason
to believe that he is the person spoken of by Procopius and
Nonnosus (Caussin de Perceval, Essai, Vol. II. p. 316). The
rest of his life is but a legend. It is related in the Kitab al
Aghani (see the extract in M‘Guckin de Slane’s Diwan of Imr
al Kays) that a certain Arab of the Benh Asad, whose brother
had been slain by Imr al Kays, came to Constantinople, and
calumniated the fugitive, whom the Kaysar had placed at the
head of an army. He said that Imr al Kays was a debauched
_ man, who had not only seduced the Emperor’s daughter, but


492 NOTES.


had composed verses on the subject dishonourable to the Im-
perial House. On this the Emperor sent him a poisoned shirt,
which, as soon as he put it on, began to consume him, so that
his flesh fell from him. Hence he is called Tha 1 Kordh, ** the
man with the ulcers.” The intrigue with a Greek lady of high
station is probable; and to it the poet is said to allude when he
describes his entry into a married woman’s chamber in the first
poem of the Diwan, p. 20, Arab. Text. According to M. de Slane,
the mistress of Imr al Kays was probably Arabia, the daughter
of Justin II, It is certain, however, that Imr al Kays died at
Ancyra; probably of some leprous disease, which gave rise to
the legend. When his death was known, the Ghasséni prince
Harith resolved to possess himself of the cuirasses left in the
_charge of Samuel. He put himself at the head of his troops
and summoned Samuel to give them up. The Jewish chief
shut himself up in his castle and refused. But one day an
infant son of Samuel, being with his nurse outside the castle,
was seized by, Harith, who then summoned Samuel to a parley.
Samuel appeared on the wall, and Harith repeated his demand,
with the threat that if it were not complied with he would put the
child to death. Samuel asked time for consideration, and it was
granted. He then called all his people to counsel, and they
advised him to give up the property and save the child. But
when he came again on the wall he said, “I cannot give up the
cuirasses and break faith; do what thou wilt with the boy, for
perfidy is a collar that never wears out; this boy will leave
brothers behind him.” Then Harith killed the child before the
father’s eyes ; but was forcéd after a time to give up the siege.
When the season of the pilgrimage came, Samuel took the
cuirasses and delivered them to the heirs of Imr al Kays at the
fair of ‘Okaz. This Samuel was, like so many. of the noble
Arabs of that age, a poet, and to him are attributed some fine
verses contained in the HamAseh, p. 49. For other persons who
are exemplars of faith-keeping among the Arabs, see Arab. Prov.
IT. 880 and following pages. One of these owes his reputation,
like Samuel, to good faith towards the gifted and unhappy Imr


NOTES. 493


al Kays. This is Abi Hanbal at Ta’i, who, when his two wives
solicited him, the one to give up, and the other to protect, the
Prince, milked a two-year-old ewe, and, drinking the milk,
exclaimed, “ By God, I shall never break faith as long as this
contents me.” So that it is said, “ More faith-keeping than
Ab& Hanbal.” :


THE TWENTY-FOURTH ASSEMBLY.


The portion of Ar Rabi.—A large and populous quarter or
suburb of Bagdad was known by the name of the Portion of Ar
Rabi’, because the ground had been given by Al Mansir to his
hdjib or chamberlain, Abd ’1 Fadl ar Rabi ibn Yanus. The life
of this personage, who enjoyed the greatest power during the
reigns of his patron and of Al Mahdi, is to be found in Ibn Khal-
likaén. He was of low origin, though something was known of his
pedigree, since it was said that his ancestor, Abi Farwat al Haffar,
had been a slave of the Khalif ‘Othman ibn ‘Affin, and, having
received his freedom, had become a grave-digger, whence his
surname. Ibn Khallikan relates that “Ar Rabi died towards
the beginning of the year 170 (a.p. 786), but At Tabari‘places
his death in 169. Some say that he was poisoned by the Khalif
Al Hadi.” Ar Rabi was an able but unscrupulous. man. There
is reason to believe that he was concerned in the death of Al
Mansir’s nephew, ‘Abd al Wahhab, whose rivalry the Khalif
feared for his own son Mahdi. Under Mahdi’s reign Ar Rabi
showed himself a military commander of ability in Asia Minor,
but his treachery towards the wazir Abi ‘Abd allah, whose
destruction he accomplished by persuading the Khalif that the
wazir had brought up his son Mohammed as a zindtk, or free-
thinker, shows him to have been capable of the worst means to
gain his ends, For a full account of him, see Weil, Geschichte
der Chalifen.


494 NOTES.


The two boon-companions of Jathimeh.—This was Jathimet al
Abrash, son of M&lik the Azdi, the famous king of the Arabs of
Irak, and celebrated for his pride and grandeur’ in the popular
legends. It was the custom of the Arabs to associate by, threes
in their feastings, so that each man had two boon-companions.
But such was the pride of Jathimeh that he would drink with
none of mortal race; but declared that the Farkadan alone
should be his boon-companions; and to these stars cups were
filled whenever the king caroused, and the liquor was poured out
as if they had indeed drunk. But it came to pass at last that the
king’s nephew ‘Amr ibn ‘Adi was lost in the Semdweh, or
Syrian desert. This ‘Amr was son of ‘Adi ibn Nasr and
Rakash the king’s sister, whose adventure has been mentioned
in the Introduction. It will be remembered that‘ Adi, a youth.
of princely blood, was one of the king’s pages, and that he and
Rakaésh having mutually fallen in love, she had persuaded him
to ask the king’s consent after he had well drunken, and then to
consummate the marriage at once. ‘Adi the next day found
Jathimeh so angry at what had passed, that he sought safety in
flight. Rakish gave birth to a son whom Jathimeh adopted,
since he was himself childless. The boy ‘Amr used to go out
with the king’s servants to gather mushrooms, and it happened
* that whenever the servants found fine mushrooms they ate
them, and brought back only the worse kind to the king. But
‘Amr brought back the best he could find, and one day in
presenting them he uttered this verse :—

These are my gathering, and they are the best, though truly every
gatherer has his hand to his mouth.

These last words became proverbial, At Jast‘Amr, who was
eight years old, was lost in,the desert. Some say that he was
carried off by Jinn, by whom he was enchanted a long time.
At last two brothers, named Malik and ‘Okayl, the sons of
Karij, men of Balkayn, who were journeying to the king with
presents, met a young man with his hair and nails grown
long. They said to him, “ Who art thou?” He said, “A son
of the Tanikhiyeh.” (Jathimeh resoned over the Tanikhites of


NOTES. 495


Kodétah, who had founded the city of Hira, under Malik ibn
Zohayr). The adventure which followed is not worth relating ;
it will bé found at Arab. Prov. II. 319, and in De Sacy’s
commentary to the Thirty-ninth Assembly. In the end they
brought him to the king, who offered them whatever reward they
chose to ask. They asked that Jathimeh should take them
as his boon-companions as long as he lived. The king con-
sented, and the three dwelt together for forty years, until death
separated them. ‘Amr was called ‘Amr of the Collar, for when
he was brought back his mother left on him the collar he had
worn in infancy, on which Jathimeh said, “‘Amr has outgrown
the Collar,” which became proverbial in speaking of a thing that
is no longer fitting. This phrase, “the guests of Jathimeh,”’ is
taken by Hariri from some verses of Mutemmim, son of
Nuwayrah, on his brother M4lik, who, having espoused the
cause of the prophetess Sajih, at the head of the tribe of Yarbif,
was cruelly put to death by order of Khalid ibn Al Welid. For
this passage in early Moslem history, see the commentary to
some verses of Mutemmim, p. 370 of Hamaseh. It is to this
Malik that people allude when they say, “A man, but not
like Malik :” Arab. Prov. II. 213.

Assumed its gilding ee adorned itself.—These words are
from Koran x. 25. «-~zj! is explained to be primitively
tnd ap by an tdghdm of frequent occurrence in the Koran.
But it is also read my 2351 with the .s treated as 3 sound letter,
and wok y}\ like ewslasl.

The headstrong ruddy wine. iad i ig an epithet of a horse,
meaning “ of a dark bay colour.” The word Uys, therefore,
is fitly coupled with it. For the former word compare Mo alla-
kah of Tarafeh, v. 59: “Of the things.that I love one is to
be beforehand with the women who would blame me, and to
drink the dark-red wine, that foams when thou mix it with
water.”

There intruded on us.—At the proverb, “ More intrusive than
Tofayl,” Arab. Prov. II. 838, Maydani remarks that the
Arabs of the desert called him who came unbidden to eat y's


496 NOTES.


and him who came unbidden to drink J<\, ; but that the people
of towns called the former also J.\,.. Hariri, however, uses
the word here in its legitimate meaning, since the party were
engaged in drinking.

How long, Suéd.—The metre of these lines is oily, which is
a metre of the second circle, or isl sl, 80 called because
the feet of all thé metres it contains are seven-lettered. The two
metres of this circle which are in use are.the wdéfir and hdmil.
which differ only by the respective positions of the two com-
ponent parts of the foot, the wdfr having the radical foot
wks, made up of a Eps? Oy, followed by & (5, dels,
while the Admil has the derivative foot wiclixe, in which the
order is reversed. The normal measure of the wéfir is wlis,
three times in each hemistich, but this is seldom used. The
measure of the present verses belongs to the first (45 yc, which is
dijL%,, and which has one —,é similar to itself. The dk
called hs consists in the dropping the Wiis — ww at the
end of a foot, and quiescing the moved letter before the net
so that packs becomes icke= = oly, which forms the last
foot of each hemistich. Of the Wsl>; there enters most
frequently into this metre wae, which is the quiescing of the
fifth moved letter of the foot, by which .zlelis becomes \acliv.
Examples of this will be found in the verses. There also enters
dic, which is the dropping the fifth moved letter, so that
pplclis becomes wiclie. Another of these licenses, (aii, which
isa oer cil}, made up of was and 3, is less common.

Sufad is a name applied by the Arabs to a cruel and
capricious beauty: see a note to the Introduction. As the
metre shows, it is imperfectly declined, the reason being that it
unites the qualities of a proper name and of feminineness, and
consists of more than three letters: see Alfiyeh of Ibn Malik, v.
664 and commentary. ~

As she drinks to me.—Compare the address of Abi Odayneh
to Al Aswad ibn Al Munthir, inciting him to slay the prisoners
taken from Ghassin,v. 3. Schultens, Mon. Vetust. Arabia, p. 58.

Why he nagbed the first j.cy.— Hariri has, perhaps, taken the


NOTES. 497


idea of this Assembly from an anecdote related of Abt ‘Othman
al Mazini, the grammarian. One day a slave girl happened to
sing in the presence of the Khalif Al Wathik a verse, in which
it was doubtful whether a certain word should be made marfit
or mansib. A discussion arose among the guests ; but the girl
declared that she had the authority of Abd “Othman for the
accusative case. The Khalif then sent for Abd “Othman, and
asked, somewhat contemptuously, of what family he was. The
grammarian replied, “Of the Beni Mazin.” “Of which
Mazin?” said the Khalif; “Is it of Rabi‘ah, or Temim; or
Kays?” “Of Rabi‘ah” was the reply. Then the Khalif, know-
ing that a peculiarity of this tribe was to substitute B for M,
and M for B in pronunciation, asked Aba ‘Othman jocularly,
“S401 L,” “What is thy name?” Now Abd “Othman’s name
was Bekr, and if he had answered according to the pronunciation
with which the Khalif credited him, he would have uttered the
offensive word ‘‘ Mekr,” which means deceit, and have further-
more declared that it was his name, so he replied in a marked
manner “ Bekr.” The Khalif, perceiving his readiness, was
much pleased, and repeating to him the verse asked him his
opinion. He answered that the word must be mangid, and sup-
ported his decision by satisfactory arguments. In the end the
Khalif dismissed him with a present of one thousand denars.
don Khallikén; life of Abi ‘Othman. This anecdote ‘is also
related by Hariri in the Durrah.

Sibawayh.—Ibn Khaldin observes in the Mukaddimeh fi
4 tarikh, that most of the Moslems learned in the law and
in science were of foreign origin, and not of Arab race; though
the Koran, the foundation of all, was an Arab book. Sibawayh
was one of the most eminent of these strangers, who, prizing the
knowledge of the Arab language, law, and religion, above all
that their own countries had produced, devoted themselves to the
learning that had its origin in the schools of Basra and Kufa.
He was a Persian by-birth, and his fall name was ‘Amr ibn
‘Othman ibn Kanbar; the name Sibawayh being a dakad, or

surname, which he received. For the meaning of this appella-
82


498 NOTES.


tion, see Ibn Khallikén, who gives his life; and for its form,
Anthol. Gram. Arabe, p. 151, He was a monia to the Bent 71
Harith ibn Ka‘b. According to the tradition concerning him
adopted by Sherishi, he was born at Bayda, near Shiraz. He early
came to Basra to study, and joined the class of Hammad ibn
Selemeh, who had also instructed Al Asmat (see the latter’s
life in Ibn Khallikén), Sibawayh employed himself in copy-
ing out Traditions; and it would appear that at this early
period of his life he plunged into the controversy respecting
raf and nash; for it is related that while writing from
dictation some words of the Prophet, “There is not one of my
companions ‘ls,o!| Li (w.J,” Sibawayh said that it should be
“layall yw, since »\ was the el of Und. “No,” said Hammad,

‘you are wrong, for this is aly the _»J of exception.” He
then left Hammad to obtain more perfect instruction, and
attached himself to Al Khalil ibn Ahmed. He also studied
under ‘isa ibn “Omar, and in the life of the latter, by Ibn
Khallikin, it is said that Stbawayh’s celebrated work, called
preeminently the Kitab, was founded upon ‘lsa’s work called
gl ele. Sibawayh, according to this account, interpolated
observations of Al Khalil into ‘{sa’s book, and, adding his own
remarks, produced the celebrated compilation which was after-
words looked upon as the standard work on Arabic Grammar.
See also Anthol, Gram. Arabe., p. 381, note 1. Among his
masters were also Yinus ibn Habib and Abd ’1 Khattéb, known
under the name of Al Akhfash the Elder. The discussion con-
cerning the raf“ and nasb, which took place before Ar Reshid,
and the treachery of the Kufian grammarian, Al Kisa’i, and his
pupil Al Amin, son of Hardin, have been already noticed in the
Introduction. The anecdote is given by numerous writers.
It is related by Sherishi that when Sibawayh left the Khalif’s
presence in despair he met his friend Al Akhfash the Younger,
to whom he was in the habit of submitting his writings before
publication, and told him what had occurred. AJ] Akhfash,
indignant, at once sought out Al Kiséi, and put to him a
hundred grammatical questions, accusing him of a mistake in


NOTES. 499


every answer. On this Al Kisé’t asked him if he were Al
Akhfash, and, on his answering in the affirmative, requested him
to undertake the education of his children, to which Al Akhfash
consented. He made the Kufian acquainted with Sibawayh’s
book, and in the end Al Kisa’t repented deeply of the artifice
which had caused Sibawayh’s death. When near his end he
exclaimed to Ar Reshid, “Commander of the Faithful, impose on
me the diyeh (the fine for involuntary homicide), for I fear I have
had a share in killing Stbawayh.” The year and place of the
death of Sibawayh are both disputed. According to a legend
given by Sherishi, he would not return to Basra discredited
after quitting Bagdad, but repaired to Ahwiz, and there made
inquiry if there were any prince with a fondness for grammar.
He was recommended to Talhat ibn Tahir of Khorasan,.and set
out for his court, but was taken ill at Siweh and died. Some
valuable extracts from the Kitéb have been published by De
Sacy in his Anthologie. The work appears to have been early
used as a text book. In the life of Aba ‘Othman al Mazini, who
has been spoken of above, it is related that he refused to teach
the Book of Sibawayh to a ¢himmi or non-Moslem, although
offered a hundred denars ; also that another person having gone
‘through the Book, exclaimed, “God reward thee, I have not
understood a word of it.”

I will announce to you its interpretation —The words of the
butler to Pharaoh before he departs to question Joseph con-
cerning the king’s dream. Koran xii. 45.

Call to me “Come down.”—J\;5 belongs to the class called
Jel “Lot. Words of the form Jie, with the sense of the
imperative, may be formed from triliteral verbs, and are inde-
clinable on the esr. Alfiyeh, vv. 095 and 627. The word
“ Nizdl ” was a challenge to alight and fight on foot.

What is the word?—-The grammatical notes suggested by
this Assembly will be found appended to the author’s Explanation.

If ye return Ireturn.—These words are from the Koran: “If ye
(the unbelievers) return to the fight we (God) will return,” viii.
19. In the Koran the muddri® mejziim is used, but after ..) as


500 . NOTES.


a conditional particle the mddi has the same future signification.
' Extract from Zamakhshari, Anth, Gramm, Arabe, p. 113, Arab.
Text.

We changed from weariness.—The varying of the preposition,
as in this sentence, is a favourite artifice of the author. It has
been imitated in, the translation. ;

Unless every hand endoto me: (jy. signifies “he caused him
to possess (J,> gifts;” it is used with a double mef“di.
Koran. vi: 94, and xxxix. 11.

The light of proof.—At Koran iv. 174, it is said, “ O people,
a proof has come to you from your Lord, and we have sent
down to you a clear light.”

We were astonished, ete.—These words give an instance of the
tenis called 53\\ —S\\, which is when one of the two words
between which the ¢ejnis subsists is shorter than the other, and
you make the correspondence complete by adding to the shorter
a part or the whole of the word next to it. See De Sacy’s-

_ commentary to the Twenty-third Assembly, at word tejnis, and
Mukhtasar, p. 624.

Need is not courtesy.—islia is the showing honour to one by
‘appearing glad at meeting him, and enquiring concerning his
’ condition. This saying is to be found at Arab. Prov. II. 690. It
is used when one shows kindness for a purpose or necessity of
his own, and not out of disinterested courtesy.

Lights up my morning.— According to Sherishi there is a
double meaning in the word -l.c\, which also signifies “redness
of the hair,” used by the author like “ blackness” to typify youth.
The colour i.<, according to the Kamas (cited by Freytag), is
. akin to bayeo, that is the colour of white mixed with red, which
was the colour attributed by the Arabs to the hair of their
Christian enemies. If this be so the verse in oe text me be
also rendered “‘ whitens my fair hair.”

I swear that.—} after a formula of swearing is often followed
by the mddi in a future sense: compare the Fifth Assembly,
“TT will not taste of your meal.” °

Deck itself.— Compare the Forty-aixth Assembly (the first


N TES 501


set of: verses), “ Who has not docked « or clothed ‘his palms with
the cup of wine.’

Mixed drink.— Compare Mo. allakah of ‘Amr ibn Kulthom, v.2,

Cooled of the north wind.—I have translated thus on the
authority of the commentary to v. 32 of the Moallakah of
Lebid. Compare the Burdeh of Ka‘b ibn Zohayr, v. 4.

Gray hair is a guest te whom honour is due.—The meaning is
that if he did not behave with sobriety in his old age he would
not be treating his own gray hair with respect, and that, conse-

- quently, those who pridéd themselves on receiving their guests

with courtesy would blame and contemn him.


EXPLANATION.


-The first and best. ... If his work be good, then his reward
is good; and if his work be evit, then his-reward is evil.—In this ,
case the first ~+ is mangizb through being the + of 6. It
is almost needless to remind the student that ,.,\§ and its e yeluied
verbs (U3 \,01) such as Jb, oh, etl, ple preceded by le, and .
others, make the lakes marfi as their »\, and the nt manstb;
thus differing from the substantive verbs in Latin and in the
languages influenced by Latin grammar. The sion is as if it .
should be said in Latin, “Caius est bonum virum.” Alfiyeh,
y..143. The converse ‘is the case with ,. Pa | and its sisters, where
the idiom is, “ Sané Caium, vir bonus.” Ta the first part of the
sentence alec is the pul of wi, and Fess i is the ~s ; the former -
is marfu', the latter abe, in accordance with this principle.
As to the second + it is said that it is marfi as the Pan of an-
elided inchoative, loss, the full proposition being ps bps
This last is called a dian) dls>, or nominal proposition, of
which thé property is that the ye shall agree in W\,c| with the
\ai.~, or in other words, be put in the same case with it. It is
then said by the author that ..,\f and its noun are elided because
the conditional particle ..,| aii to their virtual presence or
influence. For this see Alft oy v. 155, where it is said that’, '$
and its ism are elided after...) and 4), while the khabar einai
as in the verse uttered by Noman ibn al Monee to Rabi‘ ibn


502 ‘NOTES.


Ziyad, when the latter, who was his boon-companion, was accused
before him in satirical verse by the poet Lebid of being leprous,
in revenge for the ill-will which Rabi‘ had instilled into the king
towards the pent Ja far.
S fy Gos OL US be J 05

It is also said that the inchoative is elided because the —3, which
is the answer to the condition, points to it; since an inchoative
generally follows 3. Grammarians explain the many abrupt
forms of Arabic speech, and the anomalies of the é‘rdd by the
supposed elision, —3i>, of the mubtada or khabar, or both
together, and display wonderful ingenuity and power of analysis
in thus accounting for idioms which arose among a simple un-
lettered race, which sought only to express its thoughts as
vigorously and emphatically as possible. .On this subject con-
sult Alfiyeh, 136th and following verses ; Nasif’s Grammar,
chapter on » scl, wast, p. 71. -Whenever anything is elided,
there should be, if the speech is to be intelligible, a JJo, that is,
something which shows or points to the nature and meaning of
what is elided; in this case the elision is called jest, abbrevia-
tion; but otherwise it is called jac, Thus, in the text the
-author speaks, of the do of .(| and of Wj, To find the io
the grammarians sometimes resort to fanciful artifices. With
respect to —3, which is called b,t)| ule, it is naturally
followed by a mubtada; since it is a disjoining particle, and
must commence a new proposition, either fully or elliptically
expressed. Such a proposition has what the grammarians call a
place in the z rdb, oe Ne ye Je W ilu, which is the place of
Jezm, since in such a phrase as jail ais io the verb is mejztim,
See extract from Ibn Hishim; Anthol. Gramm. Arabe, p. 74,
Arab. Text, and De Sacy’s Grammar, Vol. II. paragraph 1179.
The mubtada is commonly elided after 3, as in Koran xii. 46,
daudohs tLe Z Use oye, that is, audi alens tel. Cae oye

The second mode is that you should nasb both.—In this case
the nagb of the first cS requires no further explanation than has
been given in the former case. The % (Jyriv or Janie, that is,


NOTES. 503


the object of the verb’s action, is, according to the Arab gram-
marians, not only the objective complement of the active verb,
as ‘Aur in the sentence “ Zayd beat Amr,” but also that of the
passive verb, either absolutely, GiL4, as the word “ beating” in
the sentence “‘Zayd was beaten a beating,” or otherwise, as
“‘denar” in the sentence, “ Zayd was given a denar.” It would
also be, I think, allowable to describe the second +. in this
case as mansith by ie or specification ; since it contains the
signification of ays and explains what goes before, as ni
Vet Zsl. See Alfiyeh, v. 356.

The third mode is that you should raf" both—In this case
the first + is the ism, and has us? the Ahabar of WS, the
latter being virtually mansid. The second +. is marfit, as
in the first case, as the khabar of the elided mubtada. On
this agreement in the irdb between the mubtada and the
khabar in a proposition, there are various explanations among
the grammarians. Ibn Malik’s verse on the subject is, “ Make
the mubtada to be marfi by its ibtidé (or because it commences
the sentence), and make the khabar to be marfu by the mub-
tada. Ibn ‘Aktl then says that the teaching of Sibawayh and

‘the generality of the Basrians was thus; and that they declared _
the regent, els, on the mubtada to be logical, CSgere, in that
the noun was without any verbal regent except in a certain
exceptional case, which it is.needless to dwell on here. On the
other hand, the regent on the khadar is verbal and consists of
the mubtada.. But the teaching of others is that the regent on
both the mubtada and the khabar is the ibtidd, and with-respect
to both it is logical. Another opinion is that the mubtada is
marfi: by the ibtidd, and the khabar is marfi* both by the
ibtidd and the mubtada. It is also said that there is reciprocity
between them, and that each makes the.other marfi. The
correct opinion is held to be that of Sibawayh.

And it may be tha¥ the first ps is raf‘ed through being the
agent of .\S; and that the .,\6 which receives a virtual power here
is the complete attributive ob ths class of verbs known as
“ yS and its sisters,” are called ici, “incomplete verbs,”


504 NOTES.


because they do not, like other verbs, contain an attribute. But
S$ and _jle may be used as attributive verbs with the significa-
tion “‘ to exist,” and then they do not require a khabar. This
will be easily understood from the text. Thus in English we
may eay, “ God is,” in the sense of “ God exists ;” and in that
case “is” requires no word after it to give a complete sense.

The fourth and weakest mode.—This requires no explanation.

As for the noun that alternates.—This and the following riddle
bring us to one of the most important and difficult questions
connected with Arabic grammar; a question not suggested by
the ingenuity of scholars, but one which every beginner must
attempt to understand, and which yet remains insoluble by the
greatest masters of the language. It is the double form of
declension of Arabic nouns, which, according to our terminology,
are divided into triptots and diptots; the latter having ‘an in-
complete iréd without tanwin, and being mejrér with the fethah
instead of the kesreh. It is possible that this strange diversity,
for which all the theories of grammarians give no satisfactory
explanation, may have arisen from the fusion or mutual action
of two great dialects, one diptotic, the other triptoti¢ in its
declensions. Even at the present day the incomplete declension
prevails over a great part of Arabia (Palgrave, I., p. 464). But
accepting, as a commentator of Hariri is bound to do, the prin-
ciples of the grammarians, I must dismiss such scientific con-
siderations, and treat the subject in the traditional manner. It
is well worthy of attention, since it is frequently discussed
by native authors, and yet has received insufficient notice, or no
notice at all, from the European compilers of grammars.

Two kinds of declension are, according to the Arabic gramma-
rians, to be found in the language; the one that proper to the
noun, the other that proper to the verb. The noun is declined
with the canwin, the damm, the feth, and the kesr ; the verb with
the damm, the feth, and the jezm. “Thus the tanwin and the kesr
are proper to the noun, and the jezm is proper to the verb. If
then a noun be declined without the tanwin and the esr,
but with the damm and feth only, its declension is assimilated


NOTES. 505


|

to that of the verb, Such is the case with the class of nouns
which we are considering. - If the noun be fully declinable, that
is with the tanwin and kesr, it is called oa OOF because
it possesses its full nominality, GuJt we £25, in form as well
as meaning. If it be not fully declinable it is called noe
el 5 a because it does not possess all the characteristics of a
noun in form, but is assimilated to the character of a verb.

Now, according to all grammarians, the noun is.fundamental, or
primitive, and the verb is derivative, or secondary. This doc : 5
of the verb is two-fold ; firstly, logical, yx, inasmuch as
the noun gives a perfect sense in itself, while the verb requires a
noun to be joined to it; secondly, i, formal or etymological.
The schools of Basra and Kufa agree as to the former cause of the
verb’s secondariness, but differ as to the latter. The Basrians say
that the verb is derived from the noun, that is from the masdar,
supporting their opinion partly on logical grounds, since they
say that the notion of running or eating must precede the notion
he ran, or he ate, and partly on actual linguistic experience,
since there are numbers of verbs which have evidently been
formed from nouns expressing even material objects, as in
English we say “ to steam,” “to sail,” “to post a letter.” This
they give as the cause of the verb’s formal secondariness. The
Kufians, on the other hand, deny the derivation of the verb from
the noun, and make the third person of the preterite the root. But
they equally admit the formal secondariness of the verb, which
they say consists in ¢erkib or composition, since any part of
the verb expresses a notion compounded of the idea of the
verb and a subject, while the noun expresses only a simple
notion, and as the compounded is secondary to the simple, there-
fore the verb is formally secondary to the noun. It is somewhat
difficult to distinguish this formal secondariness from the logical
secondariness. But the distinction will be perceived if we
consider the logical secondariness to consist in the dependence
of the abstract verb on a noun (or pronoun), for a complete
meaning, and the formal secondariness to consist in the actual


506 NOTES.


presence, real or implied, of a ».«<, or pronoun, in every part of
the verb. It must be remembered that in each tense and person
the «6 is supposed to exist, either 5,4, apparent, or plus,
hidden, Thus, in 2, and sh the damir is hidden; s0,
also, it is hidden in EDO and LG, the ¢@ in both cases
being the mark of the feminine: in some other cases it is
expressed. Hence the Kufians might argue that a verb actually
uttered in language inevitably contained a compounded signi-
fication, By the consent of all, then, the verb has two kinds
of secondariness, the one logical, the other formal or in regard
of utterance,

Now the principle of the grammarians is that the nouns which
have the imperfect declension have it because they correspond
to the verb in these two respects; that is, they combine the two
defects of logical and formal secondariness. Thus a noun
to be imperfectly declined must have two defects, one of the
logical and one of the formal kind; for if both be logical,
or both be formal, it is not imperfectly declined. These defects
are nine in number: wos, the quality of description or of
being an adjective; Sxl 5, determination as a proper
name; ,jadi, deviation of form in a word, while its meaning
remains the same, as when pe is turned .into ne west,
composition ; LA, the quality of being a foreign word ;
esi, the plural number; ctwlt!, the being feminine;
Jail jy, the form of the verb; and Gol J! oell, Wall, that
is, the addition of .,\ to the root, as in .,\0., drunken. Some
writers add five more, making up the number to fourteen;
but these last are useless refinements. These nine qualities
give the noun a character of secondariness, since the adjective
is secondary to the substantive, the determinate noun to the
indeterminate, the deviate to the original form, the compounded
to the simple, the foreign to the Arab, the plural to the singular,
the feminine to the masculine, the form of the verb to the form
of the noun, the augmented word to the unaugmented. Now, it
has been said that the noun, to be imperfectly declined, must


NOTES. 507


have two of these defecta, and, moreover, one of them must
be logical and the other formal. The logical defects are the
first two—the quality of an adjective,‘and the quality of a proper
name; the other defects are formal, that is, affect the form
or utterance of the words themselves. Hence one of the first
two defects must be united with one of the last seven to make
the noun imperfectly declined. This, according to the gram-
marians, is consistent with reason, inasmuch as the first, namely,
the quality of description, represents the adjective, and the second,
the.proper name, represents the substantive ; and so, béetween
them, all nouns are represented. These two are, therefore, the
“ pillars” to which the others are united. Each one of the two
may be combined with the deviation, or the form of the verb, or
the augmentation. But the proper name alone can be combined,
with the foreign word, or the compounded, or the td of the
JSeminine, 80 as to produce imperfect declinability. In this brief
space only principles can be enunciated; the full meaning of
these distinctions can only be understood from the explanations
and examples of Arabic writers.

There are two cases, however, in which one defect is counted
as two. The first concerns the defect of femininity, in the case
of a word ending with the elif of the feminine. The class of
words which are thus made imperfectly declinable will be found
by a reference to any grammar. The reason for the double
power of femininity in this case is that the elif of the feminine
adheres continually to such words as if it were part of the root,
which is not the case with the td of the feminine, which only
attaches inseparably to proper names, except in some rare
cases. Thus, in the case of these nouns it is held that the
elif of the feminine gives them the formal defect of femininity,
while the feminine essentiality which they derive from the.
presence of this e/i/, as a radical, gives them a logical femininity.
They have, therefore, both formal and logical secondariness,
and are, consequently, imperfectly declined.

The second concerns the defect of the quality of the plural,
and affects those plurals which belong to what are called the last


508 NOTES.


forms of the broken plurals, which are diverse from the form

_of any singular. These are plurals of the form 1,5, or eal,
or us, where the first fetter is meftih, and the third letter
is elif, followed by a letter with teshdid, or by two moved letters,
either juxtaposed or divided by a quiescent letter. There are no
singulars of these forms in the Arabic language, and the double
secondariness consists in conveying the notion of plurality, which
is a logical defect, and in diverging from the form of the sin-
gular, which is a formal defect. The two defects, one logical
and the other formal, being combined, such plurals are imper-
fectly declined.

Hariri does not mention in his ¢efsir that the first letter of
such a plural should be meftih, and the same condition is
omitted by other grammarians, since it always co-exists with
the others mentioned; but it is logically necessary to state it,
since there is a form of the singular with the first letter madmim,
as the word laze. Al Ashmfini; Bulak edition, Part II.
p. 461.

Certain grammarians hold that plurals of these forms are
imperfectly declined because they are really or by supposition
plurals of plurals; for the repeated plurals have these forms.
Thus, ls makes gli and wii, and ,i% makes ksi and
ill ; and plurals of the form palo and iGo are held to
correspond to these. According to this theory the logical
secondariness would consist in the quality of plurality, and the
formal secondariness would consist in the assumption of the
form of the mukarrar or repeated plural ; real in the first in-
stance, and by supposition in the second. Other explanations
are given of less plausibility. The opinion that one of the
causes of imperfect declinability is the divergence from the
‘forms of the singular is the teaching of Abt ‘Ali, and has been
generally adopted. The answers to the objections to it are
given by Al Ashmini, Part II. p. 463. On this subject see
also Alfiyeh, and the grammar of Nasif; as well as Anthol.
Gram. Arabe, p. 95 Ar. text. The sense in which the words


NOTES. 509


eile, JH, and Jes, as applied to this declension, are to be
taken will be sufficiently understood from the above.

Some say that this is @ singular form.—In the Seventh
Assembly Hariri uses the singular form JI, y~»; the contrary
opinion appears to rest on a Tradition of the Prophet,-who said
to his followers, us) ad! \,aacl (p. 78 De Sacy’s edition).
Ibn Malik treats jy)! 0 as & singular having the form of a
plural, and therefore imperfectly declinable. Others think that
either declension is lawful.’ Alfiyeh, v.660. Similar words are

tis, a name for the hyena, and \L.>\.b, a man’s name.

As for the » which when it attaches itself—tThis requires
little explanation. As the formal secondariness which is neces-
sary to the imperfect declension arises from divergence from a
singular form, the addition of the x, which gives the plural a
singular form, takes away this condition, and makes the declen-
sion perfect. Alfiyeh, v. 658.

As for the (yw which deposes the regent.—The particle ol is of
two kinds. Firstly, Syduae, that is, “forming a proposition

equivalent to the masdar ;” in this case it combines with the
muddri’, which it causes to be mansib ; thus: ead ol ay) Jy,
I desire that thou stand, is equivalent to Sols ay) wu), I desire
thy standing. So in Koran ii. 180, oS ys oem oly, And
that ye fast i is better Jor you, is equivalent to “ your fasting.”
In this case oN is an (bole, regent, and nasbs the verb, But

ol may also be considered a contraction of i in which case it
is called dacs! pe wae, because the original form is lightened
by taking away the teshdid. io is one of the sisters of ob and
not distinguished from it by Sibawayh, who is of opinion that
the former is originally wl: The property of ot and its sisters
is that they annul (e) the mubtada, their action being the
reverse of (.,\f and its sisters ; for whereas the latter make their
ism manfic ‘ai their Ahabar mansib, the former make their zsm
mangib and their khabar marfi, as 33 \33; 43 I+ These par-
ticles are considered to partake of the nature of the verb, and
are therefore called particles assimilated to verbs (Jleidl hte


510 NOTES.


This resemblance consists, firstly, in their adhering to the noun,
since it is their peculiar property to be prefixed to the mubtada ;
‘secondly, in a logical analogy, since they have the signification
of verbs in expressing emphasis, like oi or comparison, like
os ; thirdly, in a formal analogy, since they are composed of
three or more letters, the last of which is meftih. If this
resemblance to the verb be clearly perceived, the peculiar action
of these particles on the mubtada and the khabar will be readily
understood.

Now when it is said that isl is the lightened from the heavy,
- that is, a contraction of oe it is meant that ra is used in the
signification of * ; but this can only happen under certain con-
ditions. When ol is thus lightened it preserves its regency, é.¢.
its. grammatical effect, but its ism can only be the litt ers
elided (the damir as sha’n is the affixed pronoun » in 21, for
which see the grammars), and the khabar can only be a pro-
position, Ae. Thus in the phrase wil oy; i Cle, the ¥ I
is the Aghtened from the heavy, and its ism is an elided ; the
virtual expression being 81 cule. This damir as sha’n is
mangib as the ism of ||, while the khabar of || is the pro-
position a oy 3, which is in the position of raf“. In this case
the proposition is nominal, is..\, and ol does not require a
dividing particle between itself and its khabar, except in the
case of a negative. But if the proposition be verbal, iles,
distinctions are made. In the case of undeclined verbs, a8 (J
or _ gue, there is no fdsil or dividing particle ; so also where the
verb expresses prayer or imprecation. But in other cases 4
dividing particle is lawful, and to be preferred. In the case in
the text the dividing particle. is what is called (ic! io,
that is _» or 3s. These particles are described as of (wai:
or ps3, because they extend the time from the present to the
fature. We are now able to perceive the meaning of Hariri’s
riddle. If. be prefixed to the verbal proposition then Go is
the lightened from the heavy ; and the sentence ., oo eh bes
str phe, He (God) knows that some of you will be sick,


NOTES. 511
Koran xxiii. 20, is equivalent to al Ars the elided damir as
shan ia the ism of a and is mansib, while oss ete. is the
khabar of ;\ and in the state of raf*. But if there were no.
cw the ol must be considered masdari, and a ndsib of the verb.
It is hardly correct to say that ol here has no regency, since it
nasbs its elided ism the damir as sha’n, and places the proposition
user eho C9 in the state of raf*. But though (f exercises
& regency on the proposition it does not exercise it on the verb
itself, which within that proposition is grammatically unaffected,
and is therefore marfii. Or it may be that Hariri takes the
view that the (w entirely destroys the regency of that which
precedes it on that which follows it; if so we must consider that
mA governs an elided khadar as well as an elided ism; in that
case the takdir would be ,.,Ss 148 al elt. Compare Baydawi
on Koran v. 75.

That which is nasbed as a term of circumstance, On this ques-
tion it will be sufficient to quote Hariri himself, who says in the
Durrah thet when one pronounces swe _ Sf 285, he commits
a fault, because wc is mejrér after .y»» only. Such is the
constant use in the Koran; see ii. 73, 83, 95, etc. The reason,
according to Hariri, that wrt has this peculiarity is that it is
the mother (the origin or principle) of the particles which make
the noun mejrir; for in each class of words that which is
the original is distinguished by properties which the others
do not possess, Thus ne with the esr, is distinguished from its
sisters by the prefixion of (J to its khabar ; thus ,,,\$ alone admits
a verb in the preterite as its khabar; thus, in swearing, the
particle \ alone can be used when the verb, “I swear” is
expressed, and alone can be joined to the pronoun, as 2%.
Whatever may be thought of this reasoning, the usage in the
Arabic language is certainly as the author states.

As to the annexed noun.—The meaning of the author is
that es though its property is to be followed by a noun
mejrir, yet in one case is followed by a mansib, and therefore
cannot be looked upon as in annexion to the noun following ; it
may, consequently, be said to have lost one of its handles or


512 _ NOTES.


links of annexion. The word os or ws belongs to the
class of nouns which are constantly annexed. These are
divided into two classes; firstly, such as require annexion both
logically and formally, and are never used separately ; among
them are (sj, doc, and usp». Secondly, such as require an-
nexion logically though not formally, like JS, and au, and Gl.

Alfiyeh, v. 896; Al Ashméni, Part II. p. 152. (,) is made
indeclinable by the generality of the Arabs, acs it has only
one use, and that an adverbial one; and it only quits its quality
of zarf, when it is mejrér by ye. Indeed it never appears
in the Koran except after .,s, a8 at xi. 1; xviii. 2, 64. The
tribe of Kays decline it; so that at xviii. 2, it is also read
aut ut The noun which follows it is mejrér, except in the case
of 5 3,02, which is mangib by ae or specification ; it is also said
that in this case the noun is the A/abar of an elided ,,,, the
virtual sense being 5,02 Sluis ws. Yet ‘iis 3 jerr is
lawful, and is according to rule, the nasé being the more rare.

The Kufians teach that i, may be marfi after ,. a, through
LAU WS elided, ‘the takdir being ia WIS aS: Alfiyeh,

v. 409. To understand the construction of these sentences it
must be noticed that .,0J is one of the nouns of annexion which
may be annexed to the proposition, being, with the exception of
wiuo, the only zarf of place which has this property. Al
Ashmini, Part II. p. 153. Another way of accounting for
the nasb of 5,2 is that it is assimilated to a mef “al by reason of
wy being assimilated to the ism al fail, and the latter is so
assimilated, since it sometimes has the final ..,, and sometimes
not; the wy 80 far having the pature of tanwin. You would
then say 5,2, as you say \a.j Cols. There are other explana-
tions, but the above are the most satisfactory.

The regent whose last joins his first—On the particles of
calling, sufficient information will be found in the Alfiyeh, v.
578, et seqq. A distinction must be observed between hamzeh,
which is used in calling one who is near, and 1 with medd,
which is used in calling one who is either distant, or in the
predicament of being distant, as when he is inattentive or asleep.


NOTES. 513


The regent whose deputy is more spacious chan he in abode.—
Hariri, in the passage of the Durrah, quoted above, explains, as
he does here, why \ is to be considered the original of the
particles which enter into formulas of swearing, namely, that
it is used when the verb “I swear” is expressed, and also
that the aftixed pronoun may be joined to it. Among the hurif
al jerr ~ ia used only before the name of God, or his epithets,
a8 War {G and aS! 55: Alfiyeh’ v. 366 ; Nasif's grammar,
p. 191. The usage of , is explained by Ibn Hishim, Anthol.
Gram. Arabe, p. 88. It is a harf al jerr in two cases, namely
where it stands for aay, a8 idly, many a region; and where
it is the , of the oath, a8 gust, poll, CZ swear) by the fig tree
and the olive tree: Koran xev. 1. Zamakhshari says (Anthol.
Gram. Arabe, p. 100) that the primitive signification of w is
adhesion, so that when you say “I swear aJb,” you mean “ My
oath adheres to the word God.” He says, further on, that
the , is a substitute for , and the is a substitute for ,;
thus confirming the judgment of Hariri that the Wo is the
original. When Hariri says that , has the sense of union,
he adopts thé opinion of the school of Basra, who hold that the
conjunction “and” conveys only the idea of accompaniment,
and that when you say “ Zayd and “Amr came,” it may be that
Zayd came before “Amr, or after him, or that they both came
together. On the other hand the Kufians teach that the idea of
order is also inherent in the word “ and,” so that what is men-
tioned before it must be considered as prior to what is mentioned
after it. This, however, is refuted by Koran xxiii. 39: ‘There
is nought but the life below ; we die and we live, and we shall
not be raised again.” Here what is later in time is put before
. what is earlier, for it is evident that when the infidels say “ we
live,” they refer to the present life, since they are denying the
resurrection. It must be admitted, however, that according
to Baydawi, “ we die and we live,” is interpreted to mean “ one
generation dies and another lives,” which would remove the
objection to the Kufian theory which is derived from the Koran.

Also the y is larger in dmelling.—The various uses of , are

83


514 NOTES,


given by Ibn Hishim in the passage cited above. That it is
prefixed to the noun, the verb, and the particle, while Ww is
prefixed only to the noun needs no explanation. Its use as
_& substitute for 3), or with ray, understood, has been already
noticed. The rest of the text applies to such phrases as
cpplal the, Wovle ydll alll obs: Us , where the second phe:
is mangib, with the meaning “‘ Do ye think that ye shall enter
into Paradise except God know which of you have warred well,
so that he may know those who are constant?” Koran iii. 136.
Or to such as dive cals asl ue 45 3, “Do not forbid a thing
to men, and (in order to) commit it yourself.”

The place where males put on the veils of women.—This riddle
relates to the grammatical singularity which appears not only in
Arabic but also in Hebrew and Syriac; namely, that the femi-
nine numeral from three to ten is used with the masculine noun,
and the masculine numeral with the feminine noun. The most
reasonable explanation of this phenomenon is that these numerals
are substantives of multitude, the feminine representing in the
Semitic languages the idea of collectiveness. It is as though
you should say in Latin “‘trias filiorum.” The’Arab gram-
marians say that as the feminine fundamentally belongs to the
abstract numeral it is put with the masculine, which is the
fundamental gender ; and as the masculine is secondary in the
numeral it is put with the feminine, which is the secondary
gender. Nasif’s grammar; Al Ashmini, Part III. p. 99; Ewald,
Ausfiihrliches Lehrbuch der Hebraischen Sprache, 7th edition,
p- 650. :

The other questions require no explanation. The sixth riddle
in the Thirty-sixth Assembly applies to the word luv».


THE TWENTY-FIFTH ASSEMBLY.


Keregj.—The city of Kerej, between Ispahan and Hamadan,
sitnated in the hill country of Persian Irak, was the seat of the


NOTES. B15


family of Al ‘Ijli, a powerful Arab house descended from Bekr
ibn Wail. Kerej, according to Sherishi, was sixty parasangs
from Ispahan. It was rebuilt and greatly enlarged by Al
Kasim ibn ‘fea the ‘Ijli, commonly known as Aba Dulaf, a
celebrated general, and a great patron of letters in the time of
the Khalifs Al Ma’min and Al Mo‘tasim. A life of him, or
rather some fragmentary anecdotes respecting him, may be
found in Ibn Khallikén. When Ar Reshid inquired of Aba
Dulaf respecting the state of his country, and received for
answer that it was wasted and desolate, spoiled by Arabs and
Kurds, a certain person present declared that Abi Dalaf had
had a chief share in this devastation. Abi Dulaf then promised
that with the help of the Khalif he would restore the country —
to prosperity, which he did by rebuilding the city of Kerej.

Scorching cold.— signifies the scorching or blasting by a
cold wind, as é by a hot one. At. Koran xxi, 47, it is said
“If but a ddast of the chastisement of thy Lord reach them.”

Sorest torment.—The phrase ‘Ji a,> is derived from a
Tradition of the Prophet, and is defined as such extreme snffer-
ing as makes a man desire death. Abd Horayrah relates that
Mohammed taught him the following rhythmical prayer : eel
Nae Ghats LEAS) LS o5 MN aye 5 Laill pe Cpe Hagel wh
Another Tradition makes the Prophet say that to be refused in
one’s need is jahd al belé’. It is conventionally applied to great
worldly distress, as hopeless indebtedness, or small means with a
large family. _The word o> signifies energy or effort, and is
used several times in the Koran in a phrase signifying ‘the
most energetic or.forcible of your oaths.” See v. 58; vi. 109;
xvi. 40, and other places.

Attendance at the ‘congregation. —Sherishi says that the cold
in the province of Granada had a still greater effect on his
countryman Ibn Sirah, for it prevented him from going even to
prayer. The poet thus addresses the people of -the place :


Sure we may fail at the prayer in your land, and even drink the strong
wine, though a thing forbidden ;
Since we would gladly go to the eternal flame as more gentle and
‘merciful than the cold of Shalir ; 3


516 NOTES.


If my Lord were to cast me into heli on such a day as this I should
say “ How comfortable is hell.”

The author of these irreverent verses was Abi Mohammed
ibn Sarat ash Shantarini (of Santarem), a poverty-stricken poet
of Spain, who lived by bookbinding. He died at Almeria in the
year 517 (a.p. 1123).

And heeded nought.—For this word see Lane’s Lexicon, isthe.

O people.—The metre of these verses is the fifth _2,,5 of the
Pr» the last foot being gyaie. I have divided the translation
into lines as if the measure were mashtir, in accordance with
the exceptional principle of the reez, but it may be that in this
’ particular ‘arid the verse is made up of two hemistiches.

Destroyed : caused them to pass away and perish. Thus,
“‘T think not that this garden will ever perish,” Koran xviii. 33.

My humped camels mourned the morning I made the feast.—
However poorly the Arabs might fare when alone they thought
it due to their reputation for hospitality to feast the stranger to
the utmost extent of their means; and this was generally done
by killing a camel for him, the joints of which were either
roasted at the fire or boiled in large cauldrons : all who chose
to come shared in the feast, and what remained was distributed
among the poor. - The eating of camel’s flesh seems not to have
been universal in the early times among the Arabs. There is -
no mention of its having been used for food by the Hebrew
patriarchs, and it is forbidden by the Mosaic law: Leviticus
xi. 4; Deuteronomy xiv. 7. At the proverb “ Barikish has
sinned against her people,” Arab. Prov. II. 89, it is related that
Bardkish was a wife of Lokman ibn “Ad. Her husband’s tribe
did not feed upon camel, but a son of hers by a former marriage,
going to visit his mother’s family, brought back a joint of camel,
which Lokman, tasting, pronounced to be good food. Barakish,
hearing this and desiring to feed upon camel, said to her husband,
“ Camel us and camel thyself,” meaning, “ Give us camel to eat
and eat it thyself,” which words became proverbial, Arab. Prov.
I. 295. The eating of camel which had been confined to Hijaz
and Nejd then became general among the descendants of “Ad;


NOTES. +517


so that Lokmfn, who was ® powerful prince and exacted tribute,
destroyed the camels of his wife’s people for food. Hence the
origin of the proverb. Lokmén is described as a person of
enormous strength ; he could dig with his nails a well for his
camels to drink at: see the proverb ‘ Stronger than Lokman,”
Arab. Prov. I. 701. This legend may be connected with the
tradition which places his home in the Ahkéf, tracts of sand in
the region of Ash Shihr, where such a feat may not be im-
possible. He- was also said to be of boundless voracity, inas-
much as he ate one camel’s carcass in the morning and andther
. in the evening ; ‘‘ More voracious than Lokman,” Arab. Prov.
I. 1384, This may be explained by supposing him to have been
profusely hospitable. His courtiers were as liberal as himself.
At the proverb “‘ More gambling than Lokmén,” Arab. Prov. II.
938, it is said that Lokman used to play at the game of maysir
with arrows, for portions of camel, as described in a former note ;
and that his companions were eight persons renowned for their
generosity ; so that it came to be said proverbially of liberal
persons, “They are like Lokman’s gamblers.” These various
legends point to the adoption of the camel as food by the Arabs
of the south, under the influence of a powerful prince.

A spindle in nakedness.—The spindle is made an example
of nakedness, since the woman spins the wool from it and leaves -
it bare. Arab. Prov. II. 160. :

Warmth.—There is a tradition connected with the word *50,
which may be worth relating, as it exhibits a remarkable
peculiarity in the speech of Koraysh. Though this tribe is
reputed to have spoken the purest Arabic, and the Koran is
in conformity with their tongue, they are said to have frequently
omitted the hamzeh in words which, according to the pure speech
of the Arabs, contained it, One of these was the verb (33, “he
was warm,” which they pronounced like lsu, “he despatched
the wounded man,” ajc >. On one occasion a man of
Johayneh brought the Prophet a prisoner, who trembled with
cold, on which the Prophet said »,301, “ Despatch him,” meaning
' to say s,Adol, “ Warm him.” They took out their prisoner and


518 NOTES.


killed him. According to Tabari and others, the death of Malik
ibn Nowayrah and his companions of the tribe of Yarb' was due
to a mistake of the same kind, since the Korayshi crier of
Khalid ibn Al Welid, intending to proclaim in the camp “ Warm
your prisoners,” it being a cold night, said ‘“‘ Despatch your
prisoners,” and the soldiers fell upon the Beni Yarba’ and
slaughtered them. An instance of this omission of the hamzeh
is mentioned by Baydawi at Koran xvii. 103, where it is said
that Koraysh use (ls for is. The clear pronunciation .of
the hamzeh was called ,. .

Sinn and Sinnabar.—There were seven days in the early
spring which were thought to bring with them a return of the
winter’s cold, before the warmer weather set in. According
to Sherishi they are the four last days of February and the first
three of March. The two days mentioned in the text were
the first two of them. The names are united in some verses
by Ibn Ahmar, quoted in De Sacy’s commentary ; they are also
united by Nasif, in his Sixth Assembly.

An ample robe-—One liberal and beneficent.

Let him expend.—Koran lxv. 7.

Of his day: of his yesterday.—The meaning of these shies
is that a man must depend for approbation and reward on what
he himself does in his own age, and not on what his ancestors
have done in times past.

Bidden us to ask of thee. —The allusion bers is to Koran
iv. 36 and xl. 62.

Prefers even from his straitness.—Compare Koran lix. 9.

‘Isdm, the son of Shahbar, is the exemplar among the Arabs
of a man who is great by his own merits, and not by the
nobility of his ancestors. [He was chamberlain to No‘man
ibn al Munthir, king of Hira, known as No‘man Abi Kabds,
and in this capacity befriended two of the most eminent poets of
the time, An Nabighat ath Thobyani and Hassan ibn Thabit.
The phrase in the text is taken from some verses of An Nabi-
ghah, who says “ the soul of ‘Isam has ennobled ‘Tsim :” Arab.
Prov. II. 745. Sherishi, no doubt erroneously, attributes them


NOTES. 519


to‘Isim hignself, who was asked how he who was low of origin.
had attained to such high rank. Na&bighah, who like most

of the poets of the Ignorance was licentious in style, had com-

posed some verses celebrating in impassioned language the

beauties of Mutejarradeh, the wife of No‘man,: and indicating

that she requited his admiration. Thig Mutejarradeh had been

the wife of the king’s father, after whose death the king had

married her, a practice *permitted; among the ancient Arabs,
though apparently not generally approved, since it was called

nal! 2\G, the marriage of hate. It was abrogated by Moham-

med; see Koran iv. 26. Some say that Nabighah had entered

the apartment of Mutejarradeh ; others that he composed the
kasideh at the instance of Al Munakhkhal, her lover. The verses

were repeated to the king, who was greatly incensed, and would

have slain Nabighah, had not‘Isam warned him, so that he was

able to escape by flight. He repaired to the court of Ghassan,

but being after a time desirous of returning to Hira he sought-a

reconciliation with the king. Ndémén was sick, and Nabighah

addressed the following verses to the chamberlain :


I conjure thee tell me whether the hero be still borne on the litter ;
I do not blame thee that I enter not ; but, tell me, what is behind thee,
‘Ishim ?


These last words became proverbial, being used when you ask
information of any one concerning something that he has
seen ; Arab. Prov. II. 589, where it is made a woman’s
name, ple. Nabighah was afterwards received into favour


by the king, and remained thenceforward on good terms with
“him, ‘Tsim procured for Hassin ibn Thabit the favour of
the king by warning him that when No‘main spoke against
the king of Ghassin, and asked his opinion, he should not
join in disparaging him; fpr Noman, though he hated his
. royal brother and railed at him himself, would not like a king to
be ill-spoken of by a subject. These adventures, taken from
the Kitab al Aghani, will be found at length in the second
volume of M. Caussin de Perceval’s Essai. It became a saying


Gétie vy Calas we in the sense of “ Be like ‘Isim whose


honour was derived from his own worth, and not like one who
relies for honour merely on the bones of his ancestors.” An
anecdote of Al Hajjij connected with this phrase is given by
Maydaini at the first cited proverb,-and from Sherishi in De
Sacy’s commentary. Whether the proverb, ““Isim was sleeping
at the hour of departure,” Arab.- Prov. II. 770, refqgg to the
same person I am not able to determine. More on this subject
will be found in the notes to the kasideh of An Nabighah in De
Bacy’s Chrestomathie,

Al Asma‘t has been already spoken of, He was celebrated not .
only for his great learning, but for his cheerful humour and
ready wit; of which examples are recorded too numerous to be
repeated here. Shertshi remarks that Al Asma‘t is to be con-
sidered an ‘TeAmt, that is, one who was great om account of his
own merits, since he descended from Bahilehy which is the most
bastard and the meanest of the tribes of the Arabs. It is but
justice, however, to the great his say that, according to
Tbn Khallikén, no such name as Bahileh appears in his pedigree,
which the biowraphier sets forth up to ‘Adnin himself. He bore
the name of Bahili, according to this authority, because the wife
of Malik, one of his ancestors, was named Bahileh. Whatever
may have been the disgrace of belonging to this tribe, Al Asma i
shared it with one of the most illustrious men of Islam,
Kutaybet ibn Muslim, who conquered Tartary in the reign of
‘Al Welid ibn “Abd al Melik. Ibn Khallik4n, in his life of Kutay-
beh, gives several anecdotes illustrative of the contempt in which
Bahileh was held. The Arabs of the desert, he says, hated to
bear the name ; so that a poet said, “It profits not a man to be
descended from Hashim if he have a Bahili soul.” Again, “If
it were said to a dog, ‘Thou Bahili,’ the dog would turn howling
from the reproach of such a pedigree.” The Prophet being
asked by Al Ash ath ibn Kays al Kindi whether all were equally
subject to the law of retaliation, namely, that the offender
should suffer the precise injury that he had inflicted (Koran
ii. 173; v. 49) said, “Yes, even if thou slewest a Bahili, I
should slay thee to avenge him.” An Arab being told that a


NOTES. §21


certain man had sprung not merely from Bahileh, but from the
slaves of Bahileh, immediately fell down and kissed his hands
and his feet. Being ‘asked why he did so,'he replied, ‘God
would never have inflicted on thee such a misfortune in this life
unless he had intended to reward thee with Paradise in the
next.” This evil renown of Bihileh caused Abt ‘Obaydeh to
doubt whether Al Asma‘t could ever have called himself by such
a name; since those who belonged to the tribe concealed their
pedigree.

Cloak me.—Abt Zayd intends Hfrith to understand the word
in a figurative sense, that of, concealing who he was; while the:
others believe that he merely asks for clothing.

Imbued mith the dew of benevplence.—The word thi in the
sense of being zmbued or penetrled with anything is taken from
Koran ii. 87, “‘ They (the Teraclités) were imbted in their aie
with the calf;” or they “‘ were made to drink in their hearts”
it; which is interpreted. to ‘mean that they were imbued a
the love of it, and the Aesire to worship it, asthe cloth is imbued
with the dye: Zamakhshari and Baydéwi. It may be, how-
ever, that the original phrase indicates a vague acquaintance on
the part of Mohammed with the account given at’ Exodus
xxxii. 20: ‘And he took the calf which they had made, and
burnt it in the fire and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon
the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.”

Well done he.—The measure of these verses belongs to the -
third darb of the first “ardd of’ the saré. The ‘arid which is
originally HN ynie loses the > by W825, which is the dropping
of the last letter of a watad mefri. at the end of a foot ; it then.
suffers (.b, which is the dropping of the quiescent fourth letter.
It thus becomes cl. The dard being also originally EV grive
suffers phe, which is the ae of a watad mefrik at the end
of a foot, and becomes yaie =

Jinn. he is another form ot wr The expression, “ Men
and Jinn,” is taken from the last Sura of the Koran, which is
one of the two prayers for protection. ;


522 NOTES.


The silk of Paradise.—The people of Paradise will be clothed
in green silk Gwine, and in 52.1, which is thick woven
embroidered brocade. Koran xviii. 30; xliv. 53; Ixxvi. 21.
God provides these two materials, one fine and the other of a
stout texture, that the believers may be gratified according to
their fancy. The silk will be green because that is the most
beautiful of colours.

A sharp cold was that which froze thee !—This is admirative
or ironical.

Prosecute not that.—Koran xvii. 38. For the interpretation
of this command see Baydiwi. The meaning of la or Wsl3 in
this passage is taken to be “a following up of a man or thing
for the purpose of accusation or calumny ;” so that in ordinary
phrase Uli {Ms \ signifies that such an one inveighed against
or slandered such an one; it is also used of lying and bearing
false witness. ‘In a Tradition of the Prophet it is said, using
the word (83, “‘ Whosoever shall prosecute or accuse a Moslem
untruly, God shall imprison him amid the sweat of the damned.”

Taybeh.—This was the name which the city of Yathrib re-
ceived from Mohammed: for God —-~b “ made it sweet and
goodly,” as the home of the Prophet during life, and his resting-
place after death. The /akad or appellation of Medinet an Nebi,
the City of the Prophet, however, prevailed, and is now used as
the proper name of the city.

My nature is to pass from prey to prey.—The word dam,
which is used several times by Hariri, is made popular by the
proverb attributed to a certain Abi Akhzam, for which see
Arab. Prov. I. 658, and Hariri’s explanation to the Forty-
fourth Assembly. .

From ‘Amr to Zayd.—That is, from one person to another.
These two names, being very common among the Arabs, are
used in stating grammatical or legal propositions ; as we should
say, “John struck William ge John leased land to William.”
They are used in the verses of Abii Odayneh ; Schultens, Mon.
Vetust. Arabia.

More coated than an onion.—This homely but expressive pro-


NOTES. 523


verb is to be found in Maydani. Arab. Prov. II. 885. A verb
is formed from the noun, so that you say wl ye Jo- Nba,
“T peeled or stripped (literally, I onioned) the man of his
clothes,” that is, ‘‘I peeled them off like the coats of an onion.”

Glory to God who rusted thy mind.—This is an expression of
wonder.

Rent the bottle of thy storing is sqnivalent to “ made thee
incapable of remembering anything.” I have rendered - on
the authority of Sherishi, who says that it signifies to cover with
rust and dirt, as a sword is covered. The word is used in the
Koran as at iv. 154; xvi. 110, to signify an action of God on
the hearts of the wicked, by which He keeps them from know-
ledge of the truth, and abandons them to evil deeds. Originally,
no doubt, the meaning was simply to “‘ mould” or “stamp” the
heart or understanding ; but from these passages it acquired an
evil signification, so that it is said, “‘ We take refuge with God
from gb (sinful desire) which is akia to eb (vice or that state
of the mind which is reprobate of God).” The derivative
signification of foulness, or uncleanness, is easily understood.

ols is mansib as a masdar; but see also Baydawi, Koran
vii 1. Itis the word used whenever some indignity to God is
to be repudiated ; as that he has a Son, or a female companion,
or partners in the Godhead.

Deskereh was a place between Holwan and Bagdad, sixteen
parasangs from the latter.

Ibn Sukkereh.— Abid | Hasan Mohammed the HAshimi, sur-
named Ibn Sukkereh, was an elegant poet of the fourth century
of the Hijra. He was descended from “Ali, son of the Khalif
Al Mahdi, and was consequently ofthe blood of Hashim. He
excelled in light and humorous writing, as may be supposed
from the verses in the text. His collected works amount to
about fifty thousand verses. He was the rival of Ibn al Hajjaj,
a contemporary poet of the same style; and the two were com-
pared to Jerir and Al Farazdak in a former age. Ibn Sukkereh
died in 385 (a.p. 996).

Winter comes.—These are the pair of verses of which Hariri


‘“c


524 ; NOTES.


speaks in his Preface asehaving been taken from an extraneous
source. The metre is dasét. For the two plurals of é>-\>,
which occur in the first line, see Lane’s Lexicon, and Hariri in
the Durrah (Anthol. Gramm. Arabe, p. 42, Arab. Text.) It
may be necessary to remind the reader that the seven things
here described as necessary for winter all begin with the letter
kéf. A wit remarking on these verses has said that if a man
has one kif, namely (<5, & purse, he can easily supply himself
with the pther six.


THE TWENTY-SIXTH ASSEMBLY.


- The “ Spotted.” —The Arabic rhetoricians have given various
fanciful names to. the artificial compositions of the later writers.
The epithet “ths, is applied to a composition of which every
alternate letter is pointed, the rest being unpointed. Its literal
signification is “ spotted, ” like the leopard which is called b35,¥\,
or a hen which is white but has black spots on her feathers. The
composition called ‘li,s., of which the Sixth Assembly gives an ex-
ample is one in which the letters of each alternate word are pointed,
while the letters of the other words are without points. This
name is given to it from a fancied resemblance to a horse which
which has one eye black and the other blue; such a horse is
called Wii. Verses made up of words which are entirely
without pointed letters are called Jblye cly!; on the other
hand, those which consist of words of which all the letters are
pointed are called (i\¢ Goly\ or “ brides.” The word Jbl is
applied to a woman who is unadorned with a necklace, the
emblem of female.dignity ; while the bride, on the contrary, is
supposed to fully adorned, the rhetoricians conceiving that the
words are adorned by the points attached to them. The expla-
nation of Sherishi (Assembly 46) that among the pagan Arabs
brides were adorned by their faces being spotted with saffron, is
not necessary for the understanding of this epithet. Examples


NOTES. 525


of these and of other kinds of artificial composition are to be
found in the Forty-sixth Assembly, |‘

Ahwéz was a city, or rather a district of towns, on the Karin
river, probably the Pasitigris, about fifty miles south-east of Sis.
In a note to Nasif al Yazaji’s Assemblies, p. 8, it is said to have
consisted of nine towns. It was noted for its unhealthiness, new
comers being liable to attacks of fever. There is an allusion to
the sugar of Ahw4z in some verses of Al Mutenebbi, quoted in
De Sacy’s Commentary. The explanation of the expression
“the two markets” is that one part of the inhabitants carried on
their business from morning till noon, and the others during the
remainder of the day. Ahwaz disputes with Basra the honour
of having given birth to the poet Aba Nuwas.

Passing sombre days : literally, urging or driving. -De Sacy
compares it with the French “ pousser le temps avec 1l’épaule.”
Chrest. Arabe, III. 268. The word is used of gentle urging
forward, as a man drives on his camel, or a cow her calf.

Mouldering camp-ruin—The abandonment by a tribe of its
abode, leaving behind the ashes and other relics of the encamp-
ment, was, as has been noticed, a common subject of lamentation
amonge the Arab poets; for the poet’s mistress was supposed to
have passed away with her family, leaving him disconsolate.
For the words in the text see Diwan of Imr al Kays, p. 20
Arab. Text, first line of poem.

Girded up of skirt; that is, actively ; gathering up my skirt
for speed.

Its streamlet .... the abundant waters ; that is, “ I left Ahwaz
where I had no hope of making gain, and sought some richer
place.”

The shadow of the tent.—Hariri says in the Durrah (Anthol.
Gramm. Arabe, p. 27, Arab. Text) that Jb is applied to the
shadow only during the forenoon, and | 45 during the afternoon.

Wilt thou not ?—Nasif al Yazaji, in his letter to De Sacy, says
that the ¥\ here is not interrogative. It may be like l» a particle
of calling attention, éo5,s8ee Anthol. Gramm. Arabe, p. 109, Arab
Text. In the 37th it is said, using the hamzeh alone, “ How!


526 NOTES.


at one time a Temimi, and at another a Kaysi?” There it is
apparently G31 3,>. Compare also 28th, p. 347, and 29th,
p- 360. But I have made it interrogative as most consistent
with the sense.

Took my seat.—jj5- is used of deliberately taking a seat, as
on @ cushion or sofa, for the purpose of conversation, and thus
differs from 3, which is the mere act of sitting down. The
literal meaning of the former verb is “ he placed his posteriors
on (ule,” that is, on rugged or elevated ground; and it
expresses a change of place from low to high, while us ex-
presses a change of place from high to low. Thus if one who
has been lying down sits up, it is said that (wl>; while if one
who has been standing sits dédwn, the word o«3 is used.

Those yellow teeth ; literally, his tooth-yellowness.” Pa is the
yellow or green filth which hardens on and between the aged
camel’s teeth, and which the Arabs periodically clean away.
Thus it is said of any one who is instructed or reformed late in
life, “The aged camel is tooth-cleaned.” Arab. Prov. II. 84.
The word is here applied to the yellow teeth of an old man.

Thy returning.—For this anomalous masdar see Lane’s Lexicon.

Tés.—Ibn Khallikan, in his life of Abi ’1 Futth al Gleazzali,
who was born at Tis, says that it consisted “ of two towns called
Taberén and Nowkén, to which belong more than a thousand
villages.” It was one of the most important districts in
Khorasan, and distinguished as the birthplace of the poet Fir-
dousi, as well as of the Wazir Nizim al Mulk, who wielded
almost absolute power for thirty years as the minister of Alp
Arslan and Melek Shah, and of whose services to education I
have spoken in the Introduction. He was assassinated by a
Sfifi fanatic near Nehavend, in the year 485 (4.p. 1092).

J improvised.—The word —+\2:3\ has also the technical mean-
ing of beginning the kasideh without the zeséb, or mention of
the poet’s mistress. Abdi Nuwas is said to have been the first
to make this innovation, which was afterwards adopted by Al
Mutenebbi. This was also called -.$ and =).

The war of Al Basis.—The death of Kolayb Wa’il and the


NOTES. 527


war of Al Basis form one of the most celebrated chapters in the
early Arab history. Kolayb Wé'il, the powerful chief of the
stock of Rabiah, who at the head of Bekr and Taghlib defeated
the army of Himyar on the day of Khoziz or Khozaza, has been
already spoken of. After he had delivered the descendants of
Méadd from the domination of Yemen he was elected by all the
race of Rabiah as their Prince, and became virtual sovereign of
Arabia. But his pride equalled his greatness. It has: been
mentioned in the note to ‘“‘the guarded domain of (olayb,”
in the Nineteenth Assembly, that he forbade the pasturing of
any camels but his own upon certain lands. It is said that he
asserted this right of domain all through the dlc, that is,
the country between the Nejd and the Tihdmeh, and at the back
of Mecca. The legend of his death is as follows. Once a lark
flew up from her eggs on his approach, as he was walking in his
domain, and he improvised in rejez, as has been already related.
At Arab. Prov. I. 432, the verses, with a slight variation,
are attributed to the poet Tarafeh : the word 45> signifies here
the wide part of avalley. It is related that Kolayb found one
day the lark’s eggs broken by the feet of a camel whose
footprints he did not recognise, and which he consequently knew
to belong toa stranger. ‘Now Kolayb was married to Jelileh
and Mawiyeh, daughters of Morrat ibn Thohl ibn Shayban ibn
Thélabeh. Their mother, Al Haleh, had a sister or an aunt
named Al Basis, both of them being of the tribe of Temim.
Morrah had also ten sons, one of whom was named Jessis. For
greater security the descendants of Bekr by Shayban, of whom
.were Morrah and his family, lived in common with the tribe of
Taghlib, of which Kolayb was the immediate head. It con.
sequently came to pass that Kolayb gave his brother-in-law
Jessas the right of: pasturing his camels upon the princely
domain. Al Basis, the aunt, or the great-aunt, of Jessis, and of
his sisters the wives of Kolayb, also lived in the same settle-
ment. (The name Bastis is explained by Hariri in the te/sir to
the Forty-fourth Assembly. The milker of a camel used
to say to her oo ud, in order to keep her quiet and make


528 NOTES


her give milk freely. The action of saying this, and getting
milk by it, is cwluw{, and the camel which gives milk
when this is said to her is called Usps See also Arab.
Prov. I, 94.) Al Basis had a neighbour named Sed, the
son of Shems, of the tribe of Jarm, and it was his she-camel
Saréb which had brokent he lark’s eggs ; Jessis having allowed
it to graze with his own. Kolayb, when he knew that a strange
camel had entered his pasture, said, “‘ By the altars of Wail!
no camel of Wii] would have dared to outrage my clientship.”
What followed is told in various ways, and is too lengthy to
‘repeat here. It is sufficient to say that Kolayb watched for the
strange camel to come again, and when he saw Sardb, he shot at
her with an arrow, and pierced her udder. The she-camel
galloped homeward, her udder spurting milk and blood, until she
came to her master’s door. Then Sdd cried out with shame and
humiliation at the sight, and Al Basis came forth, and when she
saw the camel she also cried out “ Oh scorn!.oh scorn!” and
beat her hand upon her head, and improvised thus ;


By thy life, if I dwelt in the house of Monkith (her father) Sa‘d would
not have been injured, he the neighbour of my dwelling ; 3

But I am in the house of exile, which, when the wolf assails, it is my
sheep that he seizes.

O Sa‘d, be not careless but depart, for thou art among a people who are
as dead men in the defence of a neighbour.

Take my camels, for I am about to set forth, in fear lest they wrong my
daughters,


She raised her voice while she thus declaimed, in order that
Jessas might hear her. He said to her, “ Be tranquil, to-morrow
there shall be slain a male camel, whose houghing shall be a
greater deed than this wounding of thy neighbour’s she-
camel.” By this he meant that he would slay Kolayb, but the
Prince suspected nothing, and when he heard the threat of Jessis
he said to himself, “‘ He intends to slay my camel stallion Gho-
layyan, but less than Gholayydn is the stripping of the katdd ;”
Arab. Prov. I. 484; that is, to kill Gholayy4n would be a more
difficult thing than for a man to strip the thorny tragacanth with
his naked hand. This phrase became proverbial, and is used
when one attempts a task above his powers. Kolayb also


NOTES. 529


uttered verses declaring that what he had done would be a

warning to the family of Morrah. Jessis also improvised

verses, in which he swore by the altars of Wé’il (or of his people,

for the word is doubtful) that he would maintain the rights .
of hospitality.

The slaying of Kolayb was on this wise. Jessis watched his
opportunity, and one day when Kolayb went out into the field
unarmed, he followed him, accompanied by ‘Amr ibn Abi
Rabi‘at al Muzdalif ibn Thohl, or, as others say, ‘Amr ibn
Al Harith ibn Shayban. Jessis ran at him with his spear, and
broke his spine, and went and stood over him. Kolayb, tor-
mented, said to him, “ Give me a drink of water.” “Thou hast
passed by Shobayth and Al Ahass,” said Jessds,- alluding to
two water-sources which Kolayb had prohibited to the Bena
Shayban: Arab. Prov. I. 249. These words became proverbial,
and are used when one seeks a thing where it is not to be found.
He then left him, and‘ Amr coming up, Kolayb asked him also for
water, but ‘Amr got off his horse and despatched him, so that
“To ask help of ‘Amr in need,” is a proverb meaning to suppli-
cate a merciless person. The war or feud then began between
the tribe of Taghlib, of which Kolayb’s brother, Mohalhil,
was now tlie chief, and the tribe of Bekr, of which the Bend
Shayban were a branch. Mohalhil could not believe that one
of the family of Morrah had dared to slay his brother, and when
Hammam ibn Morrah told him what Jesséis had done, he -ex-
claimed, “‘ He is not a big enough man for it,” literally, “ Podex
ejus angustior est quam illud,” Arab. Prov. I. 607. But when
he knew the truth he determined to avenge him. The real name
of Mohalhil was‘ Adi, and he received the former appellation on
account of the beauty of his poetry, since Mohalhil signifies,
“ one who weaves finely.” The elegy which Mohalhil composed
on his brother’s death is generally held to have been. the first
regular poem (kasideh) composed among the Arabs. Some
fragments of it are preserved in the Hamaseh, p. 420, and the
invaluable commentary appended to these contains a full narrative

.of the death of Kolayb. These events took place, probably, in


34


530 "NOTES.


the last ten years of the fifth century after Christ. The war of
Basis lasted forty years between Taghlib and Bekr, so that it is
said proverbially ‘More unlucky than Basis,” Arab. Prov. I.
683, and “ More unlucky than Sarab.” In this war the tribe
of Taghlib was in the end defeated ; Mohalhil was taken prisoner
and put to death, or, according to another account, forced to take
refuge in Yemen, and the descendants of Rabi‘ah were so ex-
hausted by mutual carnage as to be obliged to accept a viceroy
of the Himyarite monarch.

There was, it is said, another Basis, to whom the oe
“More unlucky than Basis” refers. According to Sheref ad
Din, and the author of the K&émis, she and her husband were of
the children of Israel, and God had promised the husband to
fulfil for him three wishes. Basis persuaded her husband to ask
that she should be made the most beautiful woman in Israel, and
God granted the request. She then, being greatly admired,

‘ ceased to care for her husband, on which he prayed God that she
might be turned into a bitch, which also came to pass. Her
children then, being in much affliction, implored their father

- to ask that she should be restored to her original form, before

she was beautiful. The husband did this, and Basis became as

’ she was at the beginning. Thus the man’s three wishes were

exhausted without gaining any good.

The Kitab al Aghani contains a narrative of the war of Basis ;
a short summary of the events will be found in the second
volume of M. Caussin de Perceval’s Essai. See also the verses
of Jahdar ibn Dobay‘ah, in the Hamiseh, p. 252.

Take omen of the raven of separation.—The crow and raven
were looked upon as birds of ill omen, because in the ceaseless
migrations of the Arabs they slighted on each deserted encamp-
ment to scratch and search for what they could find, and were

consequently taken as emblems of departure and desolation.
This image recurs continually in the poets. Various kinds of
crow were distinguished, one said to be properly the “crow
of separation,” being of mixed black and white, or with a white
breast, or, as others say, a crow with red beak and feet, while


NOTES. 531


the black crow was called hdtim, because it decided or announced
separation to be inevitable. On this subject see Lane’s Lexicon,
at word .,.. The crow is associated with death in the history
of Cain and Abel at Koran v. 34. The word ,>; signifies
literally to start a bird by making @ noise or throwing a
stone at it, and has the meaning of taking an omen, because
he who wished to take an omen from the flight of birds did
this. If the bird flew towards his right it was a good omen,
if towards his left it was a bad one. A distinction is made
between dlc and j=}, the former being to take omens from
the names, or the voices, or the settlings of birds; while
the latter appears to have been restricted to omens from their
flight. The practice of taking omens by birds is alluded to
at Koran xxxvi. 17, where the inhabitants of Antioch say to
Simon and John, and another apostle, who had been sent to
them by Jesus, “‘ We look upon you as an ill omen, and if ye
abstain not (from preaching) we will stone you.” (They were all
destroyed by a shout of Gabriel, with the exception of Habib,
the carpenter; see Baydiwi.) The word eB is used of a bad
omen ; Os of a good one. The meaning of ,Jl is illustrated
as follows in the commentary to the Thirty-eighth Assembly :
“Tf a man be sick and he hear somebody say pl. L, or if he
be seeking something, and he hear one say a>|, y, or pile \, it
is a good omen.” There is a Tradition of the Prophet that
he said (Jl uses Fably Lsyae J, literally, “ No. infection, no
bird-omening; but good omening pleases me,” that is, as I
understand it, “Do not worry yourselves to escape infection
of (2,7 or »\dc- (the two forms of leprosy), nor to take omens of
birds, but if you hear a word of good omen, rejoice and be
thankful for it.” The Slit pe was afterwards used to signify a
practice resembling the “sortes Virgiliane” of Europe. The
Koran was opened and a certain line, as the seventh on the
tight hand side, was read. Then seven leaves would be turned,
and the seventh line on the left hand side would be read.
Whatever the inquirer could gather from a certain number


032 NOTES.


of passages obtained’ in this manner was supposed to indicate
the future.

The Arabs had, from early times, many forms of soothsaying
and augury. Not only was the flight of birds or the track
of beasts ominous, but certain animals were supposed to indicate
misfortune. Thus, when Imral Kays received the poisoned shirt
from Cesar he went forth and saw a wild ass lying in his path.
He knew then that he was to die, and when his companions
congratulated him on the gift, he merely replied, “ Why lay
down the wild ass?” which became proverbial. Arab. Prov. II.
204. See also ‘‘ More unlucky than the crow of separation ;”
than “the bird (CAWN,” that is, the green wood-pecker, picus
viridis; than ai\,0)\ .b. Arab. Prov. I. 694-5. When a man
going from home desired to be assured whether his wife would
remain faithful to him he secretly bound- the twigs of a tree
together. If, on his return, he found them as he left them
he knew that she was virtuous; if they had loosened them-
selves he concluded that she was faithless. This knot was called
ei); OF @i, was the name of the plant, the broom, which was usually
tied. It is déscribed as useless at Arab. Prov. II. 716. The
discovery of a thief by the twisting of a pitcher was also known
-among them, Arab. Prov. IJ.115. Often the omen or divina-
tion depended on tgnis or paronomasia, .\,+ itself having the —
same root of is. Thus &, the ben-tree, was ominous of
separation from its relation to we Compare the names Bd,
and qwlic, and ale. Arab. Prov. I. 697.

The shoes of Honayn,—This saying was explained at Assembly
Ten.

The story.—For ect see Zamakhshari on Koran xii. 3, in
Anthol. Gramm. Arabe, p. 124, Arab. Text.

The Tales of Pleasure after Pain.—This was a celebrated
collection of anecdotes.

How various are thy wiles—I have read ($,>-\, as correspond-
ing more closely with the first karineh.

A spotted Address.—It has been mentioned that the letters
of this composition are alternately pointed and unpointed.


NOTES. 533


There are several peculiarities to be noticed. The teshdid and
the conjoined /am-elif are naturally made single letters. Nasif
al Yazaji, in his epistle to De Sacy, falls into a mistake through
an excess of critical acumen. De Sacy, in noticing the latter-
named peculiarity, had said that Hariri made “the word)”
a single letter, on which Nasif observes that J is not a word, but
merely one of the letters. of the alphabet, which is not af
because it has no meaning. But De Sacy is strictly accurate,
since he means that not only is ¥ made one letter when it forms
part of a word, as in is, at the beginning of the composition,
but that the word J, xot, is made a single letter, as in the fourth
line of the second piece of verse. Nasif then goes on to say that
Y is rightly called a single letter, because it is the soft elif, as in
is, a letter that cannot be uttered by itself, and requires ,| to
be joined to it in order to make it pronounceable. In this he
refers to the opinion of some, that the soft or quiescent elif,
which is merely a letter of prolongation, and to be distinguished
from hamzeh, as I shall notice presently, is really named 3, and
that this is the ¥ which is reckoned between , and .s, the lam
being prefixed to the edi/, because the latter cannot begin a word,
and therefore cannot begin its own name. If this be true, and
if the early grammarians did thus place the three weak letters
at the end of the alphabet together, while they kept hamzeh at.
the beginning, it must be acknowledged that the true meaning of
this accurate and scientific distinction was eventually lost, and
that lexicographers, as well as the vulgar, looked upon the dam
as an essential part of the double letter, since, in indices of
shawéhid, or the like, verses beginning, for instance, with ¥, not,
are to be found under this heading. They treated lam-elif
aa a single letter merely because it formed a single character in
writing.

A more important peculiarity in this composition is that the
author treats the letter which bears the sign of hamzeh, in such
words as SLs and (3b, as a «s, and makes it a pointed letter.
The true nature of this letter has been the subject of many
discussions among the grammarians, which must have been well


534 NOTES.


known to Hariri, who has criticised with “such minuteness the
faults in orthography committed by his contemporaries. The
existence of such a letter as hamzeh, or the Hebrew aleph, is due
to the strong and energetic pronunciation of the Semitic nations.
In Arabic it may be said that there is no letter precisely equiva-
lent to the corresponding letter in the softly uttered speech of
England or France. For instance W, though formed by the
same action of the mouth as our B, is uttered with a stronger
compression and a more rapid separation of the lips, and so
of all the other letters. For this reason the pronunciation
of Arabic by Europeans, even when they have a fair notion
of the language, is almost unintelligible to natives, since the
former utter an incomplete sound, particularly at the ends of
syllables. For instance, in pronouncing (30), without the
tanwin, they seem only half to sound the \, and almost to drop
the ,J altogether; the true Arabic pronunciation might be
represented by dbedelll. From this habit of forcible utterance it
comes to pags that when a word begins with a sound correspond-
ing to our vowels, the Arabs necessarily utter it with the pre-
fixion of a slight guttural, or rather faucial, sound:. We can
understand this by uttering energetically, and, as it were,
jerking from the mouth, some English word beginning with
a vowel, as and, 2/l, out. The more energetically we do this the
more we are conscious of the prefixion of a very decided faucial
to the initial vowel. This faucial is the Arabic hamzeh. It has
been stated by European scholars of the highest authority, to
differ from whom seems like presumption, that the hamzeh
corresponds to the spiritus lenis in Greek words, and may be
represented by the H in such French words as habit, homme.
But such a description is, I must think, far from accurate.
The spirttus. lenis I conceive to have been a purely negative
sign, denoting only the absence of aspiration, and to say that the
hamzeh may be represented by the H in habit and homme, gives
the idea that it has no value at all, since 7’ habit and 1’ homme
are pronounced precisely as if they were written 7’ abit, 1’ omme.
If the spiritus lenis in dvOparos and épyov had been a definite letter,


NOTES. 535


jike hamzeh, it would never have allowed itself to be eliminated
or destroyed, as in & “vOpwire and xaxodpyos. If it is to be illus-
trated by analogies from European pronunciation it may best
be compared with the slight faucial sound which is interposed
between two words the first of which ends and the second begins
with A, in order to avoid an inelegant confusion of the two.
Thus, in pronouncing menia alta, we must either make a pause
after the first word, or prefix a slight faucial, which is hamzeh,
to the second, in order that one may not run into the other. A _
Londoner of the lower class uses the letter R for this parpose,
and, iu pronouncing the name of Julia Adams, will say Juliar
Adams, but the educated make use of a sound which is equi-
valent to the Arabic hamzeh, or the Hebrew aleph. In fact
hamzeh is not only a letter but a consonant, with a distinct and
definite value, as is sufficiently proved by its pronunciation in


words like jb and wyele, where it certainly bears no resem-
blance at all to the spiritus lenis or to a silent H, Hamzeh
is, indeed, only a feebly uttered ¢, and bears the same relation
to x which ra bears to T.

From this prefixion of hamszeh to vowel sounds it came to pass
that when the ¢anwin was affixed to 4 word ending with elif
lengthened, the hamzeh appeared in the tanwin, thus Le,
Similarly where, in the changes produced by declension, a syllable
is deprived of its consonant and remains only a farakeh or motion
of the voice (as we should say a vowel), hamseh prefixes itself
to it. Thus in (6G, (64, where the second syllable is really
congonantless through the euphonious dropping of the radical ,,
and has become a mere kesr, the hamzeh steps in and consonants
the syllable to make it pronounceable. Similarly, in Wiil<-
the plural of 4&.<°, the augmentative .¢ being elided, its place is
supplied by hamzeh. In jils,, the plural of dls), the principle
is slightly different. There the ef in the singular, which
is augmentative, is the quiescent elif (44g\J\ or &SLAI1), which
is a mere sound of prolongation after a fethah; and this is the
letter which becomes hamzeh in the plural, since the elif which
appears in the plural is the elif of the plural, as in d>lue.


536, NOTES.


Hence, strictly speaking, in all these cases the syllable in
question has for its consonant hamzeh; and the yd, written
properly without points, is equivalent to the sign of hesreh, and
indicates only the motion or vowel of the Rance:

The distinct utterance of hamzeh in the middle of words
was, however, not strictly observed. The lightening, Wiix’, of
a word by the conversion of hamzeh into elif, or wan, or yd,
according to the harakeh which attached to it was not incon-
sistent with pureness of speech. To observe the hamzeh care-
fully was called ;;.ix° or Wi. The ordinary writing of the
hamzeh in such words as those instanced above was in accordance
with the principle of tckhfif, as if hamzeh in these cases had
something of the sound of yd, as indeed becomes sensible when
the word is quickly uttered. But the learned in penmanship
wrote the yd without points in order to show that the letter was
not a real y4; the common people only writing it with points.
In one case the hamzeh became a real yd through this tekh/if ;
this was when it had d fethah, while the letter before it had Aesreh.
Thus é ies enmity, is a band, where it will be perceived that in
the pronunciation the hamzeh is almost necessarily overwhelmed
by the sound of 4, which is projected on to it from the desr of
the preceding syllable. We may now perceive why Hariri in
this composition took the liberty of treating as a pointed letter
the syd, over which the hamzeh i is written. In using the word
Sp which is more accurately Sp, he avails himself of the rule


above stated, that hamzeh with Sethah after a letter with hesreh
‘becomes pure yd. In the other cases he permits himself a
greater license ; but it is justified by the written character used,
and the modification in the nature of hamzeh which that
character, in the opinion of some, represented. It will be
observed that in el he treats the radical hamzeh as if it
were yd.

Replacing, ‘insincei—Oha is said of a powerful and generous
person, with the meaning that he replaces by forays on his
enemies the wealth which he lavishes in largesses to his friends.
‘A poet says “ Replace and consume; wealth is but a loan.”


NOTES. 587


The Arabs ‘say to him who has put on @ new garment, “ Wear
out, and replace, and praise the Clother,” meaning God (Lane’s
Lexicon, at Wis). The metre of the verses is khafif, See
Tenth Assembly.

The chaplets of his honour are self-strung ; that is, his achieve-
ments inspire the poet’s verses, and, as it were, string them into
a composition without labour on the poet’s part.

Makes gain by beguiling him; that is, gains so much that he
may be said to cheat his patron, In the next set of verses
14 is used in a good sense. :

And therefore is he loved.—Metre kdmil.

The hero of the time.—For an explanation of the word gy5
see commentary on a verse of T'a’abbata Sherran, in Hamaseh,
p- 83. It may be rendered temporis admissarius, having a
signification like i=’. Compare (AS at beginning of 49th.

Contends in honour.—The mundéfarah or trial of superiority in
birth or rank has been described in a former note.

Prepares fatigue for him who shall rule after him.—His merits
are such that his successor must exert himself greatly to escape
disparagement in comparison with him. In the Thirty-seventh
Assembly the author says, “ His clemericy brings contempt on
those’ who have gone before, and his justice fatigues those who
come after.” The editors of the second edition of De Sacy’s
Hariri have printed this line in the commentary to the 26th
with great inaccuracy; thus a3, sae), which is not Arabic.
Such carelessness is the more inexcusable as the line is given
correctly by De Sacy in the text of the 37th. They commit a
similar error at Vol. I. pp. 279 and 348, and in other places,

May he never become void.—The verses are of the second ‘arid
of the reez, each hemistich containing betoawe twice,

Koss.—The orator whose name is generally opposed to Bakil
is Sahban ; it is noticed by Shertshi that the rule of the present
composition forbids the mention of him, since it requires that
the alternate letters should be pointed. Koss, bishop of Najran
in Yemen, is one of the examples of. eloquence among the
Arabs. Christianity was professed in that city by the Bent ’l


538 NOTES.


Harith ibn Ka‘b, and Koss ibn Sffidet al iyAdt flourished
- as a preacher in the early days of Mohammed. Various
innovations are attributed to him, as that he was the first
who preached from an eminence, as a pulpit; and the first
who in preaching leaned on a sword or staff; he was also
the first who used the phrase ae (21; the first who inscribed
letters with the formula, “ From Such-a-one to Such-a-one;”
the first who asserted the Resurrection, though without having
a certain knowledge of it (inasmuch as Islam had not been
preached); and the first who established the legal principle
that it is incumbent on the plaintiff who demands a debt to
produce proofs, and on the defendant to deny by oath. From
these traditions it would seem that he was a man of ability and
education, and exercised much influence on his contemporaries.
The Prophet, before he received his mission, met Koss at the
fair of ‘Okéz, and heard him preach. In the year before
Mohammed’s death deputies of the Bend fy&d came to
Medina, and the Prophet asked them concerning Koss, They
replied that he was dead. Mohammed. then said that he had
heard him preach at ‘Ok4z, and one of the deputies repeated
_& khotbah of the bishop in rhymed prose and verse. It is
said proverbially, ‘“‘ More eloquent than Koss” (Arab. Prov.
I. 189).

Come off with the reward.—Perhaps it would be better i read
‘L “rise,” as in the 12th, “He rose up with that by which to
‘mend his poverty,” since eA is always used in the Koran in a
bad sense, as “They returned with. anger from God,” ii. 58;
“T would rather that thou return laden with my guilt (or the
guilt of killing me) and thy guilt,” Abel to Cain, v. 32.

A fem years.—This expression is used at Koran xii. 42, “ He
(Joseph) remained in the prison some (or a few) years.” The
word gud, is generally interpreted to mean‘a number more than
two and less than ten. Compare Baydawi on p and Lb, at
Koran xxvii. 49; also Hariri in the Durrah, Antho]. Gramm.
Arabe, p. 41, Arab. Text.

Praise to God.—The nasb of ss a8 a masdar after an


NOTES. 539


elided verb is the fundamental phrase. For the reason of the
raf see Baydawi, Koran i. 1. fe

Cool of eye; & common expression for content and tranquillity.
According to Al Asmat the expression “God cool thine eye”
signifies “God make thy tears cool;” since, as he asserts, the
tears of joy are cool, while those of grief are hot. Aba “Amr
ash Shaybini says that ‘its meaning is “God give thee sleep
that thou may not heat thine eye in watching ;” commentary to
Moallakah of “Amr ibn Kulthtm, v. 11, In the Twenty-
seventh Assembly it is said of a scorching noon that it was
hotter than a childless mother’s tear.”


NOTES TO THE INTRODUCTION.


The Pearl of the Diver.—This, the title of Al Hariri’s gram-
matical work, may perhaps better be given simply as “ The
Pearl,” (c\,a\ 5,0 being a phrase applied to the sea-pearl, which is
brought up from the depths by the diver. Compare line 11 of
the Kasideh of Omayyet ibn Abi “A’ith in the Diwan of the
Huthaliyin, p. 177, Kosegarten’s edition.

Rustem and Isfendiar and the Chosroes.—There are other
indications that the ancient historical legends of the Persians
were known to the Arabs at an early time. The Chosroes
especially referred to would be the heroic monarch Kai-Khosru,
who holds in the romance of Iran the position of Arthur or
Charlemagne in that of Europe. His war with Afrasiab, king
of Turan, and the adventures of the Pahlawans Rustem, Tis,
Guderz, Guiw, and others, form the grandest and most poetical
section of the work of Firdousi. For the story of An Nadr, see
Strat ar Resil, p. 191.

John Tzetzes.—The learned Byzantine refers in his Chiliads


540 NOTES.


c *.
' to the work of Lycophron, his own labours on it, and the mis-


behaviour of a rival scholar. In his City Verse he relates :


TlodAd pev ovveypdrpato Spduata, tparyydias,
Kai BiBrov, iy éréyparpev thy wdijow ’AreEdv8pav,
Eis fv 6 Teértins eyparvev eEnynow, xal'Grras.
Taurny 88 riv cEnynow éogerepivets ts,
Ody) rh BiBdov wap abtod Néyov eEnynOfvar
"AN Epunvedwv Ta pytda cipravra Ta Ths BiBrov.
* * * * *
Arévra nat rov Teérfnu 58 nai NowWopav Kai tértwv.
“Chiliades, viii. 483.
From the sequel of the narrative it appears that the Amipostor
did not go unpunished.


END OF VOL. I.


STEPHEN AUSTIN, PRINTER, HERTFORD.


UIDUUAU AUN IOUT
00050645


Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Vaidehi Thakar
on 06 November, 2019
