Personal Letters (Athanasius of Alexandria)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 II. Personal Letters.

 Letter XLVI.--Letter [4563] to the Mareotis from Sardica, a.d. 343-4.

 Athanasius to the presbyters and deacons and the people of the Catholic
 Church in the Mareotis, brethren beloved and longed for, greeting in
 the Lord.

 The holy council has praised your piety in Christ. They have all
 acknowledged your spirit and fortitude in all things, in that ye did
 not fear threats, and though you had to bear insults and persecutions
 against your piety you held out. Your letters when read out to all
 produced tears and enlisted universal sympathy. They loved you though
 absent, and reckoned your persecutions as their own. Their letter to
 you is a proof of their affection: and although it would suffice to
 include you along with the holy Church of Alexandria [4564] , yet the
 holy synod has written separately to you in order that ye may be
 encouraged not to give way on account of your sufferings, but to give
 thanks to God; because your patience shall have good fruit.

 Formerly the character of the heretics was not evident. But now it is
 revealed and laid open to all. For the holy synod has taken cognisance
 of the calumnies these men have concocted against you, and has had them
 in abhorrence, and has deposed Theodore, Valens, Ursacius, in
 Alexandria [4565] and the Mareotis by consent of all. The same notice
 has been given to other Churches also. And since the cruelty and
 tyranny practised by them against the Churches can no longer be borne,
 they have been cast out from the episcopate and expelled from the
 communion of all. Moreover of Gregory they were unwilling even to make
 mention, for since the man has lacked the very name of bishop, they
 thought it superfluous to name him. But on account of those who are
 deceived by him they have mentioned his name; not because he seemed
 worthy of mention, but that those deceived by him might thereby
 recognise his infamy and blush at the kind of man with whom they have
 communicated. You will learn what has been written about them from the
 previous document [4566] : and though not all of the bishops came
 together to sign, yet it was drawn up by all, and they signed for all.
 Salute one another with a holy kiss. All the brethren salute you.

 I, Protogenes [4567] , bishop, desire that you may be preserved in the
 Lord, beloved and longed for.

 I, Athenodorus*, bishop, desire that ye may be preserved in the Lord,
 most beloved brethren. [Other signatures] Julian, Ammonius, Aprianus,
 Marcellus, Gerontius*, Porphyrius*, Zosimus, Asclepius, Appian,
 Eulogius, Eugenius, Liodorus (26), Martyrius, Eucarpus, Lucius*,
 Caloes. Maximus: by letters from the Gauls I desire that ye may be
 preserved in the Lord, beloved. We, Arcidamus and Philoxenus,
 presbyters, and Leo a deacon, from Rome, desire that ye may be
 preserved. I, Gaudentius, bishop of Naissus, desire that ye may be
 preserved in the Lord. [Also] Florentius of Meria in Pannonia, Ammianus
 (9), of Castellum in Pannonia, Januarius of Beneventum, Prætextatus of
 Narcidonum in Pannonia, Hyperneris (48) of Hypata in Thessaly, Castus
 of Cæsaraugusta, Severus of Calcisus in Thessaly, Julian of Therae
 Heptapolis [4568] , Lucius of Verona, Eugenius (35) of Hecleal Cycbinae
 [4569] , Zosimus (92) of Lychni [4570] Sunosion in Apulia [4571] ,
 Hermogenes of Syceon [4572] , Thryphos of Magara, Paregorius* of Caspi,
 Caloes (21) of Castromartis, Ireneus of Syconis, Macedonius of
 Lypianum, Martyrius of Naupacti, Palladius of Dius, Broseus (87) of
 Lu[g]dunum in Gaul, Ursacius of Brixia, Amantius of Viminacium, by the
 presbyter Maximus, Alexander of Gypara in Achaia, Eutychius of Mothona,
 Aprianus of Petavio in Pannonia, Antigonus of Pallene in Macedonia,
 Dometius* of Acaria Constantias, Olympius of Enorodope [4573] , Zosimus
 of Oreomarga, Protasius of Milan, Mark of Siscia on the Save, Eucarpus
 of Opûs in Achaia, Vitalis* of Vertara in Africa, Helianus of Tyrtana,
 Symphorus of Herapythae in Crete, Mosinius (64) of Heracla, Eucissus of
 Chisamus [4574] , Cydonius of Cydonia [4575] .

 [4563] This and the following letters were first printed by Scipio
 Maffei from a Latin ms. in the Chapter Library of Verona, along with
 the Historia Acephala. They were included in Galland, Bibl. Patr. vol.
 5, and in Justiniani's Ed. of Athanasius (Padua, 1777). The letters are
 printed in Migne, xxvi. 1333, sqq., along with one (from the same
 source) addressed by the Council to the Mareotic Churches. Hefele
 doubts their genuineness, but without reason (ii. 166, E. Tra.) The
 list of signatures (an independent source of information, supr. p. 147)
 alone proves the contrary. The two letters may be taken as a supplement
 to the documents given, Apol. c. Ar. 37-50 (see also p. 147), with
 which they have many points of resemblance. The Latin is very bad and
 occasionally without sense; it bears clear traces of being a rendering
 by an unskilful hand from Greek.

 [4564] In the letter referred to in note 1.

 [4565] i.e. has given notice to those places of their deposition.

 [4566] The letter of the Council.

 [4567] For the probably correct names and sees, see p. 147, sq. The
 asterisk denotes signatories of the letter of the Council to the
 Mareotis, the numbers in brackets denote those of the list on pp. 147,
 sq.

 [4568] Thera was divided into seven districts. Herod. iv. 153.

 [4569] These two sees are a puzzle.

 [4570] These two sees are a puzzle.

 [4571] Probably Canusium, the name of Stercorius being lost, lurks in
 this corruption.

 [4572] In Galatia?

 [4573] Æni in Thrace. D.C.B. iv. 75 (3).

 [4574] In Crete, near Cydonia.

 [4575] 59 signatures, to which add Stercorius (note 8) and Athanasius,
 making 61.

 Letter XLVII.--To the Church of Alexandria on the same occasion.

 Athanasius to all the presbyters and deacons of the holy Catholic
 Church at Alexandria and the Parembola, brethren most beloved,
 greeting.

 In writing this I must begin my letter, most beloved brethren, by
 giving thanks to Christ. But now this is especially fitting, since both
 many things and great, done by the Lord, deserve our thanks [4576] ,
 and those who believe in Him ought not to be ungrateful for His many
 benefits. We thank the Lord therefore, who always manifests us to all
 in the faith, who also has at this time done many wonderful things for
 the Church. For what the heretical party of Eusebius and heirs of Arius
 have maintained and spread abroad, all the bishops who assembled have
 pronounced false and fictitious. And the very men who are thought
 terrible by many, like those who are called giants, were counted as
 nothing, and rightly so, for just as the darkness is illuminated when
 light comes, so, iniquity is unveiled by the coming of the just, and
 when the good are present, the worthless are exposed.

 For you yourselves, beloved, are not ignorant what the successors of
 the ill-named heresy of Eusebius did, namely Theodore, Narcissus,
 Valens, Ursacius, and the worst of them all, George, Stephen, Acacius,
 Menophantus, and their colleagues, for their madness is manifest to
 all; nor has it escaped your observation what they committed against
 the Churches. For you were the first they injured, your Church the
 first they tried to corrupt. But they who did so many great things, and
 were, as I said above, terrible to the minds of all, have been so
 frightened as to pass all imagination. For not only did they fear the
 Roman Synod, not only when invited to it did they excuse themselves,
 but, now also having arrived at Sardica, so conscience-stricken were
 they, that when they had seen the judges, they were astonished. So they
 fainted in their minds. Verily, one might say to them: Death, where is
 thy sting, Death, where is thy victory?' For neither did it go as they
 wished, for them to give judgment as they pleased; this time they could
 not over-reach whom they would. But they saw faithful men, that cared
 for justice, nay rather, they saw our Lord Himself among them, like the
 demons of old from the tombs; for being sons of falsehood, they could
 not bear to see the truth. So Theodore, Narcissus, and Ursacius, with
 their friends said as follows [4577] : Stay, what have we to do with
 you, men of Christ? We know that you are true, and fear to be
 convicted: we shrink from confessing our calumnies to your face. We
 have nothing to do with you; for you are Christians, while we are foes
 to Christ; and while with you truth is powerful, we have learned to
 over-reach. We thought our deeds were hid; we did not think that we
 were now coming to judgment; why do you expose our deeds before their
 time; and by exposing us vex us before the day?' and although they are
 of the worst character and walk in darkness, yet they have learnt at
 last that there is no agreement between light and darkness, and no
 concord between Christ and Belial. Accordingly, beloved brethren, since
 they knew what they had done, and saw their victims [4578] ready as
 accusers, and the witnesses before their eyes, they followed the
 example of Cain and fled like him; in that they greatly wandered [4579]
 , for they imitated his flight, and so have received his condemnation.
 For the holy council knows their works; it has heard our blood crying
 aloud, heard from themselves the voices of the wounded. All the Bishops
 know how they have sinned, and how many things they have done against
 our Churches and others; and accordingly they have expelled these men
 from the Churches like Cain. For who did not weep when your letter was
 read? who did not groan to see whom those men had exiled? Who did not
 reckon your tribulations his own? Most beloved brethren, you suffered
 formerly when they were committing evil against you, and perhaps it is
 no long time since the war has ceased. Now, however, all the Bishops
 who assembled and heard what you have suffered, grieved and lamented
 just as you did when you suffered the injuries and [4580] they shared
 your grief at that time....

 On account of these deeds then, and all the others which they have
 committed against the Churches, the holy general council has deposed
 them all, and not only has judged them aliens from the Church, but has
 held them unworthy to be called Christians. For how can men be called
 Christians who deny Christ? And how can men be admitted to church who
 do evil against the Churches? Accordingly, the holy council has sent to
 the Churches everywhere, that they may be marked among all, so that
 they who were deceived by them may now return to full assurance and
 truth. Do not therefore fail, beloved brethren; like servants of God,
 and professors of the faith of Christ, be tried in the Lord, and let
 not tribulation cast you down, neither let troubles caused by the
 heretics who plot against you make you sad. For you have the sympathy
 of the whole world in your grief, and what is more, it bears you all in
 mind. Now I think that those deceived by them will, when they see the
 severe sentence of the Council, turn aside from them and reject their
 impiety. If, however, even after this their hand is lifted up, do you
 not be astonished, nor fear if they rage; but pray and raise your hands
 to God, and be sure that the Lord will not tarry but will perform all
 things according to your will. I could wish indeed to write you a
 longer letter with a detailed account of what has taken place, but
 since the presbyters and deacons are competent to tell you in person of
 all they have seen, I have refrained from writing much. One thing alone
 I charge you, considering it a necessity, that having the fear of the
 Lord before your eyes you will put Him first, and carry on all things
 with your wonted concord as men of wisdom and understanding. Pray for
 us, bearing in mind the necessities of the widows [4581] , especially
 since the enemies of truth have taken away what belongs to them. But
 let your love overcome the malice of the heretics. For we believe that
 according to your prayers the Lord will be gracious and permit me to
 see you speedily. Meanwhile you will learn the proceedings at the Synod
 by what all the Bishops have written to you, and from the appended
 letter you will perceive the deposition of Theodore, Narcissus,
 Stephen, Acacius, George, Menophantus, Ursacius and Valens. For Gregory
 they did not wish to mention: since they thought it superfluous to name
 a man who lacked the very name of bishop. Yet for the sake of those
 deceived by him they have mentioned his name, not that his name was
 worthy of mention, but in order that those deceived by him may learn
 his infamy and blush for the sort of man they have communicated with
 [4582] ....I pray that you may be preserved in the Lord, brethren most
 beloved and longed for.

 [4576] Latin hardly translateable.

 [4577] Cf. Hist. Ar. and Introd. Fialon, p. 209, remarks on the
 uncritical adoption (by Fleury and his plagiarist Rohrbacher) of these
 satirical colloquies as an authentic account of what was actually said.

 [4578] Lat. quæcunque miserrimos videntes accusatores, testes præ
 oculis habentes:' apparently a barbarous rendering of idontes kai tous
 par' auton pathontas, tous kategorous, tous elenchous pro ophthalmon
 echontes, as in Apol. Ar. 45.

 [4579] Granditer erraverunt,' either for makran apephugon, or for
 sphodra eplemmelesan: no verb elsewhere used in this connection in
 Athanasius exactly corresponds to erraverunt,' nor is the flight to
 Philippopolis elsewhere compared, as here, to that of Cain. But the
 latter comparison is often used by Ath. in other connections.

 [4580] illis...erat dolor communis illo tempore quo processistis. The
 Latin has quite lost the sense.

 [4581] For the philoptochia of Athanasius, cf. Hist. Ar. 61, Vit. Ant.
 17, 30, and the stress laid on the hardship of the artoi (as here) in
 Encycl. 4, Hist. Ar. ubi supr. and 72.

 [4582] ....tamen, et hoc cum illis.'

 Letter XLVIII.--Letter to Amun [4583] . Written before 354 a.d.

 All things made by God are beautiful and pure, for the Word of God has
 made nothing useless or impure. For we are a sweet savour of Christ in
 them that are being saved [4584] ,' as the Apostle says. But since the
 devil's darts are varied and subtle, and he contrives to trouble those
 who are of simpler mind, and tries to hinder the ordinary exercises of
 the brethren, scattering secretly among them thoughts of uncleanness
 and defilement; come let us briefly dispel the error of the evil one by
 the grace of the Saviour, and confirm the mind of the simple. For to
 the pure all things are pure,' but both the conscience and all that
 belongs to the unclean are defiled [4585] . I marvel also at the craft
 of the devil, in that, although he is corruption and mischief itself,
 he suggests thoughts under the show of purity; but with the result of a
 snare rather than a test. For with the object, as I said before, of
 distracting ascetics from their customary and salutary meditation, and
 of appearing to overcome them, he stirs some such buzzing thoughts as
 are of no profit in life, vain questions and frivolities which one
 ought to put aside. For tell me, beloved and most pious friend, what
 sin or uncleanness there is in any natural secretion,--as though a man
 were minded to make a culpable matter of the cleanings of the nose or
 the sputa from the mouth? And we may add also the secretions of the
 belly, such as are a physical necessity of animal life. Moreover if we
 believe man to be, as the divine Scriptures say, a work of God's hands,
 how could any defiled work proceed from a pure Power? and if, according
 to the divine Acts of the Apostles [4586] , we are God's offspring,' we
 have nothing unclean in ourselves. For then only do we incur
 defilement, when we commit sin, that foulest of things. But when any
 bodily excretion takes place independently of will, then we experience
 this, like other things, by a necessity of nature. But since those
 whose only pleasure is to gainsay what is said aright, or rather what
 is made by God, pervert even a saying in the Gospels, alleging that not
 that which goeth in defileth a man, but that which goeth out [4587] ,'
 we are obliged to make plain this unreasonableness,--for I cannot call
 it a question--of theirs. For firstly, like unstable persons, they
 wrest the Scriptures [4588] to their own ignorance. Now the sense of
 the divine oracle is as follows. Certain persons, like these of today,
 were in doubt about meats. The Lord Himself, to dispel their ignorance,
 or it may be to unveil their deceitfulness, lays down that, not what
 goes in defiles the man, but what goes out. Then he adds exactly whence
 they go out, namely from the heart. For there, as he knows, are the
 evil treasures of profane thoughts and other sins. But the Apostle
 teaches the same thing more concisely, saying, But meat shall not bring
 us before God [4589] .' Moreover, one might reasonably say no natural
 secretion will bring us before him for punishment. But possibly medical
 men (to put these people to shame even at the hands of outsiders) will
 support us on this point, telling us that there are certain necessary
 passages accorded to the animal body, to provide for the dismissal of
 the superfluity of what is secreted in our several parts; for example,
 for the superfluity of the head, the hair and the watery discharges
 from the head, and the purgings of the belly, and that superfluity
 again of the seminative channels. What sin then is there in God's name,
 elder most beloved of God, if the Master who made the body willed and
 made these parts to have such passages? But since we must grapple with
 the objections of evil persons, as they may say, If the organs have
 been severally fashioned by the Creator, then there is no sin in their
 genuine use,' let us stop them by asking this question: What do you
 mean by use? That lawful use which God permitted when He said, Increase
 and multiply, and replenish the earth [4590] ,' and which the Apostle
 approves in the words, Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled
 [4591] ,' or that use which is public, yet carried on stealthily and in
 adulterous fashion? For in other matters also which go to make up life,
 we shall find differences according to circumstances. For example, it
 is not right to kill, yet in war it is lawful and praiseworthy to
 destroy the enemy; accordingly not only are they who have distinguished
 themselves in the field held worthy of great honours, but monuments are
 put up proclaiming their achievements. So that the same act is at one
 time and under some circumstances unlawful, while under others, and at
 the right time, it is lawful and permissible. The same reasoning
 applies to the relation of the sexes. He is blessed who, being freely
 yoked in his youth, naturally begets children. But if he uses nature
 licentiously, the punishment of which the Apostle [4592] writes shall
 await whoremongers and adulterers.

 For there are two ways in life, as touching these matters. The one the
 more moderate and ordinary, I mean marriage; the other angelic and
 unsurpassed, namely virginity. Now if a man choose the way of the
 world, namely marriage, he is not indeed to blame; yet he will not
 receive such great gifts as the other. For he will receive, since he
 too brings forth fruit, namely thirtyfold [4593] . But if a man embrace
 the holy and unearthly way, even though, as compared with the former,
 it be rugged and hard to accomplish, yet it has the more wonderful
 gifts: for it grows the perfect fruit, namely an hundredfold. So then
 their unclean and evil objections had their proper solution long since
 given in the divine Scriptures. Strengthen then, father, the flocks
 [4594] under you, exhorting them from the Apostolic writings, guiding
 them from the Evangelical, counselling them from the Psalms, and
 saying, quicken me according to Thy Word [4595] ;' but by Thy Word,' is
 meant that we should serve Him with a pure heart. For knowing this, the
 Prophet says, as if interpreting himself, Make me a clean heart, O God
 [4596] ,' lest filthy thoughts trouble me. David again, And stablish me
 with Thy free spirit [4597] ,' that even if ever thoughts disturb me, a
 certain strong power from Thee may stablish me, acting as a support.
 Giving then this and the like advice, say with regard to those who are
 slow to obey the truth, I will teach Thy ways unto the wicked,' and,
 confident in the Lord that you will persuade them to desist from such
 wickedness, sing and sinners shall be converted unto Thee [4598] .' And
 be it granted, that they who raise malicious questions may cease from
 such vain labour, and that they who doubt in their simplicity may be
 strengthened with a free spirit;' while as many of you as surely know
 the truth, hold it unbroken and unshaken in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
 whom be to the Father glory and might, together with the Holy Spirit,
 for ever and ever. Amen.

 [4583] See Migne xxvi. 1169, sqq.; Prolegg. ch. ii, §7. Amun, probably
 the Nitrian monk (supr. p. 212, and D.C.B. i. 102 init.). At any rate,
 Athanasius addresses his correspondent as elder' and father,' which
 accords well with the language of Vit. Ant. ubi supr. The letter states
 clearly Athanasius' opinion as to the relative value of the celibate
 and married state. It also shews the healthy good sense of the great
 bishop in dealing with the morbid scrupulosity which even at that early
 date had begun to characterise certain circles in the Monastic world.

 [4584] 2 Cor. ii. 15.

 [4585] Tit. i. 15.

 [4586] Acts xvii. 28.

 [4587] Matt. xv. 11.

 [4588] 2 Pet. iii. 16.

 [4589] 1 Cor. viii. 8.

 [4590] Gen. i. 28.

 [4591] Heb. xiii. 4.

 [4592] Heb. xiii. 4.

 [4593] See Mark iv. 20, &c.

 [4594] This is a clear reference to the Monastic Societies which had
 now long existed in the Nitrian desert.

 [4595] Ps. cxix. 107.

 [4596] Ps. li. 10.

 [4597] Ib. 12

 [4598] Ib. li. 13.

 Letter XLIX.--Letter to Dracontius [4599] . Written a.d. 354 or 355.

 I am at a loss how to write. Am I to blame you for your refusal? or for
 having regard to the trials, and hiding for fear of the Jews [4600] ?
 In any case, however it may be, what you have done is worthy of blame,
 beloved Dracontius. For it was not fitting that after receiving the
 grace you should hide, nor that, being a wise man, you should furnish
 others with a pretext for flight. For many are offended when they hear
 it; not merely that you have done this, but that you have done it
 having regard to the times and to the afflictions which are weighing
 upon the Church. And I fear lest, in flying for your own sake, you
 prove to be in peril in the sight of the Lord on account of others. For
 if he that offendeth one of the little ones, should rather choose that
 a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
 the depths of the sea [4601] ,' what can be in store for you, if you
 prove an offence to so many? For the surprising unanimity about your
 election in the district [4602] of Alexandria will of necessity be
 broken up by your retirement: and the episcopate of the district will
 be grasped at by many,--and many unfit persons, as you are well aware.
 And many heathen who were promising to become Christians upon your
 election will remain heathen, if your piety sets at nought the grace
 given you.

 2. What defence will you offer for such conduct? With what arguments
 will you be able to wash away and efface such an impeachment? How will
 you heal those who on your account are fallen and offended? Or how will
 you be able to restore the broken peace? Beloved Dracontius, you have
 caused us grief instead of joy, groaning instead of consolation. For we
 expected to have you with us as a consolation; and now we behold you in
 flight, and that you will be convicted in judgment, and when upon your
 trial will repent it. And Who shall have pity upon thee [4603] ,' as
 the Prophet says, who will turn his mind to you for peace, when he sees
 the brethren for whom Christ died injured on account of your flight?
 For you must know, and not be in doubt, that while before your election
 you lived to yourself, after it, you live for your flock. And before
 you had received the grace of the episcopate, no one knew you; but
 after you became one, the laity expect you to bring them food, namely
 instruction from the Scriptures. When then they expect, and suffer
 hunger, and you are feeding yourself [4604] only, and our Lord Jesus
 Christ comes and we stand before Him, what defence will you offer when
 He sees His own sheep hungering? For had you not taken the money, He
 would not have blamed you. But He would reasonably do so if upon taking
 it you dug and buried it,--in the words which God forbid that your
 piety should ever hear: Thou oughtest to have given my money to the
 bankers, that when I came I might demand it of them [4605] .'

 3. I beseech you, spare yourself and us. Yourself, lest you run into
 peril; us, lest we be grieved because of you. Take thought of the
 Church, lest many of the little ones be injured on your account, and
 the others be given an occasion of withdrawing. Nay but if you feared
 the times and acted as you did from timidity, your mind is not manly;
 for in such a case you ought to manifest zeal for Christ, and rather
 meet circumstances boldly, and use the language of blessed Paul: in all
 these things we are more than conquerors [4606] ;' and the more so in
 that we ought to serve not the time, but the Lord [4607] . But if the
 organising of the Churches is distasteful to you, and you do not think
 the ministry of the episcopate has its reward, why, then you have
 brought yourself to despise the Saviour that ordered these things. I
 beseech you, dismiss such ideas, nor tolerate those who advise you in
 such a sense, for this is not worthy of Dracontius. For the order the
 Lord has established by the Apostles abides fair and firm; but the
 cowardice of the brethren shall cease [4608] .

 4. For if all were of the same mind as your present advisers, how would
 you have become a Christian, since there would be no bishops? Or if our
 successors are to inherit this state of mind, how will the Churches be
 able to hold together? Or do your advisers think that you have received
 nothing, that they despise it? If so surely they are wrong. For it is
 time for them to think that the grace of the Font is nothing, if some
 are found to despise it. But you have received it, beloved Dracontius;
 do not tolerate your advisers nor deceive yourself. For this will be
 required of you by the God who gave it. Have you not heard the Apostle
 say, Neglect not the gift that is in thee [4609] ?' or have you not
 read how he accepts the man that had doubled his money, while he
 condemned the one that had hidden it? But may it come to pass that you
 may quickly return, in order that you too may be one of those who are
 praised. Or tell me, whom do your advisers wish you to imitate? For we
 ought to walk by the standard of the saints and the fathers, and
 imitate them, and to be sure that if we depart from them we put
 ourselves also out of their fellowship. Whom then do they wish you to
 imitate? The one who hesitated, and while wishing to follow, delayed it
 and took counsel because of his family [4610] , or blessed Paul, who,
 the moment the stewardship was entrusted to him, straightway conferred
 not with flesh and blood [4611] ?' For although he said, I am not
 worthy to be called an Apostle [4612] ,' yet, knowing what he had
 received, and being not ignorant of the giver, he wrote, For woe is me
 if I preach not the gospel [4613] .' But, as it was woe to me' if he
 did not preach, so, in teaching and preaching the gospel, he had his
 converts as his joy and crown [4614] . This explains why the saint
 [4615] was zealous to preach as far as Illyricum, and not to shrink
 from proceeding to Rome [4616] , or even going as far as the Spains
 [4617] , in order that the more he laboured, he might receive so much
 the greater reward for his labour. He boasted then that he had fought
 the good fight, and was confident that he should receive the great
 crown [4618] . Therefore, beloved Dracontius, whom are you imitating in
 your present action? Paul, or men unlike him? For my part, I pray that
 you, and myself, may prove an imitator of all the saints.

 5. Or possibly there are some who advise you to hide, because you have
 given your word upon oath not to accept the office if elected. For I
 hear that they are buzzing in your ears to this effect, and consider
 that they are thus acting conscientiously. But if they were truly
 conscientious, they would above all have feared God, Who imposed this
 ministry upon you. Or if they had read the divine Scriptures, they
 would not have advised you contrary to them. For it is time for them to
 blame Jeremiah also, and to impeach the great Moses, in that they did
 not listen to their advice, but fearing God fulfilled their ministry,
 and prophesying were made perfect. For they also when they had received
 their mission and the grace of Prophecy, refused. But afterwards they
 feared, and did not set at nought Him that sent them. Whether then you
 be of stammering utterance, and slow of tongue, yet fear God that made
 you, or if you call yourself too young to preach, yet reverence Him Who
 knew you before you were made. Or if you have given your word (now
 their word was to the saints as an oath), yet read Jeremiah, how he too
 had said, I will not name the Name of the Lord [4619] ,' yet afterwards
 he feared the fire kindled within him, and did not do as he had said,
 nor hid himself as if bound by an oath, but reverenced Him that had
 entrusted to him his office, and fulfilled the prophetic call. Or are
 you not aware, beloved, that Jonah also fled, but met with the fate
 that befel him, after which he returned and prophesied?

 6. Do not then entertain counsels opposite to this. For the Lord knows
 our case better than we ourselves, and He knows to whom He is
 entrusting His Churches. For even if a man be not worthy, yet let him
 not look at his former life, but let him carry out his ministry, lest,
 in addition to his life he incur also the curse of negligence. I ask
 you, beloved Dracontius, whether knowing this, and being a wise man,
 you are not pricked in your soul? Do you not feel anxious lest any of
 those entrusted to you should perish? Do you not burn, as with a fire
 in your conscience? Are you not in fear of the day of judgment, in
 which none of your present advisers will be there to aid you? For each
 shall give account of those entrusted to his hands. For how did his
 excuse benefit the man who hid the money? Or how did it benefit Adam to
 say, The woman beguiled me [4620] ?' Beloved Dracontius, even if you
 are really weak, yet you ought to take up the charge, lest, the Church
 being unoccupied, the enemies injure it, taking advantage of your
 flight. You should gird yourself up, so as not to leave us alone in the
 struggle; you should labour with us, in order to receive the reward
 also along with all.

 7. Make haste then, beloved, and tarry no longer, nor suffer those who
 would prevent you: but remember Him that has given, and come hither to
 us who love you, who give you Scriptural advice, in order that you may
 both be installed by ourselves, and, as you minister in the churches
 make remembrance of us. For you are not the only one who has been
 elected from among monks, nor the only one to have presided over a
 monastery, or to have been beloved by monks. But you know that not only
 was Serapion a monk, and presided over that number of monks; you were
 not unaware of how many monks Apollos was father; you know Agathon, and
 are not ignorant of Ariston. You remember Ammonius who went abroad
 [4621] with Serapion. Perhaps you have also heard of Muitus [4622] in
 the upper Thebaid, and can learn about Paul [4623] at Latopolis, and
 many others. And yet these, when elected, did not gainsay; but taking
 Elisha as an example, and knowing the story of Elijah, and having
 learnt all about the disciples and apostles, they grappled with the
 charge, and did not despise the ministry, and were not inferior to
 themselves, but rather look for the reward of their labour, advancing
 themselves, and guiding others onward. For how many have they turned
 away from the idols? How many have they caused to cease from their
 familiarity with demons by their warning? How many servants have they
 brought to the Lord, so as to cause those who saw such wonders to
 marvel at the sight? Or is it not a great wonder to make a damsel live
 as a virgin, and a young man live in continence, and an idolater come
 to know Christ?

 8. Let not monks then prevent you, as though you alone had been elected
 from among monks; nor do you make excuses, to the effect that you will
 deteriorate. For you may even grow better if you imitate Paul, and
 follow up the actions of the Saints. For you know that men like those,
 when appointed stewards of the mysteries, all the more pressed forward
 to the mark of their high calling [4624] . When did Paul meet martyrdom
 and expect to receive his crown, if not after being sent to teach? When
 did Peter make his confession, if not when he was preaching the Gospel,
 and had become a fisher of men [4625] ? When was Elijah taken up, if
 not after completing his prophetic career? When did Elisha gain a
 double share of the Spirit, if not after leaving all to follow Elijah?
 Or why did the Saviour choose disciples, if not to send them out as
 apostles?

 9. So take these as an example, beloved Dracontius, and do not say, or
 believe those who say, that the bishop's office is an occasion of sin,
 nor that it gives rise to temptations to sin. For it is possible for
 you also as a bishop to hunger and thirst [4626] , as Paul did. You can
 drink no wine, like Timothy [4627] , and fast constantly too, like Paul
 [4628] , in order that thus fasting after his example you may feast
 others with your words, and while thirsting for lack of drink, water
 others by teaching. Let not your advisers, then, allege these things.
 For we know both bishops who fast, and monks who eat. We know bishops
 who drink no wine, as well as monks who do. We know bishops who work
 [4629] wonders, as well as monks who do not. Many also of the bishops
 have not even married, while monks have been [4630] fathers of
 children; just as conversely we know bishops who are fathers of
 children and monks of the completest kind [4631] .' And again, we know
 clergy who suffer hunger, and monks who fast. For it is possible in the
 latter way, and not forbidden in the former. But let a man, wherever he
 is, strive earnestly; for the crown is given not according to position,
 but according to action.

 10. Do not then suffer those who give contrary advice. But rather
 hasten and delay not; the more so as the holy festival is approaching;
 so that the laity may not keep the feast without you, and you bring
 great danger upon yourself. For who will in your absence preach them
 the Easter sermon? Who will announce to them the great day of the
 Resurrection, if you art in hiding? Who will counsel them, if you are
 in flight, to keep the feast fittingly? Ah, how many will be the better
 if you appear, how many be injured if you fly! And who will think well
 of you for this? and why do they advise you not to take up the bishop's
 office, when they themselves wish to have presbyters [4632] ? For if
 you are bad, let them not associate with you. But if they know that you
 are good, let them not envy the others. For if, as they say, teaching
 and government is an occasion of sin, let them not be taught
 themselves, nor have presbyters, lest they deteriorate, both they and
 those who teach them. But do not attend to these human sayings, nor
 suffer those who give such advice, as I have often already said. But
 rather make haste and turn to the Lord, in order that, taking thought
 for his sheep, you may remember us also. But to this end I have bidden
 our beloved Hierax, the presbyter, and Maximus the reader go, and bid
 you by word of mouth also, that you may be able thus to learn both with
 what feelings I have written, and the danger that results from
 gainsaying the ordinance of the Church.

 [4599] Dracontius, Bishop of Hermupolis Parva, was one of the bishops
 expelled from their sees, 356-7. His place of exile was the desert near
 Clysma,' i.e. the gulf of Suez (Hist. Ar. 75, cf. Hieron. Vit. Hilar.
 30). We find him in 362 at the Council of Alexandria. The present
 letter, written to urge Dracontius not to refuse the Episcopate, was
 written just before Easter (§10), when persecution was expected (§3),
 and after the mission of Serapion, Ammonius and others to Constantius,
 a.d. 353. It was probably written, therefore, early either in 354 or
 355. The letter is one of the masterpieces of Athanasius: its unforced
 warmth, vigour, and affection can fail to touch no one who reads it. It
 is, like the letter to Amun, one of our most important documents for
 the history of Egyptian Monasticism. (Migne xxv. 524 sqq.)

 [4600] Cf. Joh. iii. 2; xix. 38.

 [4601] Matt. xviii. 6.

 [4602] Hermupolis Parva was in the nome, or department, of Alexandria
 (anciently called the nome of Hermupolis in the Delta), and lay on a
 canal 44 miles east of the Capital; it is identified with Damanhur.
 Agathammon, a Meletian bishop of this district,' is mentioned in the
 list, Apol. Ar. 71, where the district of Sais' seems to include a much
 wider area than the ancient Saite nome (Maspero. Hist. Anc. 4, p. 24).

 [4603] Jer. xv. 5.

 [4604] Cf. Ezek. xxxiv. 2.

 [4605] See Matt. xxv. 27, and Luke xix. 23. It is not clear whether by
 the money' received by Drac. is meant his actual consecration, or
 merely his election.

 [4606] Rom. viii. 37.

 [4607] Rom. xii. 11, and Westcott and Hort on various reading.

 [4608] It should be observed that the fear of Dracontius was, not that
 he would suffer in dignity by becoming a bishop, but lest he should
 deteriorate spiritually (§8, init.). Cf. the dying soliloquy of Pope
 Eugenius IV.: Gabriele, hadst thou never been Pope nor Cardinal it had
 been better for thy salvation.' See also S. Bernard, de Consideratione.

 [4609] 1 Tim. iv. 14.

 [4610] Luke ii. 61.

 [4611] Gal. i. 16.

 [4612] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

 [4613] Ib. ix. 16.

 [4614] 1 Thes. ii. 19.

 [4615] Reading to hagi& 251; as proposed by Montf.

 [4616] Rom. i. 15.

 [4617] Ib. xv. 19, 28.

 [4618] 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.

 [4619] Jer. xx. 9.

 [4620] Gen. iii. 12.

 [4621] In 353, see Fest. Ind. xxv.; Sozom. iv. 9.

 [4622] Perhaps the Muis' of the Sardican subscriptions (Apol. Ar.) and
 the Move' of Vit. Pachom. c. 72.

 [4623] Paulus, perhaps identical with the Philo' of Sard. subsc. and
 Vit. Pach. ubi supr. A Philo' and Muius' also occur close together in
 Apol. Fug. 7 (note 9).

 [4624] Phil. iii. 14.

 [4625] Matt. iv. 19.

 [4626] Phil. iv. 12.

 [4627] 1 Tim. v. 23.

 [4628] 2 Cor. xi. 27.

 [4629] semeia. At the end of §7 this word can only be rendered
 wonders.' But here it appears at least probable that it has the
 different sense of miracles.'

 [4630] Probably the reference is to married men who had subsequently
 become monks. Or else, as monks at this time lived in many cases in the
 world, not in communities, it may refer to married men leading an
 ascetic life.

 [4631] ex holoklerou genous.

 [4632] This is not our earliest notice of ordained persons in monastic
 societies. see Apol. Ar. 67.

 Letter L.--First Letter to Lucifer [4633] .

 To our lord, and most beloved brother the Bishop and Confessor Lucifer.
 Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

 Being well in body by God's favour, we have now sent our most beloved
 deacon Eutyches, that your most pious holiness, as is much desired by
 us, may be pleased to inform us of the safety of yourself and those
 with you. For we believe it is by the life of you Confessors and
 servants of God that the state of the Catholic Church is renewed; and
 that what heretics have assayed to rend in pieces, our Lord Jesus
 Christ by your means restores whole.

 For although the forerunners of Antichrist have by the power of this
 world done everything to put out the lantern of truth, yet the Deity by
 your confession shews its light all the clearer, so that none can fail
 to see their deceit. Heretofore perhaps they were able to dissimulate:
 now they are called Antichrists. For who can but execrate them, and fly
 from their communion like a taint, or the poison of a serpent? The
 whole Church everywhere is mourning, every city groans, aged bishops
 are suffering in exile, and heretics dissembling, who while denying
 Christ have made themselves publicans, sitting in the Churches and
 exacting revenue [4634] . O new kind of men and of persecution which
 the devil has devised, namely to use such cruelty, and even ministers
 as the agents of evil. But although they act thus, and have gone all
 lengths in pride and blasphemy, yet your confession, your piety and
 wisdom, will be the very greatest comfort and solace to the
 brotherhood. For it has been reported to us that your holiness has
 written to Constantius Augustus; and we wonder more and more that
 dwelling as it were among scorpions you yet preserve freedom of spirit,
 in order, by advice or teaching or correction, to bring those in error
 to the light of truth. I ask then, and all confessors join me in
 asking, that you will be good enough to send us a copy; so that all may
 perceive, not by hearsay only but by letters, the valour of your
 spirit, and the confidence and firmness of your faith. Those who are
 with me salute your holiness. I salute all those who are with you. May
 the deity ever keep you safe and sound and mindful of us, most beloved
 lord, and true man of God.

 Upon receiving this letter, blessed Lucifer sent the books which he had
 addressed to Constantius; and when he had read them Athanasius sent the
 following letter:

 [4633] Lucifer, bishop of Calaris (Cagliari) in Sardinia, exiled by
 Constantius after the Council of Milan (Prolegg. ch. ii. §7), first to
 Germanicia, then to Eleutheropolis in Palestine, at both of which
 places he was subjected to harsh treatment, lastly to the Thebaid. The
 violence of his advocacy of the Nicene faith, coupled with extreme
 personal abusiveness, may have aggravated his sufferings. On his part
 in the events of 362, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §9. The present letters
 exist only in Latin (Migne xxvi. 1181), and are probably a translation
 from the Greek. Athan. may have known Latin, but there is no evidence
 that he ever wrote in that language. The play on the name Lucifer in
 Letter 51 proves nothing to the contrary. Dr. Bright (in D.C.B. i. 198,
 note) expresses a doubt as to the genuineness of our letters which is I
 think unsupported by internal evidence. The main difficulty is in the
 reconciliation of the apparent references (51 init.) to the events of
 356 as recent with the clear references to the de Athanasio and
 Moriendum pro Filio Dei of Lucifer, neither of which works were penned
 before 358, while the latter in its final form mentions the translation
 of Eudoxius to CP., and therefore falls as late as 360 (for proof of
 this, see Krüger, Lucifer, pp. 102-109). But on close examination, the
 language of Letter 51 is satisfied by the events of 359, the vindictive
 commission of Paul Catena and the search for Athanasius among the
 Monasteries (cf. Letter 53, note 1). The respectful reference to
 Constantius in Letter 50 is of a purely formal character. The reference
 to the parents of Athanasius as still living is of great interest as
 one of the very few notices of the family of the great bishop (Prolegg.
 ch. ii. §1). The agitated tone of the Epistles reminds us of the Arian
 History, and they may be set down to about the year 359. On Lucifer,
 the monograph of Krüger is the standard authority.

 [4634] An exact description of George in 357 and 358.

 Letter LI.--Second Letter to Lucifer.

 To the most glorious lord and deservedly much-desired fellow-Bishop
 Lucifer, Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

 Although I believe that tidings have reached your holiness also of the
 persecution which the enemies of Christ have just now attempted to
 raise, seeking our blood, yet our own most beloved messengers can tell
 your piety about it. For to such a length did they dare to carry their
 madness by means of the soldiers, that they not only banished the
 Clergy of the city, but also went out to the Hermits, and laid their
 fatal hands upon Solitaries. Hence I also withdrew far away, lest those
 who entertained me should suffer trouble at their hands. For whom do
 Arians spare, who have spared not even their own souls? Or how can they
 give up their infamous actions while they persist in denying Christ our
 Lord the only Son of God? This is the root of their wickedness; on this
 foundation of sand they build up the perversity of their ways, as we
 find it written in the thirteenth Psalm, The fool said in his heart
 there is no God;' and presently follows, Corrupt are they and become
 abominable in their works [4635] .' Hence the Jews who denied the Son
 of God, deserved to be called a sinful nation, a people laden with
 iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children without law [4636] .' Why
 without law?'--because you have deserted the Lord. And so the most
 blessed Paul, when he had begun not only to believe in the Son of God,
 but also to preach His deity, wrote, I know nothing against myself
 [4637] .' Accordingly we too, according to your confession of faith,
 desire to hold the Apostolic tradition, and to live according to the
 commands of the divine law, that we may be found along with you in that
 band in which now Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs are
 rejoicing. So then, though the Arian madness, aided by external power,
 was so active that our brethren on account of their fury could not even
 see the open air with freedom, yet by God's favour, according to your
 prayers, I have been able, though with trouble and danger, to see the
 brother who is wont to bring me necessaries and the letters of your
 holiness, along with those of others. And so we have received the books
 of your most wise and religious soul, in which we have seen the image
 of an Apostle, the confidence of a Prophet, the teaching of truth, the
 doctrine of true faith, the way of heaven, the glory of martyrdom, the
 triumphs against the Arian heresy, the unimpaired tradition of our
 Fathers, the right rule of the Church's order. O truly Lucifer, who
 according to your name bring the light of truth, and have set it on a
 candlestick to give light to all. For who, except the Arians, does not
 clearly see from your teaching the true faith and the taint of the
 Arians. Forcibly and admirably, like light from darkness, you have
 separated the truth from the subtilty and dishonesty of heretics,
 defended the Catholic Church, proved that the arguments of the Arians
 are nothing but a kind of hallucination, and taught that the diabolical
 gnashings of the teeth are to be despised. How good and welcome are
 your exhortations to martyrdom; how highly to be desired have you shewn
 death to be on behalf of Christ the Son of the living God [4638] . What
 love you have shewn for the world to come and for the heavenly life.
 You seem to be a true temple of the Saviour, Who dwells in you and
 utters these exact words through you, and has given such grace to your
 discourses. Beloved as you were before among all, now such passionate
 affection for you is settled in the minds of all, that they call you
 the Elijah of our times; and no wonder. For if they who seem to please
 God are called Sons of God, much more proper is it to give that name to
 the associates of the Prophets, namely the Confessors, and especially
 to you. Believe me, Lucifer, it is not you only who has uttered this,
 but the Holy Spirit with you. Whence comes so great a memory for the
 Scriptures? Whence an unimpaired sense and understanding of them?
 Whence has such an order of discourse been framed? Whence did you get
 such exhortations to the way of heaven, whence such confidence against
 the devil, and such proofs against heretics, unless the Holy Spirit had
 been lodged in you? Rejoice therefore to see that you are already there
 where also are your predecessors the martyrs, that is, among the band
 of angels. We also rejoice, having you as an example of valour, and
 patience, and liberty. For I blush to say anything of what you have
 written about my name [4639] , lest I should appear a flatterer. But I
 know and believe that the Lord Himself, Who has revealed all knowledge
 to your holy and religious spirit, will reward you for this labour also
 with a reward in the kingdom of the heavens. Since then you are such a
 man, we ask the Lord in prayer that you may pray for us, that in His
 mercy He may now deign to look down upon the Catholic Church, and
 deliver all His servants from the hands of persecutors; in order that
 all they too who have fallen on account of temporal fear may at length
 be enabled to raise themselves and return to the way of righteousness,
 led away from which they are wandering, poor people, not knowing in
 what a pit they are. In particular I ask, if I have said anything
 amiss, you would be good enough to overlook it, for from so great a
 fountain my unskilfulness has not been able to draw what it might have
 done. But as to our brethren, I ask you again to overlook my not having
 been able to see them. For truth itself is my witness that I wished and
 longed to compass this, and was greatly grieved at being unable. For my
 eyes ceased not from tears, nor my spirit from groaning, because we are
 not permitted even to see the brethren. But God is my witness, that on
 account of their persecution I have not been able to see even the
 parents whom I have [4640] . For what is there that the Arians leave
 undone? They watch the roads, observe those who enter and leave the
 city, search the vessels, go round the deserts, ransack houses, harass
 the brethren, cause unrest to everybody. But thanks be to God, in so
 doing they are more and more incurring the execration of all, and
 coming to be truly known for what your holiness has called them: slaves
 of Antichrist. And, poor wretches, hated as they are, they persist in
 their malice, until they shall be condemned to the death of their
 ancestor Pharaoh. Those with me salute your piety. Pray salute those
 who are with you. May God's divine grace preserve you, mindful of us
 and ever blessed, worthily called man of God, servant of Christ,
 partner of the Apostles, comfort of the brotherhood, master of truth,
 and in all things most longed for.

 [4635] Ps. xiv. 1.

 [4636] Isa. i. 4.

 [4637] 1 Cor. iv. 4.

 [4638] Lucifer had written among other books one called Moriendum pro
 Dei Filio.' His two books pro sancto Athanasio' are referred to below.

 [4639] Lucifer's two books pro Athanasio.

 [4640] Parentes quos habeo.' Can this refer to literal parents? (1) he
 was now over 60 years old; (2) some 6 years later, under Valens, he
 hid, according to the tale in Socr. iv. 13, for four months in his
 father's tomb (see Prolegg. ch. ii. §9).

 Letter LII.--First Letter to Monks [4641] . (Written 358-360).

 1. To those in every place [4642] who are living a monastic life, who
 are established in the faith of God, and sanctified in Christ, and who
 say, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee [4643] ,' brethren
 dearly beloved and longed for, heartiest greeting in the Lord.

 1. In compliance with your affectionate request, which you have
 frequently urged upon me, I have written a short account of the
 sufferings which ourselves and the Church have undergone, refuting,
 according to my ability, the accursed heresy of the Arian madmen, and
 proving how entirely it is alien from the Truth. And I thought it
 needful to represent to your Piety what pains the writing of these
 things has cost me, in order that you may understand thereby how truly
 the blessed Apostle has said, O the depth of the riches both of the
 wisdom and knowledge of God [4644] ;' and may kindly bear with a weak
 man such as I am by nature. For the more I desired to write, and
 endeavoured to force myself to understand the Divinity of the Word, so
 much the more did the knowledge thereof withdraw itself from me; and in
 proportion as I thought that I apprehended it, in so much I perceived
 myself to fail of doing so. Moreover also I was unable to express in
 writing even what I seemed to myself to understand; and that which I
 wrote was unequal to the imperfect shadow of the truth which existed in
 my conception.

 2. Considering therefore how it is written in the Book of Ecclesiastes,
 I said, I will be wise, but it was far from me; That which is far off,
 and exceeding deep, who shall find it out [4645] ?' and what is said in
 the Psalms, The knowledge of Thee is too wonderful for me; it is high,
 I cannot attain unto it [4646] ;' and that Solomon says, It is the
 glory of God to conceal a thing [4647] ;' I frequently designed to stop
 and to cease writing; believe me, I did. But lest I should be found to
 disappoint you, or by my silence to lead into impiety those who have
 made enquiry of you, and are given to disputation, I constrained myself
 to write briefly, what I have now sent [4648] to your piety. For
 although a perfect apprehension of the truth is at present far removed
 from us by reason of the infirmity of the flesh, yet it is possible, as
 the Preacher himself has said, to perceive the madness of the impious,
 and having found it, to say that it is more bitter than death [4649] .'
 Wherefore for this reason, as perceiving this and able to find it out,
 I have written, knowing that to the faithful the detection of impiety
 is a sufficient information wherein piety consists. For although it be
 impossible to comprehend what God is, yet it is possible to say what He
 is not [4650] . And we know that He is not as man; and that it is not
 lawful to conceive of any originated nature as existing in Him. So also
 respecting the Son of God, although we are by nature very far from
 being able to comprehend Him; yet is it possible and easy to condemn
 the assertions of the heretics concerning Him, and to say, that the Son
 of God is not such; nor is it lawful even to conceive in our minds such
 things as they speak, concerning His Godhead; much less to utter them
 with the lips.

 3. Accordingly I have written as well as I was able; and you, dearly
 beloved, receive these communications not as containing a perfect
 exposition of the Godhead of the Word, but as being merely a refutation
 of the impiety of the enemies of Christ, and as containing and
 affording to those who desire it, suggestions for arriving at a pious
 and sound faith in Christ. And if in anything they are defective (and I
 think they are defective in all respects), pardon it with a pure
 conscience, and only receive favourably the boldness of my good
 intentions in support of godliness. For an utter condemnation of the
 heresy of the Arians, it is sufficient for you to know the judgment
 given by the Lord in the death of Arius, of which you have already been
 informed by others. For what the Holy God hath purposed, who shall
 scatter [4651] ?' and whom the Lord condemned who shall justify [4652]
 ? After such a sign given, who do not now acknowledge, that the heresy
 is hated of God, however it may have men for its patrons? Now when you
 have read this account, pray for me, and exhort one another so to do.
 And immediately send it back to me, and suffer no one whatever to take
 a copy of it, nor transcribe it for yourselves [4653] . But like good
 money-changers [4654] be satisfied with the reading; but read it
 repeatedly if you desire to do so. For it is not safe that the writings
 of us babblers and private persons should fall into the hands of them
 that shall come after. Salute one another in love, and also all that
 come unto you in piety and faith. For if any man' as the Apostle has
 said, love not the Lord, let him be anathema. The grace of our Lord
 Jesus Christ be with you [4655] . Amen.'

 [4641] This beautiful and striking Letter (Migne xxv. 691) formed the
 introduction to a work, which the Author, as he says in the course of
 it, thought unworthy of being preserved for posterity. Some critics
 have supposed it to be the Orations against the Arians; but this
 opinion can hardly be maintained (supr. p. 267). The Epistle was
 written in 358, or later, before the Epistle to Serapion. On its
 relation to the Arian History,' see above, pp. 267, 268.

 [4642] This appears inconsistent with the directions below, §3 (note
 3). The heading is, therefore, of doubtful genuineness.

 [4643] Matt. xix. 27.

 [4644] Rom. xi. 33.

 [4645] Eccles. vii. 23, 24.

 [4646] Ps. cxxxix. 6.

 [4647] Prov. xxv. 2.

 [4648] Probably a lost writing.

 [4649] Eccles. vii. 26.

 [4650] Newman observes in loc. "This negative character of our
 knowledge, whether of the Father or of the Son, is insisted on by other
 writers.....All we can know about the Divine Nature is, that it is not
 to be known; and whatever positive statements we make concerning God,
 relate not to His Nature, but to the accompaniments of His Nature.'
 Damasc. F.O. i. 4; S. Basil c. Eunom. i. 10, Totum ab animo rejicite;
 quidquid occurrerit, negate....dicite non est illud.' August. Enarrat.
 2. in Psalm xxvi. 8. Cyril, Catech. xi. 11. Anonym. in Append. Aug.
 Oper. t. 5. p. 383." [Patr. Lat. xxxix. 2175.]

 [4651] Is. xiv. 27.

 [4652] Rom. viii. 33, 34, so quoted Ep. Æg. 19.

 [4653] Letter 54, fin.

 [4654] "On this celebrated text, as it may be called, which is cited so
 frequently by the Fathers, vid. Coteler. in Const. Apol. ii. 36. in
 Clement Hom. ii. 51. Potter in Clem. Strom. i. p. 425. Vales. in Euseb.
 Hist. vii. 7." [Westcott, Introd. to Study of Gospels, Appendix C.]

 [4655] 1 Cor. xvi. 22, 23.

 Letter LIII.--Second Letter [4656] to Monks.

 Athanasius, Archbishop [4657] of Alexandria, to the Solitaries.

 Athanasius to those who practise a solitary life, and are settled in
 faith in God, most beloved brethren, greeting in the Lord.

 I thank the Lord who hath given to you to believe in Him, that ye too
 may have with the saints eternal life. But because there are certain
 persons who hold with Arius and go about the monasteries with no other
 object save that under colour of visiting you, and returning from us
 they may deceive the simple; whereas there are certain who, while they
 affirm that they do not hold with Arius, yet compromise themselves and
 worship with his party; I have been compelled, at the instance of
 certain most sincere brethren, to write at once in order that keeping
 faithfully and without guile the pious faith which God's grace works in
 you, you may not give occasion of scandal to the brethren. For when any
 sees you, the faithful in Christ, associate and communicate with such
 people, [or worshipping along with them], certainly they will think it
 a matter of indifference and will fall into the mire of irreligion.
 Lest, then, this should happen, be pleased, beloved, to shun those who
 hold the impiety [of Arius], and moreover to avoid those who, while
 they pretend not to hold with Arius, yet worship with the impious. And
 we are specially bound to fly from the communion of men whose opinions
 we hold in execration. [If then any come to you, and, as blessed John
 [4658] says, brings with him right doctrine, say to him, All hail, and
 receive such an one as a brother.] But if any pretend that he confesses
 the right faith, but appear to communicate with those others, exhort
 him to abstain from such communion, and if he promise to do so, treat
 him as a brother, but if he persist in a contentious spirit, him avoid.
 [I might greatly lengthen my letter, adding from the divine Scriptures
 the outline of this teaching. But since, being wise men, you can
 anticipate those who write, and rather, being intent upon self-denial,
 are fit to instruct others also, I have dictated a short letter, as
 from one loving friend to others, in the confidence] that living as you
 do you will preserve a pure and sincere faith, and that those persons,
 seeing that you do not join with them in worship, will derive benefit,
 fearing lest they be accounted as impious, and as those who hold with
 them.

 [4656] This short letter, like those to Lucifer, was printed at first
 in Latin, evidently the almost servile rendering of a Greek original.
 The latter was discovered by Montfaucon after the completion of the
 Benedictine edition, and printed in his Nova Collectio Patrum' (1706).
 (Migne xxvi. 1185.) The date is fixed a parte post in an interesting
 manner. We read in the Life of Pachomius, §88 (the story is also found
 in the Coptic documents in the collection of Zoega p. 36), that when
 Duke Artemius came to the monastery of Pabau in search of Athanasius,
 the steward of the community replied, Although Athanasius is our Father
 under God, we have never seen his face.' The Duke answered by a request
 for the prayers of the brethren before he left. The abbat Psarphi'
 replied that the Father' had forbidden the monks to pray with strangers
 who consorted with the Arians,--a clear allusion to the letter before
 us. Now Duke Artemius was in search of Athanasius in 359-60 (Fest.
 Ind.). Accordingly our letter was issued before that date. The Greek
 text is evidently imperfect: the square brackets in the translation
 denote passages supplied from the Latin. The first part of the letter
 (down to the words along with'...) is preserved in a contemporary
 inscription (Boeckh. C.I.G. iv. 8607) on the walls of an ancient
 Egyptian tomb at Abd-el-Kurna, which in those later days had become a
 monastic cell. The remainder is effaced. (See Fialon, p. 134, who has
 failed to notice the identity of the inscription with our present
 letter.)

 [4657] This first heading is from the inscription mentioned above, note
 1, and is important as recording a very early use of the title
 archbishop.' See also Letter 55, note 1, supr. p. 137, note 6, and
 Epiph. vol. ii. p. 188 c (Migne).

 [4658] 2 John 10.

 Letter LIV.--To Serapion, concerning the death of Arius.

 Athanasius to Serapion [4659] , a brother and fellow-minister, health
 in the Lord.

 I have read the letters of your piety, in which you have requested me
 to make known to you the events of my times relating to myself, and to
 give an account of that most impious heresy of the Arians, in
 consequence of which I have endured these sufferings, and also of the
 manner of the death of Arius. With two out of your three demands I have
 readily undertaken to comply, and have sent to your Godliness what I
 wrote to the Monks; from which you will be able to learn my own history
 as well as that of the heresy. But with respect to the other matter, I
 mean the death, I debated with myself for a long time, fearing lest any
 one should suppose that I was exulting in the death of that man. But
 yet, since a disputation which has taken place amongst you concerning
 the heresy, has issued in this question, whether Arius died after
 previously communicating with the Church; I therefore was necessarily
 desirous of giving an account of his death, as thinking that the
 question would thus be set at rest, considering also that by making
 this known I should at the same time silence those who are fond of
 contention. For I conceive that when the wonderful circumstances
 connected with his death become known, even those who before questioned
 it will no longer venture to doubt that the Arian heresy is hateful in
 the sight of God.

 2. I was not at Constantinople when he died, but Macarius the Presbyter
 was, and I heard the account of it from him. Arius had been invited by
 the Emperor Constantine, through the interest of Eusebius and his
 fellows; and when he entered the presence the Emperor enquired of him,
 whether he held the Faith of the Catholic Church? And he declared upon
 oath that he held the right Faith, and gave in an account of his Faith
 in writing, suppressing the points for which he had been cast out of
 the Church by the Bishop Alexander, and speciously alleging expressions
 out of the Scriptures. When therefore he swore that he did not profess
 the opinions for which Alexander had excommunicated him, [the Emperor]
 dismissed him, saying [4660] , If thy Faith be right, thou hast done
 well to swear; but if thy Faith be impious, and thou hast sworn, God
 judge of thee according to thy oath.' When he thus came forth from the
 presence of the Emperor, Eusebius and his fellows, with their
 accustomed violence, desired to bring him into the Church. But
 Alexander, the Bishop of Constantinople of blessed memory, resisted
 them, saying that the inventor of the heresy ought not to be admitted
 to communion; whereupon Eusebius and his fellows threatened, declaring,
 As we have caused him to be invited by the Emperor, in opposition to
 your wishes, so to-morrow, though it be contrary to your desire, Arius
 shall have communion with us in this Church.' It was the Sabbath when
 they said this.

 3. When the Bishop Alexander heard this, he was greatly distressed, and
 entering into the church, he stretched forth his hands unto God, and
 bewailed himself; and casting himself upon his face in the chancel, he
 prayed, lying upon the pavement. Macarius also was present, and prayed
 with him, and heard his words. And he besought these two things,
 saying, If Arius is brought to communion to-morrow, let me Thy servant
 depart, and destroy not the pious with the impious; but if Thou wilt
 spare Thy Church (and I know that Thou wilt spare), look upon the words
 of Eusebius and his fellows, and give not thine inheritance to
 destruction and reproach [4661] , and take off Arius, lest if he enter
 into the Church, the heresy also may seem to enter with him, and
 henceforward impiety be accounted for piety.' When the Bishop had thus
 prayed, he retired in great anxiety; and a wonderful and extraordinary
 circumstance took place. While Eusebius and his fellows threatened, the
 Bishop prayed; but Arius, who had great confidence in Eusebius and his
 fellows, and talked very wildly, urged by the necessities of nature
 withdrew, and suddenly, in the language of Scripture, falling headlong
 he burst asunder in the midst [4662] ,' and immediately expired as he
 lay, and was deprived both of communion and of his life together.

 4. Such has been the end of Arius: and Eusebius and his fellows,
 overwhelmed with shame, buried their accomplice, while the blessed
 Alexander, amidst the rejoicings of the Church, celebrated the
 Communion with piety and orthodoxy, praying with all the brethren, and
 greatly glorifying God, not as exulting in his death (God forbid!), for
 it is appointed unto all men once to die [4663] ,' but because this
 thing had been shewn forth in a manner transcending human judgments.
 For the Lord Himself judging between the threats of Eusebius and his
 fellows, and the prayer of Alexander, condemned the Arian heresy,
 shewing it to be unworthy of communion with the Church, and making
 manifest to all, that although it receive the support of the Emperor
 and of all mankind, yet it was condemned by the Church herself. So the
 antichristian gang of the Arian madmen has been shewn to be unpleasing
 to God and impious; and many of those who before were deceived by it
 changed their opinions. For none other than the Lord Himself who was
 blasphemed by them condemned the heresy which rose up against Him, and
 again shewed that howsoever the Emperor Constantius may now use
 violence to the Bishops in behalf of it, yet it is excluded from the
 communion of the Church, and alien from the kingdom of heaven.
 Wherefore also let the question which has arisen among you be
 henceforth set at rest; (for this was the agreement made among you),
 and let no one join himself to the heresy, but let even those who have
 been deceived repent. For who shall receive what the Lord condemned?
 And will not he who takes up the support of that which He has made
 excommunicate, be guilty of great impiety, and manifestly an enemy of
 Christ?

 5. Now this is sufficient to confound the contentious; read it
 therefore to those who before raised this question, as well as what was
 briefly addressed to the Monks against the heresy, in order that they
 may be led thereby more strongly to condemn the impiety and wickedness
 of the Arian madmen. Do not however consent to give a copy of these to
 any one, neither transcribe them for yourself (I have signified the
 same to the Monks also); but as a sincere friend, if anything is
 wanting in what I have written, add it, and immediately send them back
 to me. For you will be able to learn from the letter which I have
 written to the Brethren, what pains it has cost me to write it, and
 also to perceive that it is not safe for the writings of a private
 person to be published (especially if they relate to the highest and
 chief doctrines), for this reason;--lest what is imperfectly expressed
 through infirmity or the obscurity of language, do hurt to the reader.
 For the majority of men do not consider the faith, or the aim of the
 writer, but either through envy or a spirit of contention, receive what
 is written as themselves choose, according to an opinion which they
 have previously formed, and misinterpret it to suit their pleasure. But
 the Lord grant that the Truth and a sound [4664] faith in our Lord
 Jesus Christ may prevail among all, and especially among those to whom
 you read this. Amen.

 [4659] On this letter (Migne xxv. 686) in relation to other writings,
 see above, Letter 52, note 1, and pp. 267, 268. Serapion would seem to
 have been the right-hand man of Athan. among the bishops of Egypt. The
 dates of his birth and episcopate are not certain, but the tone of the
 letters to him imply that he is junior to Athanasius. The theory of
 Ceillier, based on a precarious inference from the words of an
 untrustworthy writer (Philip of Side) that this Serapion (the name was
 very common) had presided over the catechetical school before Peter,
 i.e. at the end of the third century, is quite out of the question.
 Moreover, no Serapion appears among the Egyptian bishops at Tyre in 335
 (p. 142), but the name occurs among the Alexandrian presbyterate of the
 same date (pp. 139, 140), while two bishops of the name sign the
 Sardican decrees (p. 127). It is then not unlikely that Athan. selected
 Serapion for the very important (Amm. Marc. xxii. 16) see of Thmuis in
 the Delta between 337 and 339 (supr. Letter 12, note 1). In 353 the
 trusted suffragan is chosen for a difficult and perilous mission to
 Constantius (supr. pp. 497, 504). For some reason we miss his name from
 the list of exiles in 356-7 (pp. 257, 297), nor is he named as present
 at the Council of Confessors' in 362. During the third exile, however,
 Ath. addressed to him our present letter, and an important dogmatic
 treatise (Prolegg. ch. iii. §1, no. 22). Serapion was a friend and
 legatee of S. Antony (supr. p. 220). The date of Serapion's death is
 not known, but he is said to have been living after 368 (Leont. adv.
 fraud. Apoll. in Galland. xii. 701, see Bright, Later Treat. p. 44).
 For further details, and for writings ascribed to him, see D.C.B. iv.
 613 (9). On the death of Arius, see Prolegg, ch. ii. §5.

 [4660] Ep. Æg. 18.

 [4661] Joel ii. 17.

 [4662] Acts i. 18.

 [4663] Heb. ix. 27.

 [4664] hugiainousan, vid. supr. p. 71, §5. fin.

 Letter LV.--Letter to Rufinianus.

 To our lord, son, and most desired fellow-minister Rufinianus [4665] .
 Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

 You write what is proper for a beloved son to write to a father:
 accordingly, I embraced you when you came near me in writing, most
 desired Rufinianus. And I, though I might write to you as a son both in
 the opening and the middle and the close, refrained, lest my
 commendation and testimony should be made known by writing. For you are
 my letter, as it is written [4666] , known and read in the heart. That
 you then are in such case, believe, yea believe. I address you, and
 invite you to write. For by doing so you afford me the highest
 gratification. But since in an honourable and church-like spirit, such
 as becomes your piety, you ask me about those who were drawn away by
 necessity but not corrupted by error, and wish me to write what
 resolution has been come to about them, whether in synods or elsewhere;
 know, most desired Lord, that to begin with [4667] , when violence was
 ceased, a synod [4668] has been held, bishops from foreign parts being
 present; while others have been held by our fellow-ministers resident
 in Greece, as well as by those in Spain and Gaul [4669] : and the same
 decision was come to here and everywhere, namely, in the case of those
 who had fallen and been leaders of impiety, to pardon them upon their
 repentance, but not to give them the position of clergy: but in the
 case of men not deliberate in impiety, but drawn away by necessity and
 violence, that they should not only receive pardon, but should occupy
 the position of clergy: the more so, in that they offered a plausible
 defence, and what had happened seemed due to a certain special purpose
 [4670] . For they assured us that they had not gone over to impiety;
 but lest certain most impious persons should be elected and ruin the
 Churches they elected rather to acquiesce in the violence and to bear
 the burden, than to lose the people. But in saying this, they appeared
 to us to say what was plausible; for they alleged in excuse Aaron the
 brother of Moses, who in the wilderness acquiesced in the people's
 transgression; and that he had had as his excuse the danger of the
 people returning to Egypt and abiding in idolatry. For there was reason
 in the view, that if they remained in the wilderness they might cease
 from their impiety: but if they went into Egypt they would become
 ruined and increase the impiety in their midst. For this reason, then,
 they have been allowed to rank as clergy, those who had been deceived
 and suffered violence being pardoned. I give this information to your
 piety in the confidence that you will both accept [4671] what has been
 resolved upon, and not charge those who assembled, as I have said, with
 remissness. But be good enough to read it to the clergy and laity under
 you, that they may be informed, and may not blame you for being thus
 minded about such persons. For it would not be fitting for me to write,
 when your piety is able to do so, and to announce our mind with regard
 to them, and carry out all that remains to be done. Thanks to the Lord
 that filled you [4672] with all utterance and with all knowledge. Let
 then those that repent openly anathematise by name the error of
 Eudoxius and Euzoius. For they blasphemed still, and wrote that He was
 a creature, ringleaders of the Arian heresy. But let them confess the
 faith confessed by the fathers at Nicæa, and that they put no other
 synod before that one. Greet the brotherhood with you. That with us
 greets you in the Lord.

 [4665] This letter (Migne xxvi. 1180) deals with one of the questions
 which occupied the council of 362 (supr. p. 481), and was probably
 written not long after, although the contents furnish no precise
 terminus ad quem. The personality and see of Rufinianus are uncertain.
 The latter must have been distant from Alexandria: the Coptic documents
 call him Rufinus the archbishop,' which seems to place him outside
 Egypt. The mention of Eudoxius and Euzoius sub. fin. possibly points to
 Syria. I suspect that he is the Lucinianus' associated with Eusebius'
 (of Vercellæ?) in the little fragment (4) quoted in note 7 below, which
 comes from a letter of Ath. dealing with the same subject. The Coptic
 Acts' of Revillout, p. 462 (as referred to supr. p. 188) give part of a
 letter of Rufinianus himself, which shews that the correspondence of
 which our letter is the principal relic bore on the Christological
 decision of the Council of 362: Sound is the idea of perfection for the
 Divinity, as for the Economy of the Manhood: Sound is the doctrine of
 the Divinity in a single essence. Pure, and wholesome for the souls of
 the faithful, is the Confession of the Holy Triad. Perfect then is the
 Economy of the Manhood of the Saviour, and Perfect is His Soul also;
 nothing is lacking to Him. It is thus that It was manifested to us.'

 [4666] 2 Cor. iii. 2.

 [4667] Immediately after the death of Constantius.

 [4668] At Alexandria, a.d. 362, see above p. 481.

 [4669] These unnamed councils are all connected with the general return
 of the exiled orthodox bishops on Julian's accession. They are possibly
 the same as are referred to again in the opening of the letter to
 Epict. below, p. 570.

 [4670] oikonomia

 [4671] Do you, then, who confess all this, abstain, I pray, from
 condemning those who confess the same. But explain the words they use,
 nor, ignoring the latter, repel their authors. Nay, entreat and advise
 them, that they be willing to come to one mind.' ad Eus. Lucin., &c.,
 supr. note 1.

 [4672] 1 Cor. i. 5.

 Letter LVI.--To the Emperor Jovian.

 Copy of a letter of the Emperor Jovian, sent to Athanasius, the most
 holy Archbishop of Alexandria.

 To the most religious and friend of God, Athanasius, Jovian.

 Admiring exceedingly the achievements of your most honourable life, and
 of your likeness to the God of all, and of your affection toward our
 Saviour Christ, we accept you, most honoured bishop. And inasmuch as
 you have not flinched from all labour, nor from the fear of your
 persecutors, and, regarding dangers and threats of the sword as dung,
 holding the rudder of the orthodox faith which is dear to you, are
 contending even until now for the truth, and continue to exhibit
 yourself as a pattern to all the people of the faithful, and an example
 of virtue:--our imperial Majesty recalls you, and desires that you
 should return to the office of the teaching of salvation. Return then
 to the holy Churches, and tend the people of God, and send up to God
 with zeal your prayers for our clemency. For we know that by your
 supplication we, and all who hold with us [the Christian faith], shall
 have great assistance from the supreme God.

 56. Letter of Athanasius to Jovian [4673] concerning the Faith.

 1. A desire to learn and a yearning for heavenly things is suitable to
 a religious Emperor; for thus you will truly have your heart' also in
 the hand of God [4674] .' Since then your Piety desired [4675] to learn
 from us the faith of the Catholic Church, giving thanks for these
 things to the Lord, we counselled above all things to remind your Piety
 of the faith confessed by the Fathers at Nicæa. For this certain set at
 nought, while plotting against us in many ways, because we would not
 comply with the Arian heresy, and they have become authors of heresy
 and schisms in the Catholic Church. For the true and pious faith in the
 Lord has become manifest to all, being both known and read [4676] '
 from the Divine Scriptures. For in it both the saints were made perfect
 and suffered martyrdom, and now are departed in the Lord; and the faith
 would have abode inviolate always had not the wickedness of certain
 heretics presumed to tamper with it. For a certain Arius and those with
 him attempted to corrupt it, and to introduce impiety in its place,
 affirming that the Son of God was from nought, and a creature, and a
 thing made and changeable. But with these words they deceived many, so
 that even they that seemed to be somewhat were carried away [4677] ,'
 with their blasphemy. And yet our holy Fathers, as we said before, came
 promptly together at the Synod at Nicæa, and anathematised them, and
 confessed in writing the faith of the Catholic Church, so that, this
 being everywhere preached, the heresy kindled by the heretics might be
 quenched. This faith then was everywhere in every Church sincerely
 known and preached. But since now certain who wish to renew the Arian
 heresy have presumed to set at nought this faith confessed at Nicæa by
 the Fathers, and while pretending to confess it, do in fact deny it,
 explaining away the Coessential [4678] ,' and blaspheming of their own
 accord [4679] against the Holy Spirit, in affirming that It is a
 creature, and came into being as a thing made by the Son, we hasten as
 of bounden duty, in view of the injury resulting to the people from
 such blasphemy, to hand to your Piety the faith confessed at Nicæa; in
 order that thy religiousness may know what has been written with all
 accuracy, and how far wrong they are who teach contrary to it.

 2. For know, most religious Augustus, that these things have been
 preached from time immemorial, and this faith the Fathers who met at
 Nicæa confessed; and to it have assented all the Churches in every
 quarter, both those in Spain, and Britain, and the Gauls, and all Italy
 and Dalmatia, Dacia and Moesia, Macedonia and all Greece, and in all
 Africa and Sardinia, and Cyprus and Crete, as well as Pamphylia, Lycia
 and Isauria, and those in Egypt and the Libyas, Pontus and Cappadocia,
 and those near at hand to us [4680] , and the Churches in the East,
 except a few who hold with Arius. For of all those above mentioned we
 have both learnt the opinion by experience, and we have letters. And
 you know, O most religious Augustus, that even if some few speak
 against this faith, they cannot create a demurrer [4681] , inasmuch as
 the whole world [4682] holds the Apostolic faith. For they having long
 been infected by the Arian heresy, now the more obstinately oppose the
 truth. And that your Piety may know, although you know already, yet we
 hasten to append the faith confessed by the Bishops at Nicæa. The faith
 then confessed at Nicæa by the Fathers is as follows:--

 3. We believe [4683] , &c., &c.

 4. By this faith, Augustus, all must needs abide, as Divine and
 Apostolic, and none must unsettle it by plausibilities, and contentions
 about words, which is what the Arian madmen have done, saying that the
 Son of God is from nought, and that once there was when He was not, and
 that He is created, and made and changeable. For for this cause, as we
 said before, the Synod at Nicæa anathematised such heresy, but
 confessed the faith of the truth. For they have not merely said that
 the Son is like [4684] the Father, lest He should be believed merely
 like God, instead of Very God from God; but they wrote Coessential,'
 which was peculiar to a genuine and true Son, truly and naturally from
 the Father. Nor yet did they make the Holy Spirit alien from the Father
 and the Son, but rather glorified Him together with the Father and the
 Son, in the one faith of the Holy Triad, because there is in the Holy
 Triad also one Godhead.

 Appendix to Letter LVI.

 Petition made at Antioch to Jovian the Emperor on the part of Lucius
 [4685] and Bernicianus, and certain other Arians against Athanasius,
 Bishop of Alexandria.

 First Petition which they made as the Emperor was departing to Camp, at
 the Roman Gate.

 May it please your Might and your Majesty and your Piety to hear us.
 The Emperor: Who are you and where from?' The Arians: Christians, my
 Lord.' Emperor: Where from, and from what city?' The Arians:
 Alexandria.'--Emperor: What do you want?' The Arians: May it please
 your Might and your Majesty, give us a Bishop.' Emperor: I ordered the
 former one, whom you had before, Athanasius, to occupy the See.' The
 Arians: May it please your Might: he has been many years both in
 banishment, and under accusation.' Suddenly a soldier answered in
 indignation: May it please your Majesty, enquire of them who they are
 and where from, for these are the leavings and refuse of Cappadocia,
 the remains of that unholy George who desolated the city and the
 world.' The Emperor on hearing this set spurs to his horse, and
 departed to the Camp.

 Second Petition of the Arians.

 We have accusations and clear proofs against Athanasius, in that ten
 and twenty years ago he was deprived by the ever memorable Constantine
 and Constantius, and incurred banishment under the most religious and
 philosophical and blessed Julian.' Emperor: Accusations ten, twenty,
 and thirty years old are now obsolete. Don't speak to me about
 Athanasius, for I know why he was accused, and how he was banished.'

 Third Petition of the Arians.

 And now again, we have certain other accusations against Athanasius.'
 Emperor: The rights of the case will not appear by means of crowded
 numbers, and clamours, but choose two from yourselves, and from the
 party of the majority other two, for I cannot answer each one
 severally.' Those from the majority: These are the leavings from the
 unholy George, who desolated our province, and who would not allow a
 counsellor to dwell in the cities.' The Arians: May it please you, any
 one you will except Athanasius.' Emperor: I told you that the case of
 Athanasius was already settled,' (and then angrily) feri, feri [4686]
 !' The Arians: May it please you, if you send Athanasius, our city is
 ruined, and no one assembles with him.' Emperor: Yet I took pains, and
 ascertained that he holds right opinions and is orthodox, and teaches
 aright.' The Arians: With his mouth he utters what is right, but in his
 soul he harbours guile.' Emperor: That will do, you have testified of
 him, that he utters what is right and teaches aright, but if he teaches
 and speaks aright with his tongue, but harbours evil thoughts in his
 soul, it concerns him before God. For we are men, and hear what is
 said; but what is in the heart God knows.' The Arians: Authorise our
 holding communion together.' Emperor: Why, who prevents you?' The
 Arians: May it please you, he proclaims us as sectarians and
 dogmatisers.' Emperor: It is his duty, and that of those who teach
 aright.' The Arians: May it please your Might; we cannot bear this man,
 and he has taken away the lands of the Churches.' Emperor: Oh then, it
 is on account of property you are come here, and not on account of the
 faith'--then he added--go away, and keep the peace.' Once more he added
 to the Arians: Go away to the Church, to-morrow you have a Communion,
 and after the dismissal, there are Bishops here, and here is Nemesinus
 [4687] , each one of you shall sign as he believes: Athanasius is here
 too; whoever does not know the word of faith, let him learn from
 Athanasius. You have to-morrow and the day after, for I am going out to
 Camp.' And a certain lawyer [4688] belonging to the Cynics petitioned
 the Emperor: May it please your Majesty, on account of Bishop
 Athanasius, the Receiver-General [4689] seized my houses.' Emperor: If
 the Receiver-General seized your houses what has that to do with
 Athanasius?' Another lawyer, Patalas, said: I have a complaint against
 Athanasius.' Emperor: And what have you to do with Christians, being a
 heathen?' But certain of the majority of them of Antioch took Lucius
 and brought him to the Emperor, saying: May it please your Might and
 your Majesty, look whom they wanted to make a Bishop!'

 Another petition made at the porch of the palace [4690] on the part of
 Lucius:--May it please your Might, listen to me.' The Emperor stopped
 and said: I ask you, Lucius, how did you come here, by sea or by land?'
 Lucius: May it please you, by sea.' Emperor: Well, Lucius, may the God
 of the world, and the radiant sun, and moon, be angry with those men
 that made the voyage with you, for not casting you into the sea; and
 may that ship never again have fair winds, nor find a haven with her
 passengers when in a storm.' And through Euzoius [4691] the unbelieving
 Arians asked Probatius and his fellows, the successors of Eusebius
 [4692] and Bardio as eunuchs, that they might be granted an audience.
 The Emperor learned this, and tortured the eunuchs and said: If any one
 wants to make a petition against Christians let this be his fate.' And
 so the Emperor dismissed them.

 [4673] Cf. Prolegg, ch. ii. §9, and ch. v. §3, h. and supr. p. 487.
 Athanasius, on the first news of Julian's death, by a secret and rapid
 journey, succeeded in meeting Jovian, when still beyond the Euphrates
 on his return from the East. He thus secured the ear of the new Emperor
 before the Arian deputation from Alexandria could reach him. The letter
 before us (Migne xxvi. 813) was drawn up at Antioch, as it would seem
 in response to a request from Jovian on a doctrinal statement. The
 short letter of Jovian prefixed to the Epistle is a formal
 authorisation for the bishop's return to his see, with which, taught by
 his experience under Julian, he was careful to arm himself. The
 documents given as an appendix are notes made at Antioch, and carefully
 preserved, of the reception given by Jovian to the Arian deputation.
 They are probably the exemplaria' referred to in Hist. Aceph. §14 (see
 note there). They are characteristic, and interesting in many ways;
 among others, as shewing how accurately Jovian had been primed by
 Athanasius with the leading facts of his case.

 [4674] Prov. xxi. 1. The letter as given by Theodoret adds, and you
 will peacefully enjoy a long reign:' probably the words were erased
 from our text on account of Jovian's premature death. If genuine, they
 stamp the prediction supr. p. 487, as, at least in part, a vaticinium
 ex eventu.

 [4675] Very probably orally, see Prolegg. ubi supr.

 [4676] 2 Cor. iii. 2.

 [4677] Gal. ii. 6, 13.

 [4678] This reference is explained above, Prolegg. ch. ii. §9 sub fin.

 [4679] 'Autoi, i.e. adding this, as a feature of their own, to the
 Arianism they shared with their predecessors. Acacius seems to be
 specially referred to; he had just signed the Homousios with
 explanations; cf. Pseudo-Ath. de Hypocr. Melet. et Euseb.

 [4680] This points to Antioch as the place of composition, which is
 fairly certain on other grounds.

 [4681] prokrima, a præjudicium' or prima facie objection in their
 favour.

 [4682] A pardonable exaggeration, but its very use is significant; cf.
 de Syn. 33, and Bright's note, Later Treatises, p. 20.

 [4683] Ut supr. p. 75; the other authorities for the text of the creed
 in Hahn §73, note. Cf. Hort, p. 54 sqq. The only important variant here
 not noticed by Hort is ton hena kurion.

 [4684] See above, pp. 83 and 84, note 4, also Prolegg. ii. §8 (2) b.

 [4685] Originally Arian deacon (p. 70), and presently bishop of the
 Arians at Alexandria; see Hist. Aceph. p. 499, and Prolegg ch. ii. §10.

 [4686] i.e. strike, strike! probably a direction to the guard to
 silence the petitioners.

 [4687] Possibly an imperial notary or registrar, see D.C.B. iv. 15.

 [4688] Scholastikos

 [4689] katholikos

 [4690] In the New Town, on the island of the Orontes.

 [4691] Originally one of the Arian clergy of Alexandria (supr. p. 70),
 now Arian bishop of Antioch.

 [4692] Hist. Ar. 35, &c.

 Letter LVII.--First Letter to Orsisius [4693] .

 And having spent a few days there, he saith to the Abbat Theodorus:
 Since the Passover is nigh, visit the brethren after your manner; and
 as the Lord shall dispose me, I will do. And he embraced him, and sent
 him away, having written a letter by him to the Abbat Orsisius and the
 brethren, to the following effect:'--

 I have seen your fellow-worker and father of the brethren, Theodorus,
 and in him the master of our father Pachomius. And I rejoiced to see
 the sons of the Church, and they made me glad by their presence. But
 the Lord is their recompenser. And as Theodorus was about to leave me
 for you, he said to me: Remember me. And I said to him: If I forget
 thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand be forgotten, yea let my tongue
 cleave to my throat if I remember thee not [4694] .

 [4693] Orsisius was chosen abbat of Tabenne in Upper Egypt, a.d. 347,
 in succession to Petronius. Presently, however, he resigned in favour
 of Theodorus, the favourite disciple of Pachomius. The two letters
 which follow are from the life of Pachomius, §§92, 96, Acta SS. for
 May, vol. iii. (Also in Migne xxvi. 977.) They belong, the first to the
 year 363 a.d., not long before the death of Julian (D.C.B. i. 199a),
 the second to the summer of the following year, 364 (infr. note 3).
 Both letters are characteristic; the second a moving and simple
 consolation to mourners.

 [4694] Ps. cxxxvii. 6, LXX.

 Letter LVIII.--Second Letter to Orsisius.

 But the most holy Archbishop Athanasius, when he heard about our father
 Theodorus, was grieved, and sent this letter to the Abbat Orsisius and
 the brethren to console them for his decease, as follows:'--

 Athanasius to Orsisius, Abbat, father of monks, and to all with him who
 practise the solitary life, and are settled in faith in God, beloved
 brethren most longed for in the Lord, greeting.

 I have heard about the decease of the blessed Theodorus [4695] , and
 the tidings caused me great anxiety, knowing as I did his value to you.
 Now if it had not been Theodorus, I should have used many words to you,
 with tears, considering what follows after death. But since it is
 Theodorus whom you and I have known, what need I say in my letter save
 Blessed is' Theodorus, who hath not walked in the council of the
 ungodly [4696] ?' But if he is blessed that feareth the Lord [4697] ,'
 we may now confidently call him blessed, having the firm assurance that
 he has reached as it were a haven, and has a life without care. Would
 that the same had also befallen each one of us; would that each of us
 in his running might thus arrive; would that each of us, on his voyage,
 might moor his own bark there in the stormless haven, so that, at rest
 with the fathers, he might say, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
 therein [4698] .' Wherefore, brethren beloved and most longed-for, weep
 not for Theodorus, for he is not dead, but sleepeth [4699] .' Let none
 weep when he remembers him, but imitate his life. For one must not
 grieve over one that is gone to the place where grief is not. This I
 write to you all in common; but especially to you, beloved and most
 longed for Orsisius, in order that now that he is fallen asleep, you
 may take up the whole charge, and take his place among the brethren.
 For while he survived, you two were as one, and when one was away, the
 work of both was carried on: and when both were there you were as one,
 discoursing to the beloved ones what made for their good. Thus act,
 then, and so doing write and tell me of the safety of yourself and of
 the brotherhood. And I exhort you all to pray together that the Lord
 may grant further peace to the Churches. For we now kept festival with
 joy, both Easter and Pentecost, and we rejoice in the benefits of the
 Lord. I write to you all. Greet all who fear the Lord. Those with me
 greet you. I pray that you may be well in the Lord, beloved and
 much-longed-for brethren.

 [4695] On Theodore see Amelineau, S. Pakhôme, &c., pp. xcv.-xcvii. The
 death of Theodore is fixed for April 27, 364, on the following grounds.
 He died (Vit. Pachom. 95) of a short and sudden illness, on Pachon 2
 (April 27), and shortly after Easter. Moreover his death took place 18
 years after that of Pachomius. But Ammon (as he tells us himself, supr.
 p. 487) became a Christian and a monk a year and more' after March 15,
 351 (proclamation of Gallus as Cæsar), and six years after the death of
 Pachomius. (Ep. Amm. 4, 5.) This dates the latter event a little less
 than five years before March 15, 351. But Pachomius died, according to
 his Life, on Pachon 14 (May 9), of an epidemic which attacked the
 community after Easter. This double condition is satisfied by the year
 346, in which Easter fell on Pharm. 4, forty days before the day of
 Pachomius' decease. If then Pachomius died in 346, Theodore died in
 364. Against this result we have (1) the fact that in that year April
 27 was twenty-three days after Easter; but the Easter gathering of the
 monks would last over April 11 (Low Sunday), and the death of Theodore
 would come suddenly enough a fortnight later; (2) the fragment (supr.
 p. 551) probably belonging to Letter 39, which a coptic life of
 Theodore makes him state that he received before his last Easter. But
 this cannot be correct; for all known data forbid us to place the death
 of Theodore as late as 367. (Tillemont's tentative opinion, vii. 691,
 761, is bound up with an obsolete chronology of the exiles of Athan.)
 On the other hand Theodore cannot have died as early as 363. Athanasius
 was with him (supr. p. 487) in the summer of that year, and when our
 present letter was written Ath. had clearly kept Easter at home, which
 suits 364, but excludes 363.

 [4696] Ps. i. 1.

 [4697] Ps. cxii. 1.

 [4698] Ib. cxxxii. 14.

 [4699] Matt. ix. 24.

 Letter LIX.--To Epictetus.

 To my Lord, beloved brother, and most-longed-for fellow-minister
 Epictetus [4700] , Athanasius greeting in the Lord. I thought that all
 vain talk of all heretics, many as they may be, had been stopped by the
 Synod which was held at Nicæa. For the Faith there confessed by the
 Fathers according to the divine Scriptures is enough by itself at once
 to overthrow all impiety, and to establish the religious belief in
 Christ. For this reason at the present time, at the assembling of
 diverse synods, both in Gaul and Spain, and great Rome [4701] , all who
 came together, as though moved by one spirit, unanimously anathematised
 those who still were secretly holding with Arius, namely Auxentius of
 Milan, Ursacius, Valens, and Gaius of Pannonia. And they wrote
 everywhere, that, whereas the above-said were devising the names of
 synods to cite on their side, no synod should be cited in the Catholic
 Church save only that which was held at Nicæa, which was a monument of
 victory over all heresy, but especially the Arian, which was the main
 reason of the synod assembling when it did. How then, after all this,
 are some attempting to raise doubts or questions? If they belong to the
 Arians, this is not to be wondered at, that they find fault with what
 was drawn up against themselves, just as the Gentiles when they hear
 that the idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
 hands [4702] ,' think the doctrine of the divine Cross folly. But if
 those who desire to reopen everything by raising questions belong to
 those who think they believe aright, and love what the fathers have
 declared, they are simply doing what the prophet describes, giving
 their neighbour turbid confusion to drink [4703] , and fighting about
 words to no good purpose, save to the subversion of the simple.

 2. I write this after reading the memoranda submitted by your piety,
 which I could wish had not been written at all, so that not even any
 record of these things should go down to posterity. For who ever yet
 heard the like? Who ever taught or learned it? For from Sion shall come
 forth the law of God, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem [4704] ;'
 but whence came forth this? What lower region has vomited the statement
 that the Body born of Mary is coessential with the Godhead of the Word?
 or that the Word has been changed into flesh, bones, hair, and the
 whole body, and altered from its own nature? Or who ever heard in a
 Church, or even from Christians, that the Lord wore a body putatively,
 not in nature; or who ever went so far in impiety as to say and hold,
 that this Godhead, which is coessential with the Father, was
 circumcised and became imperfect instead of perfect; and that what hung
 upon the tree was not the body, but the very creative Essence and
 Wisdom? Or who that hears that the Word transformed for Himself a
 passible body, not of Mary, but of His own Essence, could call him who
 said this a Christian? Or who devised this abominable impiety, for it
 to enter even his imagination, and for him to say that to pronounce the
 Lord's Body to be of Mary is to hold a Tetrad instead of a Triad in the
 Godhead? Those who think thus, saying that the Body of the Saviour
 which He put on from Mary, is of the Essence of the Triad. Or whence
 again have certain vomited an impiety as great as those already
 mentioned; saying namely, that the body is not newer than the Godhead
 of the Word, but was coeternal with it always, since it was compounded
 of the Essence of Wisdom. Or how did men called Christians venture even
 to doubt whether the Lord, Who proceeded from Mary, while Son of God by
 Essence and Nature, is of the seed of David according to the flesh
 [4705] , and of the flesh of the Holy Mary? Or who have been so
 venturesome as to say that Christ Who suffered in the flesh and was
 crucified is not Lord, Saviour, God, and Son of the Father [4706] ? Or
 how can they wish to be called Christians who say that the Word has
 descended upon a holy man as upon one of the prophets, and has not
 Himself become man, taking the body from Mary; but that Christ is one
 person, while the Word of God, Who before Mary and before the ages was
 Son of the Father, is another? Or how can they be Christians who say
 that the Son is one, and the Word of God another?

 3. Such were the contents of the memoranda; diverse statements, but one
 in their sense and in their meaning; tending to impiety. It was for
 these things that men who make their boast in the confession of the
 fathers drawn up at Nicæa were disputing and quarrelling with one
 another. But I marvel that your piety suffered it, and that you did not
 stop those who said such things, and propound to them the right faith,
 so that upon hearing it they might hold their peace, or if they opposed
 it might be counted as heretics. For the statements are not fit for
 Christians to make or to hear, on the contrary they are in every way
 alien from the Apostolic teaching. For this reason, as I said above, I
 have caused what they say to be baldly inserted in my letter, so that
 one who merely hears may perceive the shame and impiety therein
 contained. And although it would be right to denounce and expose in
 full the folly of those who have had such ideas, yet it would be a good
 thing to close my letter here and write no more. For what is so
 manifestly shewn to be evil, it is not necessary to waste time in
 exposing further, lest contentious persons think the matter doubtful.
 It is enough merely to answer such things as follows: we are content
 with the fact that this is not the teaching of the Catholic Church, nor
 did the fathers hold this. But lest the inventors of evil things [4707]
 ' make entire silence on our part a pretext for shamelessness, it will
 be well to mention a few points from Holy Scripture, in case they may
 even thus be put to shame, and cease from these foul devices.

 4. Whence did it occur to you, sirs, to say that the Body is of one
 Essence with the Godhead of the Word? For it is well to begin at this
 point, in order that by shewing this opinion to be unsound, all the
 others too may be proved to be the same. Now from the divine Scriptures
 we discover nothing of the kind. For they say that God came in a human
 body. But the fathers who also assembled at Nicæa say that, not the
 body, but the Son Himself is coessential with the Father, and that
 while He is of the Essence of the Father, the body, as they admitted
 according to the Scriptures, is of Mary. Either then deny the Synod of
 Nicæa, and as heretics bring in your doctrine from the side; or, if you
 wish to be children of the fathers, do not hold the contrary of what
 they wrote. For here again you may see how monstrous it is: If the Word
 is coessential with the body which is of earthly nature, while the Word
 is, by your own confession, coessential with the Father, it will follow
 that even the Father Himself is coessential with the body produced from
 the earth. And why any longer blame the Arians for calling the Son a
 creature, when you go off to another form of impiety, saying that the
 Word was changed into flesh and bones and hair and muscles and all the
 body, and was altered from its own nature? For it is time for you to
 say openly that He was born of earth; for from earth is the nature of
 the bones and of all the body. What then is this great folly of yours,
 that you fight even with one another? For in saying that the Word is
 coessential with the Body, you distinguish the one from the other
 [4708] , while in saying that He has been changed into flesh, you
 imagine a change of the Word Himself. And who will tolerate you any
 longer if you so much as utter these opinions? For you have gone
 further in impiety than any heresy. For if the Word is coessential with
 the Body, the commemoration and the work of Mary are superfluous [4709]
 , inasmuch as the body could have existed before Mary, just as the Word
 also is eternal: if, that is, it is as you say co-essential with the
 Body. Or what need was there even of the Word coming among us, to put
 on what was coessential with Himself, or to change His own nature and
 become a body? For the Deity does not take hold [4710] of itself, so as
 to put on what is of its own Essence, any more than the Word sinned, in
 that it ransoms the sins of others, in order that changing into a body
 it should offer itself a sacrifice for itself, and ransom itself.

 5. But this is not so, far be the thought. For he takes hold of the
 seed of Abraham [4711] ,' as the apostle said; whence it behoved Him to
 be made like His brethren in all things, and to take a Body like us.
 This is why Mary is truly presupposed, in order that He may take it
 from her, and offer it for us as His own. And this Isaiah pointed to in
 his prophecy, in the words: Behold the Virgin [4712] ,' while Gabriel
 is sent to her--not simply to a virgin, but to a virgin betrothed to a
 man [4713] ,' in order that by means of the betrothed man he might shew
 that Mary was really a human being. And for this reason Scripture also
 mentions her bringing forth, and tells of her wrapping Him in swaddling
 clothes; and therefore, too, the paps which He sucked were called
 blessed [4714] . And He was offered as a sacrifice, in that He Who was
 born had opened the womb [4715] . Now all these things are proofs that
 the Virgin brought forth. And Gabriel preached the Gospel to her
 without uncertainty, saying not merely what is born in thee,' lest the
 body should be thought to be extraneously induced upon her, but of
 thee,' that what was born might be believed to be naturally from her,
 inasmuch as Nature clearly shews that it is impossible for a virgin to
 produce milk unless she has brought forth, and impossible for a body to
 be nourished with milk and wrapped in swaddling clothes unless it has
 previously been naturally brought forth. This is the meaning of His
 being circumcised on the eighth day: of Symeon taking Him in his arms,
 of His becoming a young child, and growing when He was twelve years
 old, and of His coming to His thirtieth year. For it was not, as some
 suppose, the very Essence of the Word that was changed, and was
 circumcised, because it is incapable of alteration or change. For the
 Saviour Himself says, Behold, behold, it is I, and I change not [4716]
 ,' while Paul writes: Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to-day, and
 for ever [4717] .' But in the Body which was circumcised, and carried,
 and ate and drank, and was weary, and was nailed on the tree and
 suffered, there was the impassible and incorporeal Word of God. This
 Body it was that was laid in a grave, when the Word had left it, yet
 was not parted from it, to preach, as Peter says, also to the spirits
 in prison [4718] .

 6. And this above all shews the foolishness of those who say that the
 Word was changed into bones and flesh. For if this had been so, there
 were no need of a tomb. For the Body would have gone by itself to
 preach to the spirits in Hades. But as it was, He Himself went to
 preach, while the Body Joseph wrapped in a linen cloth, and laid it
 away at Golgotha [4719] . And so it is shewn to all that the Body was
 not the Word, but Body of the Word. And it was this that Thomas handled
 when it had risen from the dead, and saw in it the print of the nails,
 which the Word Himself had undergone, seeing them fixed in His own
 Body, and though able to prevent it, did not do so. On the contrary,
 the incorporeal Word made His own the properties of the Body, as being
 His own Body. Why, when the Body was struck by the attendant, as
 suffering Himself He asked, Why smitest thou Me [4720] ?' And being by
 nature intangible, the Word yet said, I gave My back to the stripes,
 and My cheeks to blows, and hid not My face from shame and spitting
 [4721] .' For what the human Body of the Word suffered, this the Word,
 dwelling in the body, ascribed to Himself, in order that we might be
 enabled to be partakers of the Godhead of the Word [4722] . And verily
 it is strange that He it was Who suffered and yet suffered not.
 Suffered, because His own Body suffered, and He was in it, which thus
 suffered; suffered not, because the Word, being by Nature God, is
 impassible. And while He, the incorporeal, was in the passible Body,
 the Body had in it the impassible Word, which was destroying the
 infirmities inherent in the Body. But this He did, and so it was, in
 order that Himself taking what was ours and offering it as a sacrifice,
 He might do away with it, and conversely might invest us with what was
 His, and cause the Apostle to say: This corruptible must put on
 incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality [4723] .'

 7. Now this did not come to pass putatively, as some have supposed: far
 be the thought: but the Saviour having in very truth become Man, the
 salvation of the whole man was brought about. For if the Word were in
 the Body putatively, as they say, and by putative is meant imaginary,
 it follows that both the salvation and the resurrection of man is
 apparent only, as the most impious Manichæus held. But truly our
 salvation is not merely apparent, nor does it extend to the body only,
 but the whole man, body and soul alike, has truly obtained salvation in
 the Word Himself. That then which was born of Mary was according to the
 divine Scriptures human by nature, and the Body of the Lord was a true
 one; but it was this, because it was the same as our body, for Mary was
 our sister inasmuch as we all are from Adam. And no one can doubt of
 this when he remembers what Luke wrote. For after He had risen from the
 dead, when some thought that they did not see the Lord in the body
 derived from Mary, but were beholding a spirit instead, He said, See My
 hands and My feet, and the prints of the nails, that it is I Myself:
 handle Me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me
 to have. And when He had said thus, He shewed them His hands and His
 feet [4724] .' Whence they can be refuted who have ventured to say that
 the Lord was transformed into flesh and bones. For He did not say, As
 ye see Me to be flesh and bone,' but as ye see Me to have,' in order
 that it might not be thought that the Word Himself was changed into
 these things, but that He might be believed to have them after His
 resurrection as well as before His death.

 8. These things being thus demonstrated, it is superfluous to touch
 upon the other points, or to enter upon any discussion relating to
 them, since the body in which the Word was is not coessential with the
 Godhead, but was truly born of Mary, while the Word Himself was not
 changed into bones and flesh, but came in the flesh. For what John
 said, The Word was made flesh [4725] ,' has this meaning, as we may see
 by a similar passage; for it is written in Paul: Christ has become a
 curse for us [4726] .' And just as He has not Himself become a curse,
 but is said to have done so because He took upon Him the curse on our
 behalf, so also He has become flesh not by being changed into flesh,
 but because He assumed on our behalf living flesh, and has become Man.
 For to say the Word became flesh,' is equivalent to saying the Word has
 become man;' according to what is said in Joel: I will pour forth of My
 Spirit upon all flesh [4727] ;' for the promise did not extend to the
 irrational animals, but is for men, on whose account the Lord is become
 Man. As then this is the sense of the above text, they all will
 reasonably condemn themselves who have thought that the flesh derived
 from Mary existed before her, and that the Word, prior to her, had a
 human soul, and existed in it always even before His coming. And they
 too will cease who have said that the Flesh was not accessible to
 death, but belonged to the immortal Nature. For if it did not die, how
 could Paul deliver to the Corinthians that Christ died for our sins,
 according to the Scriptures [4728] ,' or how did He rise at all if He
 did not also die? Again, they will blush deeply who have even
 entertained the possibility of a Tetrad instead of a Triad resulting,
 if it were said that the Body was derived from Mary. For if (they
 argue) we say the Body is of one Essence with the Word, the Triad
 remains a Triad; for then the Word imports no foreign element into it;
 but if we admit that the Body derived from Mary is human, it follows,
 since the Body is foreign in Essence, and the Word is in it, that the
 addition of the Body causes a Tetrad instead of a Triad.

 9. When they argue thus, they fail to perceive the contradiction in
 which they involve themselves. For even though they say that the Body
 is not from Mary, but is coessential with the Word, yet none the less
 (the very point they dissemble, to avoid being credited with their real
 opinion) this on their own premises can be proved to involve a Tetrad.
 For as the Son, according to the Fathers, is coessential with the
 Father, but is not the Father Himself, but is called coessential, as
 Son with Father, so the Body, which they call coessential with the
 Word, is not the Word Himself, but a distinct entity. But if so, on
 their own shewing, their Triad will be a Tetrad [4729] . For the true,
 really perfect and indivisible Triad is not accessible to addition as
 is the Triad imagined by these persons. And how do these remain
 Christians who imagine another God in addition to the true one? For,
 once again, in their other fallacy one can see how great is their
 folly. For if they think because it is contained and stated in the
 Scriptures, that the Body of the Saviour is human and derived from
 Mary, that a Tetrad is substituted for a Triad, as though the Body
 created an addition, they go very far wrong, so much so as to make the
 creature equal to the Creator, and suppose that the Godhead can receive
 an addition. And they have failed to perceive that the Word is become
 Flesh, not by reason of an addition to the Godhead, but in order that
 the flesh may rise again. Nor did the Word proceed from Mary that He
 might be bettered, but that He might ransom the human race. How then
 can they think that the Body, ransomed and quickened by the Word, made
 an addition in respect of Godhead to the Word that had quickened it?
 For on the contrary, a great addition has accrued to the human Body
 itself from the fellowship and union of the Word with it. For instead
 of mortal it is become immortal; and, though an animal [4730] body, it
 is become spiritual, and though made from earth it entered the heavenly
 gates. The Triad, then, although the Word took a body from Mary, is a
 Triad, being inaccessible to addition or diminution; but it is always
 perfect, and in the Triad one Godhead is recognised, and so in the
 Church one God is preached, the Father of the Word.

 10. For this reason they also will henceforth keep silence, who once
 said that He who proceeded from Mary is not very Christ, or Lord, or
 God. For if He were not God in the Body, how came He, upon proceeding
 from Mary, straightway to be called Emmanuel, which is being
 interpreted God with us [4731] ?' Why again, if the Word was not in the
 flesh, did Paul write to the Romans of whom is Christ after the flesh,
 Who is above all God blessed for ever. Amen [4732] ?' Let them
 therefore confess, even they who previously denied that the Crucified
 was God, that they have erred; for the divine Scriptures bid them, and
 especially Thomas, who, after seeing upon Him the print of the nails,
 cried out My Lord and my God [4733] !' For the Son, being God, and Lord
 of glory [4734] , was in the Body which was ingloriously nailed and
 dishonoured; but the Body, while it suffered, being pierced on the
 tree, and water and blood flowed from its side, yet because it was a
 temple of the Word was filled full of the Godhead. For this reason it
 was that the sun, seeing its creator suffering in His outraged body,
 withdrew its rays and darkened the earth. But the body itself being of
 mortal nature, beyond its own nature rose again by reason of the Word
 which was in it; and it has ceased from natural corruption, and, having
 put on the Word which is above man, has become incorruptible.

 11. But with regard to the imagination of some, who say that the Word
 came upon one particular man, the Son of Mary, just as it came upon
 each of the Prophets, it is superfluous to discuss it, since their
 madness carries its own condemnation manifestly with it. For if He came
 thus, why was that man born of a virgin, and not like others of a man
 and woman? For in this way each of the saints also was begotten. Or
 why, if the Word came thus, is not the death of each one said to have
 taken place on our behalf, but only this man's death? Or why, if the
 Word sojourned among us in the case of each one of the prophets, is it
 said only in the case of Him born of Mary that He sojourned here once
 at the consummation of the ages [4735] ?' Or why, if He came as He had
 come in the saints of former times, did the Son of Mary alone, while
 all the rest had died without rising as yet, rise again on the third
 day? Or why, if the Word had come in like manner as He had done in the
 other cases, is the Son of Mary alone called Emmanuel, as though a Body
 filled full of the Godhead were born of her? For Emmanuel is
 interpreted God with us.' Or why, if He came thus, is it not said that
 when each of the saints ate, drank, laboured, and died, that He (the
 Word) ate, drank, laboured, and died, but only in the case of the Son
 of Mary. For what that Body suffered is said to have been suffered by
 the Word. And while we are merely told of the others that they were
 born, and begotten, it is said in the case of the Son of Mary alone
 that The Word was made Flesh.'

 12. This proves that while to all the others the Word came, in order
 that they might prophesy, from Mary the Word Himself took flesh, and
 proceeded forth as man; being by nature and essence the Word of God,
 but after the flesh man of the seed of David, and made of the flesh of
 Mary, as Paul said [4736] . Him the Father pointed out both in Jordan
 and on the Mount, saying, This is My beloved Son in whom I am well
 pleased [4737] .' Him the Arians denied, but we recognising worship,
 not dividing the Son and the Word, but knowing that the Son is the Word
 Himself, by Whom all things are made, and by Whom we were redeemed. And
 for this reason we wonder how any contention at all has arisen among
 you about things so clear. But thanks to the Lord, much as we were
 grieved at reading your memoranda, we were equally glad at their
 conclusion. For they departed with concord, and peacefully agreed in
 the confession of the pious and orthodox faith. This fact has induced
 me, after much previous consideration, to write these few words; for I
 am anxious lest by my silence this matter should cause pain rather than
 joy to those whose concord occasions joy to ourselves. I therefore ask
 your piety in the first place, and secondly those who hear, to take my
 letter in good part, and if anything is lacking in it in respect of
 piety, to set that right, and inform me. But if it is written, as from
 one unpractised in speech, below the subject and imperfectly, let all
 allow for my feebleness in speaking. Greet all the brethren with you.
 All those with us greet you; may you live in good health in the Lord,
 beloved and truly longed for.

 [4700] Of Epictetus, bishop of Corinth, nothing else is known. This
 letter reflects the uncertainty, which attended the victory of the
 Nicene Creed, as to the relation of the Historical Christ to the
 Eternal Son. The questions raised at Corinth were those which troubled
 the Eastern Church generally, and which came to a head in the system of
 Apollinarius, whose distinctive tenet, however, is not mentioned in
 this letter. Persons anxious to place the Nicene doctrine in
 intelligible connection with the matter of the Gospel Narrative had
 debated the question before Epictetus, and with deference to his
 ruling. Their tentative solutions (§2 infr.) fall into two classes,
 both of which, in attempting to solve the problem, proceed upon the
 assumption incidentally combated by Athan., that the Manhood of Christ
 was a Hypostasis or Person, which if invested with Divine attributes,
 would introduce a fourth hypostatic entity into the Trinity. To avoid
 this, one class identified the Logos and the Anthropos, either by
 assuming that the Logos was changed into flesh, or that the flesh was
 itself non-natural and of the Divine Essence. The other class excluded
 the Man Jesus from the Trinity, explaining His relation to God on the
 lines of Photinus or the later Nestorians. Both alternatives are
 already glanced at (supr. p. 485) by the Council of 362. In the present
 case, both classes of suggestions seem to have been made tentatively
 and bona fide (§12). The letter must have been written before the two
 books against Apollinarianism, which (if genuine) fall about 372. Its
 more exact date depends on the identification of the Councils referred
 to in §1 (nun genomenon), and is therefore very doubtful. At any rate
 Apollinarianism proper is not alluded to, and Apollinarius is said to
 have expressed to Serapion of Thmuis his high opinion of our Letter
 (see Letter 54, note 1). It was much quoted in the Christological
 controversies of the next 80 years, e.g. by the Councils of Ephesus and
 Chalcedon, by Theodoret, Cyril, and Leo the Great (see Migne xxvi.
 1050; Bright, Later Treatises, pp. 43 sq., and D.C.B. s.v. Epictetus
 and Apollinaris the younger).

 [4701] Are these those referred to in the letter to Ruf., and held a.d.
 362-3, or are they to be identified with one or other of those held
 under Damasus (see Introd. to ad Afros.)?

 [4702] Ps. cxv. 4.

 [4703] Hab. ii. 15, LXX.

 [4704] Isa. ii. 3; Mic. iv. 2.

 [4705] Rom. i. 3.

 [4706] This opinion seems to belong to that next to be mentioned, the
 two, however, are separately dealt with below, cc. 10 and 11.

 [4707] Rom. i. 30.

 [4708] heteron pros heteron semainete

 [4709] Letter 61, §3.

 [4710] Heb. ii. 16.

 [4711] Heb. ii. 16.

 [4712] Isa. vii. 14.

 [4713] Luke i. 27.

 [4714] Ib. xi. 27.

 [4715] Ib. ii. 23.

 [4716] Mal. iii. 6.

 [4717] Heb. xiii. 8.

 [4718] 1 Pet. iii. 19.

 [4719] Mark xv. 46.

 [4720] John xviii. 23.

 [4721] Isa. l. 6.

 [4722] 2 Pet. i. 4, above, p. 65, note 5.

 [4723] 1 Cor. xv. 53.

 [4724] Luke xxiv. 39.

 [4725] Joh. i. 14.

 [4726] Gal. iii. 13.

 [4727] Joel ii. 28.

 [4728] 1 Cor. xv. 3.

 [4729] The argument rests on the principle that the Trinity is a
 trinity of Persons, not of Essences: the opponents implicitly tax the
 Nicene doctrine with the consequence that if truly man, Christ is a
 distinct Personality from the Son.

 [4730] psuchikon.

 [4731] Matt. i. 23.

 [4732] Rom. ix. 5.

 [4733] John xx. 28.

 [4734] 1 Cor. ii. 8.

 [4735] Heb. ix. 26.

 [4736] Cf. Rom. i. 3; Gal. iv. 4.

 [4737] Matt. iii. 17, and xvii. 5.

 Letter LX.--To Adelphius [4738] , Bishop and Confessor: against the
 Arians.

 We have read what your piety has written to us, and genuinely approve
 your piety toward Christ. And above all we glorify God, Who has given
 you such grace as not only to have right opinions, but also, so far as
 that is possible, not to be ignorant of the devices [4739] of the
 devil. But we marvel at the perversity of the heretics, seeing that
 they have fallen into such a pit of impiety that they no longer retain
 even their senses, but have their understanding corrupted on all sides.
 But this attempt is a plot of the devil, and an imitation of the
 disobedient Jews. For as the latter, when refuted on all sides, kept
 devising excuses to their own hurt, if only they could deny the Lord
 and bring upon themselves what was prophesied against them, in like
 manner these men, seeing themselves proscribed on all hands, and
 perceiving that their heresy has become abominable to all, prove
 themselves inventors of evil things [4740] ,' in order that, not
 ceasing their fightings against the truth, they may remain consistent
 and genuine adversaries of Christ. For whence has this new mischief of
 theirs sprung forth? How have they even ventured to utter this new
 blasphemy against the Saviour? But the impious man, it seems, is a
 worthless object, and truly reprobate concerning the Faith [4741] .'
 For formerly, while denying the Godhead of the only-begotten Son of
 God, they pretended at any rate to acknowledge His coming in the Flesh.
 But now, gradually going from bad to worse, they have fallen from this
 opinion of theirs, and become Godless on all hands, so as neither to
 acknowledge Him as God, nor to believe that He has become man. For if
 they believed this they would not have uttered such things as your
 piety has reported against them.

 2. You, however, beloved and most truly longed-for, have done what
 befitted the tradition of the Church and your piety toward the Lord, in
 refuting, admonishing, and rebuking such men. But since, instigated by
 their father the devil, they knew not nor understood,' as it is
 written, but go on still in darkness [4742] ,' let them learn from your
 piety that this error of theirs belongs to Valentinus and Marcion, and
 to Manichæus, of whom some substituted [the idea of] Appearance for
 Reality, while the others, dividing what is indivisible, denied the
 truth that the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us [4743] .' Why
 then, as they hold with those people, do they not also take up the
 heritage of their names? For it is reasonable, as they hold their
 error, to have their names as well, and for the future to be called
 Valentinians, Marcionists, and Manichæans. Perhaps even thus, being put
 to shame by the ill savour of the names, they may be enabled to
 perceive into what a depth of impiety they have fallen. And it would be
 within our rights not to answer them at all, according to the apostolic
 advice [4744] : A man that is heretical, after a first and second
 admonition refuse, knowing that such an one is perverted, and sinneth,
 being self-condemned;' the more so, in that the Prophet says about such
 men: The fool shall utter foolishness, and his heart shall imagine vain
 things [4745] .' But since, like their leader, they too go about like
 lions seeking whom among the simple they shall devour [4746] , we are
 compelled to write in reply to your piety, that the brethren being once
 again instructed by your admonition may still further reprobate the
 vain teaching of those men.

 3. We do not worship a creature. Far be the thought. For such an error
 belongs to heathens and Arians. But we worship the Lord of Creation,
 Incarnate, the Word of God. For if the flesh also is in itself a part
 of the created world, yet it has become God's body. And we neither
 divide the body, being such, from the Word, and worship it by itself
 [4747] , nor when we wish to worship the Word do we set Him far apart
 from the Flesh, but knowing, as we said above, that the Word was made
 flesh,' we recognise Him as God also, after having come in the flesh.
 Who, accordingly, is so senseless as to say to the Lord: Leave the Body
 that I may worship Thee;' or so impious as to join the senseless Jews
 in saying, on account of the Body, Why dost Thou, being a man, make
 Thyself God [4748] ?' But the leper was not one of this sort, for he
 worshipped God in the Body, and recognised that He was God, saying,
 Lord, if Thou wilt Thou canst make me clean [4749] .' Neither by reason
 of the Flesh did he think the Word of God a creature: nor because the
 Word was the maker of all creation did he despise the Flesh which He
 had put on. But he worshipped the Creator of the universe as dwelling
 in a created temple, and was cleansed. So also the woman with an issue
 of blood, who believed, and only touched the hem of His garment, was
 healed [4750] , and the sea with its foaming waves heard the incarnate
 Word, and ceased its storm [4751] , while the man blind from birth was
 healed by the fleshly spitting of the Word [4752] . And, what is
 greater and more startling (for perhaps this even offended those most
 impious men), even when the Lord was hanging upon the actual cross (for
 it was His Body and the Word was in it), the sun was darkened and the
 earth shook, the rocks were rent, and the vail of the temple rent, and
 many bodies of the saints which slept arose.

 4. These things then happened, and no one doubted, as the Arians now
 venture to doubt, whether one is to believe the incarnate Word; but
 even from beholding the man, they recognised that He was their maker,
 and when they heard a human voice, they did not, because it was human,
 say that the Word was a creature. On the contrary, they trembled, and
 recognised nothing less than that it was being uttered from a holy
 Temple. How then can the impious fail to fear lest as they refused to
 have God in their knowledge, they may be given up to a reprobate mind,
 to do those things which are not fitting [4753] ?' For Creation does
 not worship a creature. Nor again did she on account of His Flesh
 refuse to worship her Lord. But she beheld her maker in the Body, and
 in the Name of Jesus every knee' bowed, yea and shall bow, of things in
 heaven and things on earth and things under the earth, and every tongue
 shall confess,' whether the Arians approve or no, that Jesus is Lord,
 to the Glory of God the Father [4754] .' For the Flesh did not diminish
 the glory of the Word; far be the thought: on the contrary, it was
 glorified by Him. Nor, because the Son that was in the form of God took
 upon Him the form of a servant [4755] was He deprived of His Godhead.
 On the contrary, He is thus become the Deliverer of all flesh and of
 all creation. And if God sent His Son brought forth from a woman, the
 fact causes us no shame but contrariwise glory and great grace. For He
 has become Man, that He might deify us in Himself, and He has been born
 of a woman, and begotten of a Virgin, in order to transfer to Himself
 our erring generation [4756] , and that we may become henceforth a holy
 race, and partakers of the Divine Nature,' as blessed Peter wrote
 [4757] . And what the law could not do in that it was weak through the
 flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
 sin, condemned sin in the flesh [4758] .'

 5. Seeing then that Flesh was taken by the Word to deliver all men,
 raise all from the dead, and make redemption for sins, must not they
 appear ungrateful, and be worthy of all hatred, who make light of the
 Flesh, as well as those who on account of it charge the Son of God with
 being a thing created or made? For they as good as cry to God and say:
 Send not Thine Only-begotten Son in the Flesh, cause Him not to take
 flesh of a virgin, lest He redeem us from death and sin. We do not wish
 Him to come in the body, lest He should undergo death on our behalf: we
 do not desire the Word to be made flesh, lest in it He should become
 our Mediator to gain access to thee, and we so inhabit the heavenly
 mansions. Let the gates of the heavens be shut lest Thy Word consecrate
 for us the road thither through the veil, namely His Flesh [4759] .'
 These are their utterances, vented with diabolical daring, by the error
 they have devised. For they who do not wish to worship the Word made
 flesh, are ungrateful for His becoming man. And they who divide the
 Word from the Flesh do not hold that one redemption from sin has taken
 place, or one destruction of death. But where at all will these impious
 men find the Flesh which the Saviour took, apart from Him, that they
 should even venture to say we do not worship the Lord with the Flesh,
 but we separate the Body, and worship Him alone.' Why, the blessed
 Stephen saw in the heavens the Lord standing on [God's] right hand
 [4760] , while the Angels said to the disciples, He shall so come in
 like manner as ye beheld Him going into heaven [4761] :' and the Lord
 Himself says, addressing the Father, I will that where I am, they also
 may be with Me [4762] .' And surely if the Flesh is inseparable from
 the Word, does it not follow that these men must either lay aside their
 error, and for the future worship the Father in the name of our Lord
 Jesus Christ, or, if they do not worship or serve the Word Who came in
 the Flesh, be cast out on all sides, and count no longer as Christians
 but either as heathens, or among the Jews.

 6. Such then, as we have above described, is the madness and daring of
 those men. But our faith is right, and starts from the teaching of the
 Apostles and tradition of the fathers, being confirmed both by the New
 Testament and the Old. For the Prophets say: Send out Thy Word and Thy
 Truth [4763] ,' and Behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
 and they shall call His name Emmanuel, which is being interpreted God
 with us [4764] .' But what does that mean, if not that God has come in
 the Flesh? While the Apostolic tradition teaches in the words of
 blessed Peter, Forasmuch then as Christ suffered for us in the Flesh;'
 and in what Paul writes, Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of
 our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, Who gave Himself for us that He
 might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a people for
 His own possession, and zealous of good works [4765] .' How then has He
 given Himself, if He had not worn flesh? For flesh He offered, and gave
 Himself for us, in order that undergoing death in it, He might bring to
 nought him that had the power of death, that is, the devil [4766] .'
 Hence also we always give thanks in the name of Jesus Christ, and we do
 not set at nought the grace which came to us through Him. For the
 coming of the Saviour in the flesh has been the ransom and salvation of
 all creation. So then, beloved and most longed-for, let what I have
 said put in mind those who love the Lord, while as to those who have
 imitated the behaviour of Judas, and deserted the Lord to join
 Caiaphas, let them by these things be taught better, if maybe they are
 willing, if maybe they are ashamed. And let them know that in
 worshipping the Lord in the flesh we do not worship a creature, but, as
 we said above, the Creator Who has put on the created body.

 7. But we should like your piety to ask them this. When Israel was
 ordered to go up to Jerusalem to worship at the temple of the Lord,
 where was the ark, and above it the Cherubim of glory overshadowing the
 Mercy-seat [4767] ,' did they do well or the opposite? If they did ill,
 how came it that they who despised this law were liable to punishment?
 for it is written that if a man make light of it and go not up, he
 shall perish from among the people [4768] . But if they did well, and
 in this proved well-pleasing to God, are not the Arians, abominable and
 most shameful of any heresy, many times worthy of destruction, in that
 while they approve the former People for the honour paid by them to the
 Temple, they will not worship the Lord Who is in the flesh as in a
 temple? And yet the former temple was constructed of stones and gold,
 as a shadow. But when the reality came, the type ceased from
 thenceforth, and there did not remain, according to the Lord's
 utterance, one stone upon another that was not broken down [4769] . And
 they did not, when they saw the temple of stones, suppose that the Lord
 who spoke in the temple was a creature; nor did they set the Temple at
 nought and retire far off to worship. But they came to it according to
 the Law, and worshipped the God who uttered His oracles from the
 Temple. Since then this was so, how can it be other than right to
 worship the Body of the Lord, all-holy and all-reverend as it is,
 announced as it was by the archangel Gabriel, formed by the Holy
 Spirit, and made the Vesture of the Word? It was at any rate a bodily
 hand that the Word stretched out to raise her that was sick of a fever
 [4770] : a human voice that He uttered to raise Lazarus from the dead
 [4771] ; and, once again, stretching out His hands upon the Cross, He
 overthrew the prince of the power of the air, that now works [4772] in
 the sons of disobedience, and made the way clear for us into the
 heavens.

 8. Therefore he that dishonours the Temple dishonours the Lord in the
 Temple; and he that separates the Word from the Body sets at nought the
 grace given to us in Him. And let not the most impious Arian madmen
 suppose that, since the Body is created, the Word also is a creature,
 nor let them, because the Word is not a creature, disparage His Body.
 For their error is matter for wonder, in that they at once confuse and
 disturb everything, and devise pretexts only in order to number the
 Creator among the creatures.

 But let them listen. If the Word were a creature, He would not assume
 the created body to quicken it. For what help can creatures derive from
 a creature that itself needs salvation? But since the Word being
 Creator has Himself made the creatures, therefore also at the
 consummation of the ages [4773] He put on the creature, that He as
 creator might once more consecrate it, and be able to recover it. But a
 creature could never be saved by a creature, any more than the
 creatures were created by a creature, if the Word was not creator.
 Accordingly let them not lie against the divine Scriptures nor give
 offence to simple brethren; but if they are willing let them change
 their mind in their turn, and no longer worship the creature instead of
 God, Who made all things. But if they wish to abide by their impieties,
 let them alone take their fill of them, and let them gnash their teeth
 like their father the devil, because the Faith of the Catholic Church
 knows that the Word of God is creator and maker of all things; and we
 know that while in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
 God [4774] ,' now that He has become also man for our salvation we
 worship Him, not as though He had come in the body equalising Himself
 with it, but as Master, assuming the form of the servant, and Maker and
 Creator coming in a creature in order that, in it delivering all
 things, He might bring the world nigh to the Father, and make all
 things to be at peace, things in heaven and things on the earth. For
 thus also we recognise His Godhead, even the Father's, and worship His
 Incarnate Presence, even if the Arian madmen burst themselves in
 sunder.

 Greet all that love the Lord Jesus Christ. We pray that you may be
 well, and remember us to the Lord, beloved and truly most longed-for.
 If need be this is to be read to Hieracas [4775] the presbyter.

 [4738] Adelphius is named in the Tome' (above, p. 486), as bishop of
 Onuphis. Previously he had been exiled by the Arians to the Thebaid
 (above, pp. 297, &c.). Hence in the title of this letter he is styled
 Confessor.' The letter (Migne xxvi, 1072) is directed against the Arian
 Christology. Although Ath. treats it (§1) as a new blasphemy,' it had
 been held by the Arians from the first; Epiph. Anc. 33, traces it back
 to Lucian; but doubtless it had by this time been brought more to the
 front in their teaching. We know that it occupied a prominent place in
 the Eunomian system. (References in Dorner III. i. 3.) After briefly
 refuting the doctrinal error, Athanasius turns to the Arian charge of
 creature-worship brought against the Nicene doctrine. Not forgetting to
 remind them that their own doctrine was really open to this charge,
 Ath. points out at greater length that the object of Catholic worship
 is not the human nature of Christ as such, but the Word Incarnate; and
 that the human Saviour is worshipped because He is the Word Himself.
 The date proposed by Montfaucon is adopted, though there is nothing to
 fix it absolutely. Its style closely resembles that of the writings of
 the third Exile.' (See also Bright, Later Tr., p. 61.)

 [4739] 2 Cor. ii. 11.

 [4740] Rom. i. 30.

 [4741] 2 Tim. iii. 8.

 [4742] Ps. lxxxii. 5.

 [4743] John i. 14.

 [4744] Tit. iii. 10, 11.

 [4745] Isa. xxxii. 6, LXX.

 [4746] 1 Pet. v. 8.

 [4747] As some modern devotions at least tend to do.

 [4748] John x. 33.

 [4749] Matt. viii. 2.

 [4750] Matt. ix. 20.

 [4751] Ib. viii. 26.

 [4752] John ix. 6.

 [4753] Rom. i. 28.

 [4754] Phil. ii. 10, 11.

 [4755] Ib. vv. 6, 7.

 [4756] planetheisan gennesin.

 [4757] 2 Pet. i. 4.

 [4758] Rom. viii. 3.

 [4759] Heb. x. 20.

 [4760] Acts vii. 55.

 [4761] Ib. i. 11.

 [4762] John xvii. 24.

 [4763] Ps. xliii. 3.

 [4764] Matt. i. 23, and Isa. vii. 14.

 [4765] Tit. ii. 13, 14.

 [4766] Heb. ii. 14.

 [4767] Heb. ix. 5.

 [4768] Cf. Lev. xvii. 9; Num. ix. 13.

 [4769] Matt. xxiv. 2.

 [4770] Mark i. 31.

 [4771] Joh. xi. 43.

 [4772] Eph. ii. 2. Athan. here omits the tou pneumatos, thus increasing
 the difficulty of the gen. particp.

 [4773] Heb. ix. 26.

 [4774] John i. 1.

 [4775] Perhaps the Hierax' of pp. 257, 297, 560, above.

 Letter LXI.--Letter to Maximus. (Written about 371 a.d.)

 To our beloved and most truly longed-for son, Maximus [4776] ,
 philosopher, Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

 Having read the letter now come from you, I approve your piety: but,
 marvelling at the rashness of those who understand neither what they
 say nor whereof they confidently affirm [4777] ,' I had really decided
 to say nothing. For to reply upon matters which are so plain and which
 are clearer than light, is simply to give an excuse for shamelessness
 to such lawless men. And this we have learned from the Saviour. For
 when Pilate had washed his hands, and acquiesced in the false
 accusation of the Jews of that day, the Lord answered him no more, but
 rather warned his wife in a dream, so that He that was being judged
 might be believed to be God not in word, but in power. While after
 vouchsafing Caiaphas no reply to his folly, He Himself by his promise
 [4778] brought all over to knowledge. Accordingly for some time I
 delayed, and have reluctantly yielded to your zeal for the truth, in
 view of the argumentativeness of men without shame. And I have dictated
 nothing beyond what your letter contains, in order that the adversary
 may from henceforth be convinced on the points to which he has
 objected, and may keep his tongue from evil and his lips that they
 speak no guile [4779] .' And would that they would no longer join the
 Jews who passed by of old in reproaching Him that hung upon the Tree:
 If thou be the Son of God save Thyself [4780] .' But if even after this
 they will not give in, yet do you remember the apostolic injunction,
 and a man that is heretical after a first and second admonition refuse,
 knowing that such an one is perverted and sinneth being self-condemned
 [4781] .' For if they are Gentiles, or of the Judaisers, who are thus
 daring, let them, as Jews, think the Cross of Christ a stumbling-block,
 or as Gentiles, foolishness [4782] . But if they pretend to be
 Christians let them learn that the crucified Christ is at once Lord of
 Glory, and the Power of God and Wisdom of God [4783] .

 2. But if they are in doubt whether He is God at all, let them
 reverence Thomas, who handled the Crucified and pronounced Him Lord and
 God [4784] . Or let them fear the Lord Himself, who said, after washing
 the feet of the disciples: Ye call Me Lord and Master [4785] , and ye
 say well, for so I am.' But in the same body in which He was when he
 washed their feet, He also carried up our sins to the Tree [4786] . And
 He was witnessed to as Master of Creation, in that the Sun withdrew his
 beams and the earth trembled and the rocks were rent, and the
 executioners recognised that the Crucified was truly Son of God. For
 the Body they beheld was not that of some man, but of God, being in
 which, even when being crucified, He raised the dead. Accordingly it is
 no good venture of theirs to say that the Word of God came into a
 certain holy man; for this was true of each of the prophets and of the
 other saints, and on that assumption He would clearly be born and die
 in the case of each one of them. But this is not so, far be the
 thought. But once for all at the consummation of the ages [4787] , to
 put away sin' the Word was made flesh [4788] ' and proceeded forth from
 Mary the Virgin, Man after our likeness, as also He said to the Jews,
 Wherefore seek ye to kill Me, a man that hath told you the truth [4789]
 ?' And we are deified not by partaking of the body of some man, but by
 receiving the Body of the Word Himself.

 3. And at this also I am much surprised, how they have ventured to
 entertain such an idea as that the Word became man in consequence of
 His Nature. For if this were so, the commemoration of Mary would be
 superfluous. [4790] For neither does Nature know of a Virgin bearing
 apart from a man. Whence by the good pleasure of the Father, being true
 God, and Word and Wisdom of the Father by nature, He became man in the
 body for our salvation, in order that having somewhat to offer [4791]
 for us He might save us all, as many as through fear of death were all
 their life-time subject to bondage. [4792] ' For it was not some man
 that gave Himself up for us; since every man is under sentence of
 death, according to what was said to all in Adam, earth thou art and
 unto earth thou shalt return. [4793] ' Nor yet was it any other of the
 creatures, since every creature is liable to change. But the Word
 Himself offered His own Body on our behalf that our faith and hope
 might not be in man, but that we might have our faith in God the Word
 Himself. Why, even now that He is become man we behold His Glory, glory
 as of one only-begotten of His Father--full of grace and truth. [4794]
 ' For what He endured by means of the Body, He magnified as God. And
 while He hungered in the flesh, as God He fed the hungry. And if anyone
 is offended by reason of the bodily conditions, let him believe by
 reason of what God works. For humanly He enquires where Lazarus is
 laid, but raises him up divinely. Let none then laugh, calling Him a
 child, and citing His age, His growth, His eating, drinking and
 suffering, lest while denying what is proper for the body, he deny
 utterly also His sojourn among us. And just as He has not become Man in
 consequence of His nature, in like manner it was consistent that when
 He had taken a body He should exhibit what was proper to it, lest the
 imaginary theory of Manichæus should prevail. Again it was consistent
 that when He went about in the body, He should not hide what belonged
 to the Godhead, lest he of Samosata should find an excuse to call Him
 man, as distinct in person from God the Word.

 4. Let then the unbelievers perceive this, and learn that while as a
 Babe He lay in a manger, He subjected the Magi and was worshipped by
 them; and while as a Child He came down to Egypt, He brought to nought
 the hand-made objects of its idolatry [4795] : and crucified in the
 flesh, He raised the dead long since turned to corruption. And it has
 been made plain to all that not for His own sake but for ours He
 underwent all things, that we by His sufferings might put on freedom
 from suffering and incorruption [4796] , and abide unto life eternal.

 5. This then I have concisely dictated, following, as I said above, the
 lines of your own letter, without working out any point any further but
 only mentioning what relates to the Holy Cross, in order that the
 despisers may be taught better upon the points where they were
 offended, and may worship the Crucified. But do you thoroughly persuade
 the unbelievers; perhaps somehow they may come from ignorance to
 knowledge, and believe aright. And even though what your own letter
 contains is sufficient, yet it is as well to have added what I have for
 the sake of reminder in view of contentious persons; not so much in
 order that being refuted in their venturesome statements they may be
 put to shame, as that being reminded they may not forget the truth. For
 let what was confessed by the Fathers at Nicæa prevail. For it is
 correct, and enough to overthrow every heresy however impious, and
 especially that of the Arians which speaks against the Word of God, and
 as a logical consequence profanes His Holy Spirit. Greet all who hold
 aright. All that are with us greet you.

 [4776] Maximus, probably the Cynic philosopher who plays so strange and
 grotesque a part in the history of S. Gregory Nazianzen's tenure of the
 see of Constantinople (the identification is questioned by Bright, p.
 72, but without very cogent reasons), was the son of Alexandrian
 parents, persons of high social standing, who had suffered much for the
 Faith. He himself was an ardent opponent of Arianism and heathenism,
 and was banished under Valens (further particulars in Dict. Gr. and
 Rom. Biogr. s.v. Maximus Alexandrinus). The present letter compliments
 him on his success in refuting heretics, some of whom advocated the
 Arian Christology; others the doctrine of Paul of Samosata and
 Photinus. The Epistle has much in common with those to Epictetus and
 Adelphius; Montfaucon's date for it is adopted. (See Migne xxvi. 1085;
 Bright, Lat. Tr., p. 72.)

 [4777] 1 Tim. i. 7.

 [4778] Mark xv. 5; Matt. xxvi. 64; xxvii. 19

 [4779] Ps. xxxiv. 13.

 [4780] Matt. xxvii. 40; Luke xxviii. 37.

 [4781] Tit. iii. 10, 11.

 [4782] 1 Cor. i. 23.

 [4783] Cf. 1 Cor. i. 24, and ii. 8.

 [4784] John xx. 28.

 [4785] Ath. quotes John xiii. 13 in this, the order of several mss. and
 later fathers, both here and elsewhere.

 [4786] 1 Pet. ii. 24.

 [4787] Heb. ix. 26.

 [4788] John i. 14.

 [4789] Ib. viii. 40.

 [4790] Cf. Ad Epict. 5 (supr. p. 572.)

 [4791] Cf. Heb. viii. 3

 [4792] Ib. ii. 15.

 [4793] Gen. iii. 19, LXX.

 [4794] John i. 14 b.

 [4795] Cf. de Incarn. 36. 4.

 [4796] Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 53.

 Letter LXII.--To John and Antiochus. [4797]

 Athanasius to John and Antiochus, our beloved sons and
 fellow-presbyters in the Lord, greeting.

 I was glad to receive your letter just now, the more so as you wrote
 from Jerusalem. I thank you for informing me about the brethren that
 there assembled, and about those who wish, on account of disputed
 points, to disturb the simple. But about these things let the Apostle
 charge them not to give heed to those who contend about words, and seek
 nothing else than to tell and hear some new thing [4798] . But do you,
 having your foundation sure, even Jesus Christ our Lord, and the
 confession of the fathers concerning the faith, avoid those who wish to
 say anything more or less than that, and rather aim at the profit of
 the brethren, that they may fear God and keep His commandments, in
 order that both by the teaching of the fathers, and by the keeping of
 the commandments, they may be able to appear well-pleasing to the Lord
 in the day of judgment. But I have been utterly astonished at the
 boldness of those who venture to speak against our beloved Basil the
 bishop, a true servant of God. For from such vain talk they can be
 convicted of not loving even the confession of the fathers.

 Greet the brethren. They that are with me greet you. I pray that ye may
 be well in the Lord, beloved and much-desired sons.

 [4797] Of John and Antiochus nothing is known, unless the latter is the
 later bishop of Ptolemais and enemy of Chrysostom. Both men seem to
 belong to the class of well-meaning mischief-makers, given to retailing
 invidious stories. Hence the polite reserve of our little note (Migne
 xxvi. 115, and its laconic dismissal of the gossip about Basil, the new
 bishop of the Cappadocian Cæsarea (supr. p. 449). The main interest of
 this and the following letter, which seem to date from the winter
 371-372, consists in the testimony of the high esteem of Athanasius for
 Basil, as well as his indifference to words where no essential
 principle was involved. The two recipients of this letter either lived
 or were visitors at Jerusalem. On Basil's difficulties at this time,
 see D.C.B. i. 288 a, 293, and on his relations with Athan., cf.
 Prolegg. ch. ii. §10.

 [4798] 2 Tim. ii. 14; Acts xvii. 21.

 Letter LXIII.--Letter to the Presbyter Palladius [4799] .

 To our beloved son Palladius, presbyter, Athanasius the Bishop greeting
 in the Lord.

 I was glad to receive also the letter written by you alone, the more so
 that you breathe orthodoxy in it, as is your wont. And having learnt
 not for the first time, but long ago, the reason of your staying at
 present with our beloved Innocent [4800] , I am pleased with your
 piety. Since then you are acting as you are, write and let me know how
 are the brethren there, and what the enemies of the truth think about
 us. But whereas you have also told me of the monks at Cæsarea, and I
 have learned from our beloved Dianius [4801] that they are vexed, and
 are opposing our beloved bishop Basil, I am glad you have informed me,
 and I have pointed out [4802] to them what is fitting, namely that as
 children they should obey their father, and not oppose what he
 approves. For if he were suspected as touching the truth, they would do
 well to combat him. But if they are confident, as we all are, that he
 is a glory to the Church, contending rather on behalf of the truth and
 teaching those who require it, it is not right to combat such an one,
 but rather to accept with thanks his good conscience. For from what the
 beloved Dianius has related, they appear to be vexed without cause. For
 he, as I am confident, to the weak becomes weak to gain the weak [4803]
 . But let our beloved friends look at the scope of his truth, and at
 his special purpose [4804] , and glorify the Lord Who has given such a
 bishop to Cappadocia as any district must pray to have. And do you,
 beloved, be good enough to point out to them the duty of obeying, as I
 write. For this is at once calculated to render them well disposed
 toward their father, and will preserve peace to the churches. I pray
 that you may be well in the Lord, beloved son.

 [4799] On the general subject and date of this letter see note 1 to
 Letter 62. Of Palladius, who is clearly a resident at Cæsarea, nothing
 further is known. The tone of this letter is more confiding than that
 of the previous one. (Migne ib. 1167.)

 [4800] Perhaps a bishop in the neighbourhood of Cæsarea. See D.C.B.
 s.v. Innocentius (4).

 [4801] Namesake of a predecessor of Basil, otherwise unknown.

 [4802] The letter here referred to is lost. The monks in question had
 raised a cry against Basil on account of the reserve with which he
 spoke of the Divine Personality of the Holy Spirit. (See supr. p. 481.)

 [4803] 1 Cor. ix. 22.

 [4804] oikonomian

 Letter LXIV.--To Diodorus (fragment).

 To my lord, son, and most beloved fellow-minister Diodorus [bishop of
 Tyre] [4805] , Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

 I thank my Lord, Who is everywhere establishing His doctrine, and
 chiefly so by means of His own sons, such as actual fact shews you to
 be. For before your Reverence wrote, we knew how great grace has been
 brought to pass in Tyre by means of your perseverance. And we rejoice
 with you that by your means Tyre also has learned the right word of
 piety. And I indeed took an opportunity of writing to you, longed-for
 and beloved: but I marvel at your not having replied to my letter. Be
 not then slow to write at once, knowing that you give me refreshment,
 as a son to his father, and make me exceeding glad, as a herald of
 truth. And enter upon no controversy with the heretics, but overcome
 their argumentativeness with silence, their ill-will with courtesy. For
 thus your speech shall be with grace, seasoned with salt [4806] ,'
 while they [will be judged] by the conscience of all....

 [4805] This fragment (Migne xxvi. 1261) is given by Facundus, Def. Tr.
 Cap. iv. 2, who claims it as addressed to Diodorus of Tarsus, the
 famous Antiochene confessor and master of Chrysostom and Theodore.
 Unfortunately this is impossible, as Diodore became bishop of Tarsus
 not before 378, i.e. after Athan. was dead. The letter itself decides
 for Diodorus of Tyre, whom Paulinus of Antioch had quite unwarrantably
 ordained to this see (cf. Rufin, H. E. ii. 21). Whether (as has been
 held on the authority of Rufinus) Diodorus, or (as Le Quien, Or. Chr.
 ii. 865 sq. holds) Zeno, the nominee of Meletius, was first in the
 field in the unseemly scramble, is doubtful. Zeno is already bishop in
 365 (Soz. vi. 12); the date of the appointment of Diodorus, whose claim
 is at any rate no better than that of Paulinus himself, is quite
 uncertain (see also Prolegg. ch. ii. §§9, 10). Diodorus was the friend
 and correspondent of Epiphanius, and of Timothy, bishop of Alexandria,
 second from Athanasius. Facundus confuses him in these particulars also
 with his namesake of Tarsus, but the mistake is thoroughly sifted by
 Tillemont, Mem. viii. pp. 238, 712. The letter is important, along with
 Letter 56, and the correspondence of S. Basil, as illustrating the
 attitude of Athanasius with regard to the unhappy schism of Antioch.

 [4806] Col. iv. 6.

 Memorandum.--On other Letters ascribed to Athanasius.

 The above Collection of Letters is complete upon the principle stated
 in the Introduction (supr., p. 495). But one or two fragments have been
 excluded which may be specified here.

 (1.) Fragment of a letter to Eupsychius;' probably the Nicene Father
 referred to Ep. Æg. 8, (cf. D.C.B. ii. 299 (4)). The Greek is given by
 Montf. in Ath. Opp. 1. p. 1293 (Latin, ib. p. 1287). It was cited in
 Conc. Nic. II. Act vi., but although it has affinities with Orat. ii. 8
 (high-priestly dress'), it has the appearance of a polemical argument
 against Monophysitism. (Migne xxvi. 1245.)

 (2.) To Epiphanius' (Migne xxvi. 1257). Against certain, who
 contentiously follow the Jews in celebrating Easter. (From Chron.
 Pasch. pag. 4 postremæ editionis.')

 (3.) Fragments of an Epistola ad Antiochenos' (not our Tomus,' supr.,
 p. 483): also a polemic against Monophysitism, and almost Nestorian in
 doctrine: Jesus Christus...non est Ipse' [i.e. ante sæcula et in
 sæcula, Heb. xiii. 8], and duas personas' asserted of Christ. From
 Facundus, who says the letter was written against the Apollinarians,
 and who gives it on the authority of Peter, Ath.'s successor (Migne
 xxvi. 1259).

 (4.) Ad Eusebium, Lucinianum, et socios.' (In Migne xxvi. 1325 sq.,
 from Mai, Script. Vet. 11. 583 sq.) A minute fragment. Cf. supr.,
 Letter 55, notes 1, 7.

 (5.) Spurious letters (in Migne xxviii.) to Jovian, to Castor (2), to a
 bishop of the Persians,' and to and from popes Liberius, Marcus, Julius
 and Felix (made up out of late and spurious decretals, &c., &c.).

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1:1 [2]1:1 [3]1:1 [4]1:1 [5]1:1 [6]1:3 [7]1:3 [8]1:3
 [9]1:6 [10]1:6-11 [11]1:9 [12]1:11 [13]1:14-18 [14]1:20
 [15]1:26 [16]1:26 [17]1:26 [18]1:26 [19]1:26 [20]1:26
 [21]1:26 [22]1:28 [23]1:31 [24]2:3 [25]2:5 [26]2:15
 [27]2:16 [28]2:17 [29]3 [30]3:9 [31]3:12 [32]3:15
 [33]3:19 [34]3:19 [35]3:19 [36]4:1 [37]4:12 [38]4:12
 [39]4:16 [40]5:3 [41]6:2 [42]7:1 [43]9:27 [44]11:5
 [45]14:14 [46]14:14 [47]15:1 [48]15:8 [49]18:21 [50]19:24
 [51]19:24 [52]19:24 [53]19:26 [54]21:5 [55]22:2 [56]22:12
 [57]22:15 [58]25:8 [59]25:27 [60]26:13 [61]27 [62]27:2
 [63]27:29 [64]27:37 [65]28:3-4 [66]28:15 [67]31:5 [68]31:7
 [69]32:11 [70]32:26 [71]32:30 [72]32:30-31 [73]32:31
 [74]32:31 [75]42:21 [76]48:5 [77]48:15-16 [78]49:3 [79]49:3
 [80]49:10 [81]49:14

 Exodus

 [82]3:2-6 [83]3:10 [84]3:13 [85]3:14 [86]3:14 [87]3:14
 [88]3:14 [89]3:14 [90]3:14-15 [91]3:16 [92]4:12 [93]4:13
 [94]8:26 [95]12:2 [96]12:5 [97]12:7 [98]12:8-9 [99]12:11
 [100]12:23 [101]12:41 [102]12:41 [103]12:43 [104]12:43-48
 [105]12:46 [106]12:47 [107]14:14 [108]14:21 [109]15
 [110]15:1 [111]15:1 [112]15:9 [113]15:9 [114]19:8 [115]19:9
 [116]19:13 [117]19:16 [118]20:3 [119]20:4 [120]20:13
 [121]21:13 [122]21:17 [123]21:17 [124]21:17 [125]21:17
 [126]23:1 [127]23:14 [128]23:26 [129]24:2 [130]29:5
 [131]33:11 [132]33:20 [133]33:23 [134]34:6

 Leviticus

 [135]9:7 [136]9:7 [137]11:13 [138]17:9 [139]23:26
 [140]23:29 [141]25:21 [142]26:12

 Numbers

 [143]3 [144]6:25 [145]7 [146]9:2 [147]9:13 [148]10:1-2
 [149]10:8 [150]10:9 [151]10:10 [152]11 [153]12 [154]17
 [155]18 [156]21 [157]24:5-6 [158]24:5-17 [159]26 [160]28:2

 Deuteronomy

 [161]4:4 [162]4:4 [163]4:7 [164]4:19 [165]4:24 [166]4:32
 [167]6:4 [168]6:4 [169]6:4 [170]6:4 [171]6:4-5 [172]6:7
 [173]6:13 [174]6:16 [175]7:8 [176]12:11 [177]12:13
 [178]12:14 [179]13:1-3 [180]13:4 [181]13:18 [182]16:1
 [183]16:1 [184]16:1 [185]16:1 [186]17:6 [187]18:15
 [188]18:15 [189]21:15 [190]21:15 [191]21:23 [192]28:66
 [193]28:66 [194]28:66 [195]28:66 [196]30:14 [197]32:4
 [198]32:6 [199]32:6 [200]32:6 [201]32:6 [202]32:6 [203]32:8
 [204]32:17 [205]32:18 [206]32:20 [207]32:39 [208]32:39
 [209]32:39 [210]32:49 [211]34:6

 Joshua

 [212]1:6 [213]2:1 [214]5:13 [215]7:20 [216]10:12 [217]23:14
 [218]24:23

 Judges

 [219]11:34 [220]13:16 [221]19 [222]19:29 [223]19:29

 1 Samuel

 [224]2:6 [225]2:27 [226]5 [227]6 [228]12:5 [229]12:5
 [230]13:9 [231]15 [232]15:35 [233]16:12 [234]16:14
 [235]21:13 [236]22:2 [237]22:9 [238]22:18 [239]26:9
 [240]26:10-11 [241]26:21

 2 Samuel

 [242]6:23 [243]15:13 [244]18:24

 1 Kings

 [245]1:11 [246]1:19 [247]1:26 [248]8:27 [249]8:59
 [250]10:24 [251]12:32-33 [252]13:2 [253]18:15 [254]18:15
 [255]19:4-8 [256]21:10 [257]21:18 [258]21:20

 2 Kings

 [259]1:10 [260]3:11 [261]5:8 [262]5:15 [263]5:26
 [264]6:13-17 [265]6:16 [266]6:17 [267]9:35-36 [268]17:9
 [269]19:35 [270]20:18

 Ezra

 [271]3:6

 Esther

 [272]3:9 [273]4:16 [274]9:20-28 [275]9:21

 Job

 [276]1 [277]1:2 [278]1:2 [279]1:21 [280]2:7 [281]5:23
 [282]5:26 [283]7:1 [284]14:4 [285]14:16-17 [286]14:26
 [287]16:14 [288]18:5 [289]18:5 [290]18:14 [291]38:17
 [292]38:17 [293]38:17 [294]40:8-9 [295]40:16 [296]40:19-24
 [297]40:24 [298]41:1 [299]41:5 [300]41:13 [301]41:13
 [302]41:18-20 [303]41:27

 Psalms

 [304]1:1 [305]1:1 [306]1:1-2 [307]1:5 [308]1:5 [309]1:6
 [310]1:16 [311]2:1 [312]2:1 [313]2:1 [314]2:1 [315]2:4
 [316]2:6 [317]2:7 [318]2:7 [319]2:7 [320]2:7 [321]2:18
 [322]2:18 [323]2:23 [324]2:24 [325]2:25 [326]2:25
 [327]2:26-28 [328]3 [329]3 [330]4 [331]4:4 [332]4:4
 [333]4:5 [334]4:24 [335]4:24 [336]4:24 [337]4:24 [338]4:24
 [339]4:24 [340]4:24 [341]4:24 [342]4:24 [343]4:25-26
 [344]4:34 [345]5:3 [346]6:6 [347]7:3-4 [348]7:20 [349]7:20
 [350]9:6 [351]9:9 [352]9:9 [353]9:14 [354]9:15 [355]9:17
 [356]10:1 [357]10:1 [358]10:1 [359]10:1 [360]10:1 [361]10:3
 [362]10:3 [363]10:3 [364]10:3 [365]10:3 [366]10:3 [367]11:7
 [368]12:1 [369]12:6 [370]14:1 [371]14:1 [372]14:1
 [373]14:1-2 [374]14:7 [375]15:3 [376]15:3 [377]15:4
 [378]15:4-7 [379]15:5 [380]15:8 [381]15:16 [382]15:17-18
 [383]15:18 [384]16:3 [385]16:8 [386]16:10 [387]16:10
 [388]16:12 [389]16:13 [390]16:15 [391]16:15 [392]16:16
 [393]16:16 [394]17:3-4 [395]17:15 [396]18:1-2 [397]18:6
 [398]18:7 [399]18:9 [400]18:10 [401]18:13 [402]18:17
 [403]18:24 [404]18:27 [405]18:27 [406]18:29 [407]18:29
 [408]18:44-45 [409]18:45 [410]19:1 [411]19:1 [412]19:1
 [413]19:1 [414]19:3 [415]19:4 [416]19:14 [417]19:14
 [418]19:20 [419]19:43 [420]19:44 [421]19:62 [422]19:73
 [423]19:73 [424]19:73 [425]19:89 [426]19:89 [427]19:90
 [428]19:91 [429]19:91 [430]19:101 [431]19:107 [432]19:143
 [433]19:164 [434]20:1-2 [435]20:7 [436]20:7 [437]22:9
 [438]22:16 [439]22:22 [440]22:32 [441]23:4 [442]24:3
 [443]24:6 [444]24:7 [445]24:7 [446]24:7 [447]24:7 [448]24:7
 [449]24:10 [450]25:1 [451]25:1 [452]26:2 [453]27:1
 [454]27:1 [455]27:3 [456]30:3 [457]30:9 [458]30:12
 [459]31:7 [460]31:7-8 [461]31:15 [462]31:24 [463]32:9
 [464]32:9 [465]32:14 [466]32:15 [467]33:1 [468]33:4
 [469]33:6 [470]33:6 [471]33:6 [472]33:6 [473]33:9 [474]33:9
 [475]34 [476]34:1 [477]34:13 [478]34:21 [479]35:8
 [480]35:16 [481]35:28 [482]36:1 [483]36:9 [484]36:9
 [485]36:9 [486]36:9 [487]37:6 [488]37:40 [489]38:8
 [490]38:8 [491]38:12 [492]38:14 [493]38:14 [494]39:2
 [495]39:6 [496]40 [497]40:6 [498]41:9 [499]42:1 [500]42:4
 [501]42:4 [502]43:3 [503]43:3 [504]43:4 [505]44:5 [506]44:5
 [507]44:17 [508]44:17 [509]44:20 [510]44:22 [511]45:1
 [512]45:1 [513]45:1 [514]45:1 [515]45:1 [516]45:1 [517]45:1
 [518]45:1 [519]45:1 [520]45:1 [521]45:6 [522]45:6 [523]45:7
 [524]45:7 [525]45:7-8 [526]45:7-8 [527]45:7-8 [528]45:8
 [529]45:8 [530]45:13 [531]45:13 [532]45:14 [533]46:7
 [534]46:7 [535]46:8 [536]47:7-9 [537]48:5 [538]48:5
 [539]48:5 [540]49:3 [541]49:10 [542]49:11 [543]49:12
 [544]50:1 [545]50:3 [546]50:6 [547]50:14 [548]50:16
 [549]50:16 [550]50:16 [551]50:23 [552]51:10 [553]51:11
 [554]51:12 [555]51:12 [556]51:13 [557]52 [558]53:1
 [559]53:3 [560]54:1 [561]54:7 [562]55:4 [563]55:15
 [564]56:11 [565]57:3 [566]57:4 [567]57:4 [568]59:6
 [569]59:14 [570]59:15 [571]60:11 [572]60:12 [573]63:1-2
 [574]63:6 [575]63:11 [576]66:11-12 [577]68:1 [578]68:5
 [579]69:26 [580]71:3 [581]72:1 [582]72:5 [583]72:17
 [584]73:20 [585]73:23-24 [586]74:2 [587]74:6 [588]74:11
 [589]74:14 [590]76:1 [591]76:1 [592]77:10 [593]78:25
 [594]81:3 [595]81:3 [596]82:1 [597]82:5 [598]82:6 [599]82:6
 [600]82:6 [601]83:1 [602]83:6 [603]84:7 [604]84:10
 [605]84:70 [606]85:8 [607]86:8 [608]86:8 [609]86:8
 [610]86:16 [611]87:1-3 [612]87:2 [613]87:4 [614]88:7
 [615]89:6 [616]89:6 [617]89:7 [618]89:17-18 [619]89:47
 [620]90:2 [621]90:10 [622]90:14 [623]90:17 [624]91:8
 [625]94:11 [626]94:17 [627]95:1 [628]95:1 [629]97:1
 [630]104:24 [631]110:3 [632]110:3 [633]118 [634]118
 [635]119:148 [636]120:5 [637]125:1 [638]132:14 [639]135
 [640]143:5 [641]143:5

 Proverbs

 [642]1:5 [643]1:5-6 [644]1:6 [645]1:7 [646]1:23
 [647]2:13-14 [648]3:19 [649]3:19 [650]3:19 [651]3:19
 [652]3:19 [653]4:1 [654]4:23 [655]5:3 [656]5:22 [657]7:22
 [658]7:22-23 [659]8:2 [660]8:9 [661]8:10-11 [662]8:12
 [663]8:12 [664]8:14 [665]8:14 [666]8:22 [667]8:22 [668]8:22
 [669]8:22 [670]8:22 [671]8:22 [672]8:22 [673]8:22 [674]8:22
 [675]8:22 [676]8:22 [677]8:22 [678]8:22 [679]8:22 [680]8:22
 [681]8:22 [682]8:22 [683]8:22 [684]8:22 [685]8:22 [686]8:22
 [687]8:22 [688]8:22 [689]8:22 [690]8:22 [691]8:22 [692]8:22
 [693]8:22 [694]8:22 [695]8:22 [696]8:22 [697]8:22 [698]8:22
 [699]8:22 [700]8:22 [701]8:22 [702]8:22 [703]8:22 [704]8:22
 [705]8:22 [706]8:22-30 [707]8:23 [708]8:23 [709]8:23
 [710]8:23 [711]8:24-26 [712]8:25 [713]8:25 [714]8:25
 [715]8:25 [716]8:25 [717]8:25 [718]8:25 [719]8:27 [720]8:27
 [721]8:27 [722]8:27 [723]8:30 [724]8:30 [725]8:30 [726]8:30
 [727]8:30 [728]8:30 [729]8:30 [730]8:30 [731]8:31 [732]9:1
 [733]9:1 [734]9:1 [735]9:1 [736]9:1-5 [737]9:6 [738]9:17
 [739]9:17 [740]9:18 [741]9:18 [742]10:3 [743]10:20
 [744]10:27 [745]11:26 [746]12:5-6 [747]12:6 [748]12:7
 [749]12:10 [750]12:11 [751]12:20 [752]13:3 [753]13:13
 [754]14:15 [755]14:16 [756]14:24 [757]15:1 [758]15:13
 [759]15:13 [760]15:28 [761]16:13 [762]16:13 [763]18:1
 [764]18:1 [765]18:3 [766]18:3 [767]18:3 [768]19:5
 [769]19:27 [770]20:13 [771]20:14 [772]20:17 [773]20:23
 [774]20:28 [775]21:1 [776]21:26 [777]22:28 [778]22:28
 [779]23:1 [780]23:4 [781]23:32 [782]24:9 [783]24:15
 [784]25:2 [785]25:7 [786]25:7 [787]25:18 [788]25:25
 [789]26:10 [790]28:28 [791]29:7 [792]29:12 [793]30:8
 [794]30:11 [795]30:15 [796]30:15 [797]30:19

 Ecclesiastes

 [798]3:2 [799]3:7 [800]4:8 [801]5:8-9 [802]7:17
 [803]7:23-24 [804]7:26 [805]7:29 [806]7:29 [807]8:1
 [808]9:12 [809]10:8 [810]10:20 [811]12:14

 Song of Solomon

 [812]1:6-7 [813]2 [814]3:1-2 [815]5:2 [816]6:1 [817]8:1

 Isaiah

 [818]1:2 [819]1:2 [820]1:2 [821]1:2 [822]1:4 [823]1:6
 [824]1:10-11 [825]1:11 [826]1:11 [827]1:11 [828]1:12
 [829]1:12 [830]1:14 [831]1:14 [832]1:22 [833]1:22 [834]1:22
 [835]1:22 [836]2:3 [837]2:3 [838]2:4 [839]3:9-10
 [840]3:9-10 [841]5:1 [842]5:7 [843]5:11 [844]5:20 [845]5:20
 [846]6 [847]6:5 [848]6:8 [849]6:9 [850]7:14 [851]7:14
 [852]7:14 [853]7:14 [854]7:14 [855]8:4 [856]8:4 [857]9:5
 [858]9:6 [859]9:6 [860]9:6 [861]9:6 [862]9:6 [863]10:14
 [864]10:14 [865]11:5 [866]11:8 [867]11:9 [868]11:9
 [869]11:10 [870]14:12 [871]14:14 [872]14:14 [873]14:27
 [874]14:27 [875]19:1 [876]22:13 [877]22:13 [878]22:14
 [879]23:2 [880]25:8 [881]26:9 [882]26:10 [883]26:13
 [884]26:20 [885]26:20 [886]26:20 [887]32:6 [888]32:6
 [889]35:3 [890]38:18 [891]38:19 [892]38:20 [893]39:7
 [894]40:8 [895]40:18 [896]40:28 [897]40:28 [898]40:28
 [899]40:29 [900]42:8 [901]42:8 [902]42:12 [903]44:6
 [904]44:6 [905]44:9 [906]44:23 [907]44:24 [908]44:24
 [909]45:5 [910]45:14 [911]47:6 [912]48:13 [913]48:22
 [914]48:22 [915]49:5 [916]49:5 [917]49:5 [918]49:8
 [919]49:13 [920]50:6 [921]50:6 [922]50:6 [923]51:16 [924]52
 [925]52:5 [926]52:11 [927]52:11 [928]53 [929]53:3 [930]53:4
 [931]53:4 [932]53:4 [933]53:5 [934]53:7 [935]53:7 [936]53:7
 [937]53:7 [938]53:8 [939]53:8 [940]54:13 [941]54:13
 [942]55:6-7 [943]56:4-5 [944]58:5 [945]58:9 [946]58:11
 [947]59:3-4 [948]59:4-5 [949]59:9-11 [950]60:8 [951]61:1
 [952]61:1 [953]61:8 [954]63:1 [955]63:9 [956]64:4
 [957]65:1-2 [958]66:2 [959]66:2 [960]66:2 [961]66:2
 [962]66:3 [963]66:3

 Jeremiah

 [964]1:5 [965]1:5 [966]1:5 [967]1:5 [968]2:1 [969]2:12
 [970]2:13 [971]2:13 [972]2:18 [973]3:3 [974]4:3 [975]5:8
 [976]5:8 [977]5:30 [978]6:16 [979]6:20 [980]7:18
 [981]7:21-22 [982]7:22 [983]7:22-23 [984]7:28 [985]7:34
 [986]7:34 [987]9:2 [988]9:2 [989]9:3 [990]9:10 [991]11:19
 [992]13:23 [993]14:10 [994]15:5 [995]15:18 [996]17:10
 [997]17:11 [998]17:12-13 [999]20:9 [1000]20:9 [1001]20:12
 [1002]22:10 [1003]23:18 [1004]23:22 [1005]23:23 [1006]23:29
 [1007]25:10 [1008]31:22 [1009]31:22 [1010]31:34 [1011]48:10

 Lamentations

 [1012]3:27 [1013]4:6 [1014]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [1015]3:12 [1016]9:4 [1017]11:13 [1018]16:25 [1019]16:48
 [1020]18:23 [1021]18:26 [1022]18:32 [1023]28:2 [1024]34:2
 [1025]34:2 [1026]44

 Daniel

 [1027]3:18 [1028]3:25 [1029]4:3 [1030]4:19 [1031]6:5
 [1032]6:11 [1033]6:11 [1034]6:13 [1035]7:5 [1036]7:7
 [1037]7:13 [1038]7:14 [1039]7:25 [1040]9:24 [1041]9:24
 [1042]9:27

 Hosea

 [1043]4:12 [1044]6:3 [1045]6:6 [1046]7:13 [1047]7:15
 [1048]8:7 [1049]9:4 [1050]11:1

 Joel

 [1051]1:7 [1052]2:15 [1053]2:17 [1054]2:17 [1055]2:25
 [1056]2:25 [1057]2:25 [1058]2:25 [1059]2:25 [1060]2:25
 [1061]2:28 [1062]2:28 [1063]2:28 [1064]2:32

 Amos

 [1065]5:16

 Micah

 [1066]4:2 [1067]7:18 [1068]7:18

 Nahum

 [1069]1:15 [1070]1:15 [1071]1:15 [1072]1:15

 Habakkuk

 [1073]2:5 [1074]2:15 [1075]2:15 [1076]2:15 [1077]2:15

 Zechariah

 [1078]1:3 [1079]1:12 [1080]2:10 [1081]8:19

 Malachi

 [1082]1:2-3 [1083]1:11 [1084]1:11 [1085]2:10 [1086]3:3
 [1087]3:6 [1088]3:6 [1089]3:6 [1090]3:6 [1091]4:2 [1092]4:2

 Matthew

 [1093]1 [1094]1:17 [1095]1:23 [1096]1:23 [1097]1:23
 [1098]1:23 [1099]1:23 [1100]1:25 [1101]1:25 [1102]2:13
 [1103]3:3 [1104]3:7 [1105]3:7 [1106]3:9 [1107]3:17
 [1108]3:17 [1109]3:17 [1110]3:17 [1111]3:17 [1112]3:17
 [1113]3:17 [1114]3:17 [1115]3:17 [1116]3:17 [1117]4:3
 [1118]4:3 [1119]4:7 [1120]4:10 [1121]4:10 [1122]4:10
 [1123]4:11 [1124]4:19 [1125]4:20 [1126]4:23 [1127]5:6
 [1128]5:8 [1129]5:8 [1130]5:10 [1131]5:11-12 [1132]5:15
 [1133]5:21-44 [1134]5:22 [1135]5:28 [1136]5:36 [1137]5:48
 [1138]5:48 [1139]6:6 [1140]6:7 [1141]6:7 [1142]6:9
 [1143]6:30 [1144]6:31 [1145]6:33 [1146]6:34 [1147]7:2
 [1148]7:6 [1149]7:6 [1150]7:6 [1151]7:13 [1152]7:15
 [1153]7:15 [1154]7:22 [1155]7:25 [1156]7:25 [1157]8:2
 [1158]8:26 [1159]8:29 [1160]8:29 [1161]8:31 [1162]9:3
 [1163]9:5 [1164]9:5 [1165]9:13 [1166]9:20 [1167]9:20
 [1168]9:24 [1169]9:36 [1170]10:8 [1171]10:16 [1172]10:17
 [1173]10:22 [1174]10:22 [1175]10:23 [1176]10:23 [1177]10:23
 [1178]10:29 [1179]10:29 [1180]10:29 [1181]10:40 [1182]10:40
 [1183]10:40 [1184]10:40 [1185]10:40 [1186]10:40 [1187]11:13
 [1188]11:25 [1189]11:25 [1190]11:27 [1191]11:27 [1192]11:27
 [1193]11:27 [1194]11:27 [1195]11:27 [1196]11:27 [1197]11:27
 [1198]11:27 [1199]11:27 [1200]11:27 [1201]11:27 [1202]11:27
 [1203]11:28 [1204]11:28 [1205]11:28 [1206]11:29 [1207]11:29
 [1208]12:8 [1209]12:15 [1210]12:19 [1211]12:28 [1212]12:28
 [1213]12:32 [1214]12:32 [1215]12:34 [1216]12:34 [1217]12:36
 [1218]12:40 [1219]12:43-45 [1220]13:8 [1221]13:21 [1222]13:22
 [1223]13:25 [1224]13:52 [1225]14:13 [1226]14:28 [1227]15:3
 [1228]15:4 [1229]15:11 [1230]15:13 [1231]15:13 [1232]15:19
 [1233]15:26 [1234]15:28 [1235]16:13 [1236]16:13 [1237]16:16
 [1238]16:16 [1239]16:16 [1240]16:16 [1241]16:16
 [1242]16:16-17 [1243]16:18 [1244]16:22-23 [1245]16:23
 [1246]16:23 [1247]16:24 [1248]16:24 [1249]17:5 [1250]17:5
 [1251]17:5 [1252]17:20 [1253]18:6 [1254]18:6 [1255]18:6
 [1256]18:19 [1257]18:20 [1258]18:20 [1259]18:24 [1260]19:4
 [1261]19:4 [1262]19:4 [1263]19:6 [1264]19:21 [1265]19:27
 [1266]20:16 [1267]20:22-23 [1268]20:28 [1269]20:32 [1270]21:2
 [1271]21:19 [1272]21:33 [1273]21:37 [1274]22:12 [1275]22:12
 [1276]22:21 [1277]22:21 [1278]22:29 [1279]22:29 [1280]22:29
 [1281]22:29 [1282]22:29 [1283]23:19 [1284]23:34 [1285]24:2
 [1286]24:3 [1287]24:24 [1288]24:24-25 [1289]24:31 [1290]24:35
 [1291]24:39 [1292]24:42 [1293]24:42 [1294]24:42 [1295]24:42
 [1296]24:44 [1297]25:1-12 [1298]25:11 [1299]25:13 [1300]25:21
 [1301]25:21 [1302]25:21 [1303]25:21 [1304]25:21 [1305]25:23
 [1306]25:23 [1307]25:26 [1308]25:26-30 [1309]25:27
 [1310]25:31-36 [1311]25:34 [1312]25:34 [1313]25:34
 [1314]25:34 [1315]25:35 [1316]25:40 [1317]25:45 [1318]26:2
 [1319]26:17 [1320]26:26 [1321]26:26-28 [1322]26:28
 [1323]26:38 [1324]26:39 [1325]26:39 [1326]26:39 [1327]26:39
 [1328]26:39 [1329]26:41 [1330]26:41 [1331]26:45 [1332]26:64
 [1333]26:64 [1334]26:65 [1335]27:24 [1336]27:40 [1337]27:42
 [1338]27:45 [1339]27:46 [1340]27:46 [1341]27:52-53
 [1342]27:54 [1343]27:54 [1344]27:60 [1345]28:5 [1346]28:18
 [1347]28:18 [1348]28:18 [1349]28:18 [1350]28:19 [1351]28:19
 [1352]28:19 [1353]28:19 [1354]28:19 [1355]28:19 [1356]28:20
 [1357]28:20

 Mark

 [1358]1:7-11 [1359]1:24 [1360]1:24 [1361]1:31 [1362]2:11
 [1363]4:17 [1364]4:20 [1365]4:20 [1366]4:37-41 [1367]4:37-41
 [1368]6:38 [1369]6:38 [1370]8:22 [1371]8:29 [1372]8:38
 [1373]10:21 [1374]10:28 [1375]10:45 [1376]11:13 [1377]12:25
 [1378]12:29 [1379]12:29 [1380]12:29 [1381]13:9 [1382]13:31
 [1383]13:32 [1384]13:32 [1385]13:32 [1386]13:32 [1387]13:32
 [1388]13:32 [1389]13:32 [1390]13:32 [1391]15:5 [1392]15:34
 [1393]15:46

 Luke

 [1394]1 [1395]1:1 [1396]1:1 [1397]1:2 [1398]1:13 [1399]1:27
 [1400]1:35 [1401]1:41 [1402]2:1 [1403]2:23 [1404]2:52
 [1405]2:52 [1406]2:52 [1407]2:52 [1408]2:52 [1409]2:52
 [1410]2:52 [1411]2:52 [1412]2:61 [1413]3:7 [1414]4:3
 [1415]4:8 [1416]4:18 [1417]4:30 [1418]4:30 [1419]4:41
 [1420]5:24 [1421]5:24 [1422]6:1 [1423]6:36 [1424]6:36
 [1425]6:36 [1426]6:49 [1427]7:48 [1428]9:27 [1429]9:62
 [1430]10:16 [1431]10:18 [1432]10:18-19 [1433]10:19
 [1434]10:19 [1435]10:20 [1436]10:22 [1437]10:22 [1438]10:22
 [1439]10:22 [1440]10:22 [1441]11:2 [1442]11:9 [1443]11:13
 [1444]11:15 [1445]11:27 [1446]11:49 [1447]12:4 [1448]12:12
 [1449]12:20 [1450]12:29 [1451]12:33 [1452]12:40 [1453]12:40
 [1454]12:49 [1455]13:21 [1456]13:25 [1457]13:32 [1458]14:15
 [1459]14:15 [1460]15:7 [1461]15:17 [1462]16:8 [1463]16:19
 [1464]17:2 [1465]17:15 [1466]17:19 [1467]17:21 [1468]17:21
 [1469]18:2 [1470]18:7 [1471]18:12 [1472]18:19 [1473]18:19
 [1474]19:23 [1475]20:13 [1476]21:8 [1477]21:8 [1478]21:15
 [1479]21:33 [1480]22:15 [1481]22:15-16 [1482]22:28-30
 [1483]22:29-30 [1484]22:31 [1485]23:28 [1486]23:43
 [1487]23:43 [1488]24 [1489]24:1 [1490]24:5 [1491]24:11
 [1492]24:39 [1493]24:39 [1494]24:42-43 [1495]28:37

 John

 [1496]1:1 [1497]1:1 [1498]1:1 [1499]1:1 [1500]1:1 [1501]1:1
 [1502]1:1 [1503]1:1 [1504]1:1 [1505]1:1 [1506]1:1 [1507]1:1
 [1508]1:1 [1509]1:1 [1510]1:1 [1511]1:1 [1512]1:1 [1513]1:1
 [1514]1:1 [1515]1:1 [1516]1:1 [1517]1:1 [1518]1:1 [1519]1:1
 [1520]1:1 [1521]1:1 [1522]1:1 [1523]1:1 [1524]1:1-3
 [1525]1:1-3 [1526]1:3 [1527]1:3 [1528]1:3 [1529]1:3
 [1530]1:3 [1531]1:3 [1532]1:3 [1533]1:3 [1534]1:3 [1535]1:3
 [1536]1:3 [1537]1:3 [1538]1:3 [1539]1:3 [1540]1:3 [1541]1:3
 [1542]1:3 [1543]1:3 [1544]1:3 [1545]1:3 [1546]1:3 [1547]1:3
 [1548]1:3 [1549]1:8 [1550]1:9 [1551]1:9 [1552]1:9 [1553]1:9
 [1554]1:10 [1555]1:12 [1556]1:12 [1557]1:12 [1558]1:12-13
 [1559]1:12-17 [1560]1:14 [1561]1:14 [1562]1:14 [1563]1:14
 [1564]1:14 [1565]1:14 [1566]1:14 [1567]1:14 [1568]1:14
 [1569]1:14 [1570]1:14 [1571]1:14 [1572]1:14 [1573]1:14
 [1574]1:14 [1575]1:14 [1576]1:14 [1577]1:14 [1578]1:14
 [1579]1:14 [1580]1:14 [1581]1:14 [1582]1:14 [1583]1:14
 [1584]1:14 [1585]1:14 [1586]1:14 [1587]1:14 [1588]1:14
 [1589]1:14 [1590]1:14 [1591]1:14 [1592]1:14 [1593]1:15
 [1594]1:16 [1595]1:16 [1596]1:16 [1597]1:17 [1598]1:17
 [1599]1:18 [1600]1:18 [1601]1:18 [1602]1:18 [1603]1:18
 [1604]1:18 [1605]1:18 [1606]1:18 [1607]1:18 [1608]1:18
 [1609]1:18 [1610]1:22 [1611]1:45 [1612]2:4 [1613]2:4
 [1614]2:19 [1615]2:25 [1616]3:2 [1617]3:3 [1618]3:5
 [1619]3:16-19 [1620]3:17 [1621]3:17 [1622]3:17 [1623]3:18-19
 [1624]3:31 [1625]3:35 [1626]3:35 [1627]3:35 [1628]3:35
 [1629]3:35 [1630]3:36 [1631]4:14 [1632]4:20 [1633]4:20
 [1634]4:24 [1635]4:26 [1636]4:34 [1637]5:16 [1638]5:17
 [1639]5:17 [1640]5:17 [1641]5:17 [1642]5:17 [1643]5:18
 [1644]5:19 [1645]5:19 [1646]5:19 [1647]5:22 [1648]5:22
 [1649]5:23 [1650]5:23 [1651]5:23 [1652]5:23 [1653]5:25
 [1654]5:26 [1655]5:26 [1656]5:26 [1657]5:30 [1658]5:36
 [1659]5:37 [1660]5:39 [1661]5:39 [1662]5:39 [1663]5:46
 [1664]5:46 [1665]6:4 [1666]6:6 [1667]6:30 [1668]6:35
 [1669]6:37 [1670]6:38 [1671]6:38 [1672]6:38-40 [1673]6:42
 [1674]6:44 [1675]6:44 [1676]6:45 [1677]6:45 [1678]6:46
 [1679]6:46 [1680]6:46 [1681]6:48 [1682]6:48-51 [1683]6:51
 [1684]6:51 [1685]6:51 [1686]6:53 [1687]6:62-64 [1688]6:63
 [1689]6:63 [1690]6:67 [1691]6:68 [1692]6:68 [1693]6:69
 [1694]7:6 [1695]7:17 [1696]7:30 [1697]7:37 [1698]7:37
 [1699]7:37 [1700]7:37 [1701]7:37 [1702]7:37 [1703]7:37
 [1704]7:37 [1705]7:37-38 [1706]7:38 [1707]7:38 [1708]7:39
 [1709]7:46 [1710]8:12 [1711]8:12 [1712]8:35-36 [1713]8:36
 [1714]8:40 [1715]8:40 [1716]8:42 [1717]8:43 [1718]8:44
 [1719]8:44 [1720]8:44 [1721]8:44 [1722]8:44 [1723]8:56
 [1724]8:56 [1725]8:58 [1726]8:58 [1727]8:58 [1728]8:58
 [1729]8:58-59 [1730]9 [1731]9:6 [1732]9:28-29 [1733]9:32
 [1734]9:39 [1735]10:15 [1736]10:15 [1737]10:16 [1738]10:17-18
 [1739]10:18 [1740]10:18 [1741]10:18 [1742]10:18 [1743]10:29
 [1744]10:29 [1745]10:29 [1746]10:29 [1747]10:30 [1748]10:30
 [1749]10:30 [1750]10:30 [1751]10:30 [1752]10:30 [1753]10:30
 [1754]10:30 [1755]10:30 [1756]10:30 [1757]10:30 [1758]10:30
 [1759]10:30 [1760]10:30 [1761]10:30 [1762]10:30 [1763]10:30
 [1764]10:30 [1765]10:30 [1766]10:30 [1767]10:30 [1768]10:30
 [1769]10:30 [1770]10:30 [1771]10:30 [1772]10:30 [1773]10:30
 [1774]10:30 [1775]10:30 [1776]10:30 [1777]10:30 [1778]10:30
 [1779]10:32-38 [1780]10:33 [1781]10:33 [1782]10:33
 [1783]10:33 [1784]10:35 [1785]10:35 [1786]10:36 [1787]10:37
 [1788]10:37-38 [1789]10:38 [1790]10:38 [1791]10:38
 [1792]10:38 [1793]11:14 [1794]11:25 [1795]11:34 [1796]11:34
 [1797]11:34 [1798]11:35 [1799]11:43 [1800]11:47 [1801]11:50
 [1802]11:53-54 [1803]12:13 [1804]12:27 [1805]12:27
 [1806]12:27 [1807]12:27-28 [1808]12:28 [1809]12:28
 [1810]12:32 [1811]12:34 [1812]12:45 [1813]12:46
 [1814]12:46-48 [1815]12:47 [1816]13:12 [1817]13:13
 [1818]13:13 [1819]13:18 [1820]13:21 [1821]13:31 [1822]14:2
 [1823]14:3 [1824]14:6 [1825]14:6 [1826]14:6 [1827]14:6
 [1828]14:6 [1829]14:6 [1830]14:6 [1831]14:6 [1832]14:6
 [1833]14:6 [1834]14:6 [1835]14:6 [1836]14:6 [1837]14:6
 [1838]14:6 [1839]14:6 [1840]14:6 [1841]14:6 [1842]14:8-9
 [1843]14:9 [1844]14:9 [1845]14:9 [1846]14:9 [1847]14:9
 [1848]14:9 [1849]14:9 [1850]14:9 [1851]14:9 [1852]14:9
 [1853]14:9 [1854]14:9 [1855]14:9 [1856]14:9 [1857]14:9
 [1858]14:9 [1859]14:9 [1860]14:9-10 [1861]14:9-10
 [1862]14:9-10 [1863]14:9-10 [1864]14:9-10 [1865]14:9-10
 [1866]14:9-10 [1867]14:9-13 [1868]14:10 [1869]14:10
 [1870]14:10 [1871]14:10 [1872]14:10 [1873]14:10 [1874]14:10
 [1875]14:10 [1876]14:10 [1877]14:10 [1878]14:10 [1879]14:10
 [1880]14:10 [1881]14:10 [1882]14:10 [1883]14:11 [1884]14:11
 [1885]14:16 [1886]14:20 [1887]14:23 [1888]14:23 [1889]14:26
 [1890]14:27 [1891]14:28 [1892]14:28 [1893]14:28-29
 [1894]14:30 [1895]14:48 [1896]15:1 [1897]15:20 [1898]15:22
 [1899]15:26 [1900]15:26 [1901]15:26 [1902]16:7 [1903]16:13
 [1904]16:14 [1905]16:15 [1906]16:15 [1907]16:15 [1908]16:15
 [1909]16:15 [1910]16:15 [1911]16:15 [1912]16:15 [1913]16:15
 [1914]16:15 [1915]16:15 [1916]16:15 [1917]16:15 [1918]16:23
 [1919]16:25 [1920]16:28 [1921]16:28 [1922]16:33 [1923]16:33
 [1924]17:1 [1925]17:1 [1926]17:3 [1927]17:3 [1928]17:3
 [1929]17:3 [1930]17:3 [1931]17:3 [1932]17:3 [1933]17:4
 [1934]17:5 [1935]17:5 [1936]17:7-8 [1937]17:7-9 [1938]17:10
 [1939]17:10 [1940]17:11 [1941]17:17 [1942]17:18-19
 [1943]17:20-23 [1944]17:21 [1945]17:22 [1946]17:24
 [1947]18:4-5 [1948]18:5 [1949]18:5 [1950]18:9 [1951]18:12
 [1952]18:23 [1953]18:37 [1954]19:15 [1955]19:15 [1956]19:15
 [1957]19:38 [1958]19:39 [1959]19:41 [1960]20:17 [1961]20:17
 [1962]20:22 [1963]20:22 [1964]20:22 [1965]20:27 [1966]20:28
 [1967]20:28 [1968]21:15 [1969]22:36 [1970]22:45 [1971]22:46

 Acts

 [1972]1:1 [1973]1:7 [1974]1:7 [1975]1:11 [1976]1:18
 [1977]1:18 [1978]1:18 [1979]2:1 [1980]2:22 [1981]2:22
 [1982]2:24 [1983]2:24 [1984]2:36 [1985]2:36 [1986]2:36
 [1987]2:36 [1988]2:36 [1989]2:36 [1990]2:38 [1991]3:9
 [1992]3:15 [1993]3:20 [1994]3:26 [1995]4:4 [1996]4:10
 [1997]4:12 [1998]4:32 [1999]4:35 [2000]5 [2001]5:29
 [2002]5:39 [2003]5:39 [2004]5:39 [2005]6 [2006]6 [2007]7:55
 [2008]8:4 [2009]8:20 [2010]8:20 [2011]8:27 [2012]8:30
 [2013]8:34 [2014]8:37 [2015]9:4 [2016]9:5 [2017]10:26
 [2018]10:36 [2019]10:36 [2020]10:38 [2021]10:38 [2022]10:38
 [2023]13:22 [2024]13:33 [2025]14:15 [2026]15 [2027]17:5
 [2028]17:21 [2029]17:27 [2030]17:28 [2031]17:28 [2032]17:28
 [2033]17:28 [2034]17:28 [2035]17:28 [2036]17:30 [2037]17:31
 [2038]20:28 [2039]20:29 [2040]21:20 [2041]23:9 [2042]23:11
 [2043]23:22-24 [2044]24:18-19 [2045]25:16 [2046]26:2
 [2047]26:26

 Romans

 [2048]1:1 [2049]1:1-2 [2050]1:2 [2051]1:3 [2052]1:3
 [2053]1:4 [2054]1:4 [2055]1:4 [2056]1:7 [2057]1:7
 [2058]1:12 [2059]1:15 [2060]1:17 [2061]1:19-20 [2062]1:19-25
 [2063]1:20 [2064]1:20 [2065]1:20 [2066]1:20 [2067]1:20
 [2068]1:20 [2069]1:20 [2070]1:20 [2071]1:20 [2072]1:21-22
 [2073]1:22 [2074]1:23 [2075]1:25 [2076]1:25 [2077]1:25
 [2078]1:25 [2079]1:25 [2080]1:25 [2081]1:25 [2082]1:26
 [2083]1:26 [2084]1:28 [2085]1:28 [2086]1:28 [2087]1:30
 [2088]1:30 [2089]1:30 [2090]2:5 [2091]2:13 [2092]2:16
 [2093]2:21 [2094]2:23 [2095]2:24 [2096]2:24 [2097]3:10
 [2098]3:21 [2099]3:22 [2100]3:26 [2101]3:26 [2102]3:29-30
 [2103]4:20 [2104]4:25 [2105]5:1-8 [2106]5:3 [2107]5:3
 [2108]5:3 [2109]5:4 [2110]5:5 [2111]5:5-8 [2112]5:12
 [2113]5:14 [2114]5:14 [2115]5:14 [2116]5:14 [2117]5:14
 [2118]6:9 [2119]6:14 [2120]7:12 [2121]7:14 [2122]8 [2123]8
 [2124]8:1 [2125]8:3 [2126]8:3 [2127]8:3 [2128]8:3 [2129]8:3
 [2130]8:3 [2131]8:3 [2132]8:3 [2133]8:3-4 [2134]8:9
 [2135]8:13 [2136]8:15 [2137]8:17 [2138]8:18 [2139]8:18
 [2140]8:19 [2141]8:19-21 [2142]8:21 [2143]8:21 [2144]8:22
 [2145]8:24-25 [2146]8:26 [2147]8:28 [2148]8:29 [2149]8:29
 [2150]8:29 [2151]8:29 [2152]8:29 [2153]8:32 [2154]8:33-34
 [2155]8:35 [2156]8:35 [2157]8:35 [2158]8:35 [2159]8:35
 [2160]8:35 [2161]8:35 [2162]8:35 [2163]8:35 [2164]8:37
 [2165]8:37 [2166]8:37 [2167]8:37 [2168]8:38-39 [2169]9:3
 [2170]9:5 [2171]9:5 [2172]9:5 [2173]9:5 [2174]9:5
 [2175]9:19 [2176]9:19 [2177]9:32 [2178]9:33 [2179]10:4
 [2180]10:9 [2181]10:9 [2182]10:11 [2183]10:13 [2184]10:13
 [2185]10:18 [2186]10:20 [2187]11:7 [2188]11:23 [2189]11:32
 [2190]11:33 [2191]11:34 [2192]11:34 [2193]11:36 [2194]12:11
 [2195]12:12 [2196]12:15 [2197]13:7 [2198]13:7 [2199]13:14
 [2200]14:1 [2201]14:1 [2202]14:2 [2203]14:10 [2204]15:19
 [2205]15:19 [2206]15:28 [2207]16:18 [2208]16:22

 1 Corinthians

 [2209]1:1 [2210]1:4 [2211]1:5 [2212]1:5 [2213]1:7-8
 [2214]1:10 [2215]1:10 [2216]1:21 [2217]1:21 [2218]1:21
 [2219]1:21 [2220]1:23 [2221]1:23-24 [2222]1:24 [2223]1:24
 [2224]1:24 [2225]1:24 [2226]1:24 [2227]1:24 [2228]1:24
 [2229]1:24 [2230]1:24 [2231]1:24 [2232]1:24 [2233]1:24
 [2234]1:24 [2235]1:24 [2236]1:24 [2237]1:30 [2238]1:30
 [2239]1:30 [2240]1:30 [2241]1:30 [2242]2:4 [2243]2:4
 [2244]2:8 [2245]2:8 [2246]2:8 [2247]2:8 [2248]2:8 [2249]2:8
 [2250]2:9 [2251]2:9 [2252]2:9 [2253]2:10 [2254]2:16
 [2255]3:1 [2256]3:2 [2257]3:10-11 [2258]3:12 [2259]3:16
 [2260]3:16 [2261]4:1 [2262]4:4 [2263]4:4 [2264]4:5
 [2265]4:6 [2266]4:6 [2267]4:16 [2268]5:3 [2269]5:4
 [2270]5:4 [2271]5:7 [2272]5:7 [2273]5:7 [2274]5:7 [2275]5:7
 [2276]5:7 [2277]5:7 [2278]5:7 [2279]5:7 [2280]5:7 [2281]5:7
 [2282]5:7 [2283]5:7-8 [2284]5:8 [2285]5:8 [2286]5:8
 [2287]5:13 [2288]6:10 [2289]6:13 [2290]6:17 [2291]6:18
 [2292]6:20 [2293]7:1 [2294]7:2 [2295]7:5 [2296]7:5
 [2297]7:7 [2298]7:17 [2299]7:18 [2300]7:27 [2301]8:5
 [2302]8:6 [2303]8:6 [2304]8:6 [2305]8:6 [2306]8:6 [2307]8:6
 [2308]8:6 [2309]8:6 [2310]8:6 [2311]8:6 [2312]8:6 [2313]8:6
 [2314]8:6 [2315]8:6 [2316]8:6 [2317]8:8 [2318]8:9
 [2319]9:16 [2320]9:22 [2321]9:24-27 [2322]9:27 [2323]9:27
 [2324]10:4 [2325]10:13 [2326]10:23 [2327]11:1 [2328]11:1
 [2329]11:1 [2330]11:1 [2331]11:2 [2332]11:2 [2333]11:2
 [2334]11:2 [2335]11:2 [2336]11:3 [2337]11:7 [2338]11:7
 [2339]11:7 [2340]11:9 [2341]11:12 [2342]11:25 [2343]11:27
 [2344]12:4 [2345]12:4 [2346]12:26 [2347]13:9 [2348]13:9
 [2349]13:12 [2350]14:9 [2351]14:25 [2352]14:25 [2353]14:33
 [2354]15 [2355]15 [2356]15:3 [2357]15:3 [2358]15:3
 [2359]15:3-4 [2360]15:3-4 [2361]15:5 [2362]15:9 [2363]15:9
 [2364]15:10 [2365]15:20 [2366]15:21 [2367]15:21 [2368]15:22
 [2369]15:25 [2370]15:28 [2371]15:28 [2372]15:31 [2373]15:32
 [2374]15:33 [2375]15:53 [2376]15:53 [2377]15:53 [2378]15:53
 [2379]15:53 [2380]15:55 [2381]16:22-23

 2 Corinthians

 [2382]1:10 [2383]1:23 [2384]2:11 [2385]2:11 [2386]2:11
 [2387]2:11 [2388]2:15 [2389]2:17 [2390]2:17 [2391]3:2
 [2392]3:2 [2393]3:16-17 [2394]3:17 [2395]4:10 [2396]4:10
 [2397]4:11 [2398]4:11 [2399]4:11 [2400]4:11 [2401]4:13
 [2402]4:14 [2403]4:17 [2404]5:4 [2405]5:10 [2406]5:13-15
 [2407]5:14 [2408]5:14 [2409]5:16 [2410]5:17 [2411]5:17
 [2412]5:17-18 [2413]5:19 [2414]5:21 [2415]6:1-2 [2416]6:2
 [2417]6:11 [2418]6:11 [2419]6:12-13 [2420]6:14 [2421]6:14
 [2422]6:14 [2423]6:14-15 [2424]6:16 [2425]6:16 [2426]6:17
 [2427]7:1 [2428]7:6 [2429]10:15 [2430]11:3 [2431]11:3
 [2432]11:27 [2433]11:33 [2434]12:2 [2435]12:2 [2436]12:4
 [2437]12:4 [2438]12:9 [2439]12:10 [2440]12:10 [2441]12:21
 [2442]13:5 [2443]13:14

 Galatians

 [2444]1:8-9 [2445]1:8-9 [2446]1:9 [2447]1:9 [2448]1:16
 [2449]1:24 [2450]2 [2451]2:5 [2452]2:5 [2453]2:6 [2454]2:13
 [2455]2:20 [2456]2:20 [2457]3:11 [2458]3:13 [2459]3:13
 [2460]3:13 [2461]3:13 [2462]3:16 [2463]3:19 [2464]3:23-24
 [2465]4:4 [2466]4:4 [2467]4:4 [2468]4:6 [2469]4:6 [2470]4:6
 [2471]4:8 [2472]4:10 [2473]4:10-11 [2474]4:19 [2475]5:13
 [2476]5:15 [2477]5:22 [2478]5:25 [2479]6:6 [2480]6:15
 [2481]6:17

 Ephesians

 [2482]1:3 [2483]1:3-5 [2484]1:5 [2485]1:10 [2486]1:10
 [2487]1:13 [2488]1:13-14 [2489]1:20 [2490]2:2 [2491]2:2
 [2492]2:2 [2493]2:4-5 [2494]2:10 [2495]2:10 [2496]2:14
 [2497]2:14-15 [2498]2:15 [2499]2:15-16 [2500]2:19 [2501]3:15
 [2502]3:15 [2503]3:15 [2504]3:18 [2505]4:3 [2506]4:4
 [2507]4:5 [2508]4:5 [2509]4:10 [2510]4:13 [2511]4:14
 [2512]4:20-24 [2513]4:22 [2514]4:22-24 [2515]4:24 [2516]4:26
 [2517]4:30 [2518]5:1-2 [2519]5:14 [2520]5:14 [2521]5:25
 [2522]5:27 [2523]6:11 [2524]6:12 [2525]6:12 [2526]6:12
 [2527]6:13 [2528]6:14 [2529]6:15 [2530]6:15

 Philippians

 [2531]1:13 [2532]1:29 [2533]2:5-11 [2534]2:6 [2535]2:6
 [2536]2:6 [2537]2:6 [2538]2:6 [2539]2:6 [2540]2:6
 [2541]2:6-7 [2542]2:6-8 [2543]2:6-8 [2544]2:7 [2545]2:7
 [2546]2:7 [2547]2:8 [2548]2:9 [2549]2:9 [2550]2:9 [2551]2:9
 [2552]2:9-10 [2553]2:9-10 [2554]2:9-10 [2555]2:10-11
 [2556]2:11 [2557]2:26 [2558]3:13 [2559]3:13 [2560]3:13
 [2561]3:13 [2562]3:14 [2563]3:14 [2564]3:14 [2565]3:14
 [2566]3:14 [2567]3:15 [2568]3:20 [2569]3:20 [2570]3:21
 [2571]4:5 [2572]4:6 [2573]4:12 [2574]4:13

 Colossians

 [2575]1:12 [2576]1:12-17 [2577]1:15 [2578]1:15 [2579]1:15
 [2580]1:15 [2581]1:15 [2582]1:15 [2583]1:15 [2584]1:15
 [2585]1:15 [2586]1:15 [2587]1:15 [2588]1:15 [2589]1:15
 [2590]1:15-17 [2591]1:15-18 [2592]1:16 [2593]1:16 [2594]1:16
 [2595]1:16 [2596]1:16 [2597]1:16 [2598]1:16 [2599]1:16
 [2600]1:17 [2601]1:17 [2602]1:17 [2603]1:17 [2604]1:18
 [2605]1:18 [2606]1:18 [2607]1:20 [2608]2 [2609]2 [2610]2:3
 [2611]2:5 [2612]2:9 [2613]2:9 [2614]2:9 [2615]2:14
 [2616]2:15 [2617]2:15 [2618]2:15 [2619]3:4 [2620]3:5
 [2621]3:5 [2622]3:5 [2623]3:5 [2624]3:17 [2625]4:6

 1 Thessalonians

 [2626]2:19 [2627]3:11 [2628]4:13 [2629]5:16-17 [2630]5:16-18
 [2631]5:17 [2632]5:17 [2633]5:17 [2634]5:17 [2635]5:18
 [2636]5:18 [2637]5:18 [2638]5:19 [2639]5:23 [2640]5:24

 2 Thessalonians

 [2641]2:1 [2642]2:1-2 [2643]2:3 [2644]2:4 [2645]2:8
 [2646]2:8 [2647]2:8 [2648]3:10

 1 Timothy

 [2649]1:4 [2650]1:7 [2651]1:7 [2652]1:7 [2653]1:7 [2654]1:8
 [2655]1:10 [2656]1:15 [2657]1:17 [2658]1:17 [2659]1:19
 [2660]1:19 [2661]1:19 [2662]1:20 [2663]2:5 [2664]2:7
 [2665]2:7 [2666]2:7 [2667]2:9 [2668]3:2 [2669]3:2 [2670]3:8
 [2671]3:16 [2672]3:16 [2673]3:16 [2674]4:1 [2675]4:1
 [2676]4:1 [2677]4:1-2 [2678]4:2 [2679]4:4 [2680]4:6
 [2681]4:6 [2682]4:7 [2683]4:7 [2684]4:7-8 [2685]4:7-8
 [2686]4:12 [2687]4:14 [2688]4:14 [2689]4:14 [2690]4:15
 [2691]5:16 [2692]5:23 [2693]6:5 [2694]6:5 [2695]6:10
 [2696]6:15

 2 Timothy

 [2697]1:8-10 [2698]1:10 [2699]1:10 [2700]1:13 [2701]2:8
 [2702]2:8 [2703]2:13 [2704]2:14 [2705]2:16-17 [2706]2:17
 [2707]2:17 [2708]2:17-18 [2709]2:18 [2710]2:18 [2711]2:19
 [2712]3:8 [2713]3:11 [2714]3:11 [2715]3:12 [2716]3:12
 [2717]3:12 [2718]3:13 [2719]3:14 [2720]3:14 [2721]3:15
 [2722]3:16 [2723]3:17 [2724]4:2 [2725]4:6 [2726]4:7
 [2727]4:7-8 [2728]4:8

 Titus

 [2729]1:8 [2730]1:12 [2731]1:13 [2732]1:14 [2733]1:14
 [2734]1:15 [2735]2:2 [2736]2:8 [2737]2:13-14 [2738]3:8
 [2739]3:10-11 [2740]3:10-11 [2741]3:11

 Philemon

 [2742]1:10

 Hebrews

 [2743]1:1-2 [2744]1:1-2 [2745]1:2 [2746]1:2 [2747]1:2
 [2748]1:3 [2749]1:3 [2750]1:3 [2751]1:3 [2752]1:3 [2753]1:3
 [2754]1:3 [2755]1:3 [2756]1:3 [2757]1:3 [2758]1:3 [2759]1:3
 [2760]1:3 [2761]1:3 [2762]1:3 [2763]1:3 [2764]1:3-4
 [2765]1:4 [2766]1:4 [2767]1:4 [2768]1:4 [2769]1:4 [2770]1:4
 [2771]1:4 [2772]1:4 [2773]1:4 [2774]1:6 [2775]1:6 [2776]1:6
 [2777]1:6 [2778]1:6 [2779]1:7 [2780]1:10 [2781]1:12
 [2782]1:14 [2783]2:1-3 [2784]2:7 [2785]2:9 [2786]2:9
 [2787]2:10 [2788]2:12 [2789]2:14 [2790]2:14 [2791]2:14
 [2792]2:14 [2793]2:14-15 [2794]2:14-18 [2795]2:15 [2796]2:15
 [2797]2:16 [2798]2:16 [2799]3:1-2 [2800]3:2 [2801]3:2
 [2802]3:2 [2803]3:2 [2804]3:2 [2805]3:2 [2806]3:2
 [2807]3:5-6 [2808]3:6 [2809]4:12 [2810]4:12 [2811]4:12
 [2812]4:12-13 [2813]4:12-13 [2814]4:14 [2815]5:13 [2816]5:14
 [2817]5:14 [2818]6:4 [2819]6:18 [2820]6:20 [2821]6:20
 [2822]7:19 [2823]7:19 [2824]7:22 [2825]8:3 [2826]9:1
 [2827]9:5 [2828]9:10 [2829]9:10 [2830]9:10 [2831]9:13
 [2832]9:14 [2833]9:26 [2834]9:26 [2835]9:26 [2836]9:26
 [2837]9:26 [2838]9:27 [2839]10:1 [2840]10:20 [2841]10:20
 [2842]10:20 [2843]10:20 [2844]10:24 [2845]10:29 [2846]11:3
 [2847]11:3 [2848]11:3 [2849]11:6 [2850]11:6 [2851]11:16
 [2852]11:17 [2853]11:32 [2854]11:37-38 [2855]12:1
 [2856]12:18-23 [2857]12:23 [2858]12:29 [2859]13:4 [2860]13:4
 [2861]13:8 [2862]13:8 [2863]13:8 [2864]13:8 [2865]13:8
 [2866]13:8 [2867]13:14

 James

 [2868]1:2 [2869]1:8 [2870]1:12 [2871]1:14 [2872]1:17
 [2873]1:18 [2874]1:20 [2875]1:21 [2876]2:7 [2877]5:13

 1 Peter

 [2878]1:7 [2879]1:12 [2880]1:13 [2881]1:25 [2882]2:21-23
 [2883]2:22 [2884]2:23 [2885]2:24 [2886]2:24 [2887]2:24
 [2888]3:19 [2889]3:22 [2890]4:1 [2891]4:1 [2892]4:1
 [2893]4:1 [2894]4:19 [2895]5:8 [2896]5:8 [2897]5:8

 2 Peter

 [2898]1:4 [2899]1:4 [2900]1:4 [2901]1:4 [2902]1:4 [2903]1:4
 [2904]1:17 [2905]2:22 [2906]2:22 [2907]2:22 [2908]3:16

 1 John

 [2909]1:1 [2910]1:1-2 [2911]2:7 [2912]2:13 [2913]2:20
 [2914]2:23 [2915]2:23 [2916]3:2 [2917]3:5 [2918]3:8
 [2919]3:8 [2920]3:24 [2921]3:24 [2922]4:1 [2923]4:1
 [2924]4:9 [2925]4:13 [2926]4:15 [2927]5:20 [2928]5:20
 [2929]5:20 [2930]5:20 [2931]5:20

 2 John

 [2932]1:10 [2933]1:10

 Revelation

 [2934]1:4 [2935]1:5 [2936]1:8 [2937]1:8 [2938]3:14
 [2939]3:14 [2940]4:8 [2941]8:9 [2942]18:6 [2943]19:13
 [2944]22:9 [2945]22:13-17

 Tobit

 [2946]4:18 [2947]12:7

 Judith

 [2948]9 [2949]13:8 [2950]15

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [2951]1:5 [2952]1:11 [2953]1:11 [2954]2:12 [2955]2:12
 [2956]2:21 [2957]2:23 [2958]3:57 [2959]6:18 [2960]6:24
 [2961]7:25 [2962]7:25 [2963]7:25 [2964]7:25 [2965]7:27
 [2966]7:27 [2967]9:2 [2968]13:5 [2969]13:5 [2970]14:12
 [2971]14:12 [2972]14:12 [2973]14:21

 Baruch

 [2974]3:12 [2975]3:12 [2976]3:12 [2977]3:35 [2978]3:37
 [2979]4:20 [2980]4:22 [2981]6

 1 Esdras

 [2982]4:36 [2983]4:40 [2984]4:41

 2 Esdras

 [2985]7:28-29

 Sirach

 [2986]1:9-10 [2987]1:25 [2988]4:24 [2989]4:28 [2990]7:5
 [2991]7:5 [2992]15:9 [2993]15:9 [2994]18:17 [2995]30:4

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * aidia: [2996]1 [2997]2
 * aidion gennema: [2998]1
 * aidios: [2999]1
 * agape ex agapes: [3000]1
 * agapen patros: [3001]1
 * agen: [3002]1
 * ageneton: [3003]1 [3004]2 [3005]3 [3006]4 [3007]5 [3008]6 [3009]7
 [3010]8 [3011]9 [3012]10 [3013]11
 * agenetos: [3014]1 [3015]2 [3016]3 [3017]4 [3018]5 [3019]6 [3020]7
 [3021]8 [3022]9 [3023]10 [3024]11 [3025]12 [3026]13 [3027]14
 [3028]15 [3029]16 [3030]17
 * agenneton: [3031]1 [3032]2 [3033]3 [3034]4 [3035]5
 * agennetos: [3036]1 [3037]2 [3038]3 [3039]4 [3040]5 [3041]6 [3042]7
 [3043]8 [3044]9
 * agennetos, (ho Theos: [3045]1
 * agen[n]etos: [3046]1
 * agathotetos: [3047]1
 * agathou patros agathon boulema: [3048]1
 * agapen pros auton achoriston kai ouk aphosioumenen: [3049]1
 * angelon men parabanton, anthropon de parakousanton: [3050]1
 * angen: [3051]1
 * ageneton: [3052]1
 * agennetos: [3053]1
 * agennesia: [3054]1 [3055]2
 * agennetogenes: [3056]1
 * agentiseribous: [3057]1
 * agora: [3058]1
 * adeos: [3059]1
 * adelphoi: [3060]1
 * adialeiptos agape: [3061]1
 * adiaireton, anarchon, aeigenes: [3062]1
 * aei ho theos, aei ho hui& 231;s hama pater, hama hui& 231;s:
 [3063]1
 * aei gennatai ho soter hupo tou patros: [3064]1
 * aei men prophaseis: [3065]1
 * aeigennes: [3066]1
 * aeipais: [3067]1
 * atheotetos: [3068]1 [3069]2
 * atheias: [3070]1
 * akathekon, apoxenizein, epakouein: [3071]1
 * akeraion: [3072]1
 * akoas: [3073]1
 * akoas buei: [3074]1
 * akousios: [3075]1
 * aletheia, logos: [3076]1
 * alethos: [3077]1 [3078]2
 * alethos Eusebie: [3079]1
 * alethos, phusikos, kurios: [3080]1
 * alethos eusebie: [3081]1
 * all' ha: [3082]1
 * all' epedemesen ho Kurios hemon 'Iesous Christos lutroumenos tous
 aichmalotous, kai zoopoion tous tethanatomenous: [3083]1
 * alloioumenos: [3084]1
 * alogian: [3085]1
 * alogias: [3086]1
 * ameristos en memerismenois he theotes: [3087]1
 * ana tas exodous: [3088]1
 * anexodoi: [3089]1
 * aner atheos: [3090]1
 * anomoion: [3091]1
 * anomoios: [3092]1 [3093]2
 * anomoios kata panta: [3094]1
 * anomon: [3095]1
 * anabas: [3096]1
 * anakerasthomen: [3097]1
 * anakephalaiosis: [3098]1 [3099]2
 * anaktisai: [3100]1
 * anaktisai ta hola, huper panton, pathein: [3101]1
 * anarithmeton plethos: [3102]1
 * anastas: [3103]1
 * anaphurei heauton hemin: [3104]1
 * anexodon: [3105]1
 * anepimiktoi: [3106]1
 * anepimiktoi: [3107]1 [3108]2
 * anergastou ges: [3109]1
 * anth' hemon ten opheilen apodidous: [3110]1
 * anthropinon: [3111]1
 * anthropous atheous: [3112]1
 * anomoiotes: [3113]1
 * anousiou, anupostatou: [3114]1
 * anti panton: [3115]1
 * antidosis: [3116]1
 * antipsuchon: [3117]1
 * antimachomenoi to soteri: [3118]1
 * anupostatos logos: [3119]1
 * apartisma aphtharsias: [3120]1
 * aperitton: [3121]1
 * apo tes nun hupateias: [3122]1
 * apo& 207;rhoia: [3123]1
 * aparallakton: [3124]1 [3125]2
 * aparallakton eikona: [3126]1
 * aparallaktos: [3127]1 [3128]2
 * aparallaktos eikon kat' ousian: [3129]1
 * aparallaktos eikon: [3130]1
 * aparallaktos homoios: [3131]1
 * aparallaktos eikon, apekribomene emphereia: [3132]1
 * aper& 191;egmenas: [3133]1
 * apexenomenas allelon kai diespasmenas: [3134]1
 * apogrammon: [3135]1
 * apodeixis: [3136]1
 * apodeiktikos ouk apophantikos: [3137]1
 * apokreos: [3138]1
 * apolutos: [3139]1
 * apolelumenos: [3140]1 [3141]2
 * apomaphorizomenai: [3142]1
 * aporiai: [3143]1
 * aposunagogos: [3144]1
 * argos: [3145]1
 * areiomaniton: [3146]1
 * arche: [3147]1 [3148]2 [3149]3
 * arche hodon eis ta erga: [3150]1
 * arche zoes,: [3151]1
 * arche teknon: [3152]1
 * arche tes ktiseos: [3153]1
 * archen: [3154]1 [3155]2
 * archen hodon;: [3156]1
 * arche: [3157]1 [3158]2
 * archomenoi tes hagias tessarakostes--episunaptontes--sunaptontes
 exes--: [3159]1
 * arche: [3160]1
 * archieresian: [3161]1
 * archikai hupostaseis: [3162]1
 * architektonema: [3163]1
 * asebes: [3164]1
 * asebemata: [3165]1
 * aschematistos: [3166]1
 * atele proteron, eita teleion, hosper nomos tes hemeteras geneseos:
 [3167]1
 * auen: [3168]1
 * aphtharsia: [3169]1 [3170]2 [3171]3 [3172]4
 * aphthartoi dia tes anastaseos: [3173]1
 * achorista pragmata duo; ho hui& 232;s ten kata panta homoioteta
 autou ek phuseos apomaxamenos; di' esoptrou akelidotou kai
 empsuchou theias eikonos; mesiteuousa phusis monogenes; tas te
 hupostasei duo phuseis: [3174]1
 * achronos gennetheis kai pro ai& 240;non ktistheis kai
 themeliotheis;: [3175]1
 * hagion: [3176]1
 * hagneuontes: [3177]1
 * hamartian, kai ou ten praxin: [3178]1
 * haplos: [3179]1
 * haplos, ouk haplos horisthe, all' akribos exetasthe: [3180]1
 * ha thelousi prattei, epei kai autos haper ethelen ekouse par'
 auton: [3181]1
 * ha men hos zeton kai gumnazon ergapse, tauta me hos autou
 phronountos dechestho tis, alla ton pros erin philoneikounton en to
 zetein, adeos horizon apophainetai, touto tou philoponou to
 phronema esti. alla: [3182]1
 * angelos, huperetes: [3183]1
 * agonos: [3184]1
 * atheoi: [3185]1
 * akarpos: [3186]1
 * alle ekklesia: [3187]1
 * allos ho Pater allos ho hui& 231;s: [3188]1
 * aloga kata tou Logou tou Patros.: [3189]1
 * alogon: [3190]1
 * alogon kai asophon ton theon: [3191]1
 * alogos: [3192]1
 * alogos, asophos: [3193]1
 * alupos anodunos amerimnos zoe: [3194]1
 * amesos sunapheia: [3195]1
 * anarchon kai aeigenes: [3196]1
 * anthropon: [3197]1
 * anthropon holon: [3198]1
 * anthropos: [3199]1 [3200]2 [3201]3 [3202]4 [3203]5 [3204]6
 * anthropos teleios: [3205]1
 * anomos: [3206]1
 * ano kai kato: [3207]1
 * ano kai kato peripherontes: [3208]1
 * arourai: [3209]1
 * arretos: [3210]1
 * artoi: [3211]1
 * arche: [3212]1
 * arche: [3213]1
 * askes*s: [3214]1
 * atreptos kai me alloioumenos: [3215]1
 * aulos: [3216]1
 * haper egrapsa tois monachois: [3217]1
 * hate ton Kurion enoikon echousa: [3218]1
 * ebdomas ton paschon: [3219]1
 * ego apostello: [3220]1
 * ego gar doso: [3221]1
 * ego eimi ho hon: [3222]1
 * engraphos: [3223]1
 * engraphos exetethe: [3224]1
 * egenethe: [3225]1 [3226]2
 * egennethe: [3227]1
 * enkuklein: [3228]1
 * etheopoiese: [3229]1
 * ek: [3230]1 [3231]2
 * ek bouleseos tinos: [3232]1
 * ek boules: [3233]1
 * ek thelematos: [3234]1
 * ek theou: [3235]1
 * ek metaphoras: [3236]1
 * ek prokopes: [3237]1 [3238]2
 * ek tes homoiotetos: [3239]1
 * ek tes ousias: [3240]1 [3241]2 [3242]3 [3243]4
 * ek tes ousias tou patros einai, kai me ex heteras hupostaseos ton
 huion: [3244]1
 * ek tes ousias tou patros, homoousian to Patri: [3245]1
 * ek tes [hupostaseos e] ousias tou Patros: [3246]1
 * ek ton idion: [3247]1
 * ek tou thelematos: [3248]1
 * ek tou thelematos tou Patros: [3249]1
 * ek tou peritrochazein pasan aguian asemnos: [3250]1
 * ekeleusan: [3251]1
 * ekeinon: [3252]1
 * ekklesiastikos: [3253]1
 * ekporeuton: [3254]1
 * ektos kat' ousian: [3255]1
 * ekteinai ten manian: [3256]1 [3257]2
 * ekuophorethe hupo Marias kat' oikonomian: [3258]1
 * elattoma: [3259]1
 * elatton para ton patera ho hui& 232;s: [3260]1
 * eleutheron to phronema: [3261]1
 * emphilochorein: [3262]1
 * emphilochorein to theo kai endiaitasthai: [3263]1
 * en: [3264]1 [3265]2
 * en emoi: [3266]1
 * en heauto theopoiese: [3267]1
 * en iso: [3268]1
 * en homoiomati anthropou: [3269]1
 * en hupostasei triada: [3270]1
 * en gumnasi& 139; exetasas: [3271]1
 * en mono to heautou Patri holos on kata panta: [3272]1
 * en memerismenois topois: [3273]1
 * en sarki: [3274]1
 * en te idi& 139; eikoni, hetis estin ho logos autou: [3275]1
 * en to ginesthai: [3276]1
 * en to logo en to pneuma: [3277]1
 * en to toichi& 251;: [3278]1
 * en to hui& 254;: [3279]1
 * en tritai& 251; diastemati: [3280]1
 * en hui& 254;: [3281]1
 * enaretoi: [3282]1
 * energeia: [3283]1
 * energeia drastike: [3284]1
 * energeia drastike: [3285]1
 * energeiai: [3286]1
 * enanthropesanta: [3287]1
 * endiathetos: [3288]1 [3289]2 [3290]3
 * enepompeusate: [3291]1
 * energos: [3292]1
 * energeia: [3293]1
 * energei& 139;: [3294]1
 * energei& 139; gennetike: [3295]1
 * ennoion mallon de paranoion: [3296]1
 * enousios: [3297]1
 * entelletai: [3298]1
 * entos humon: [3299]1
 * entelletai: [3300]1
 * entrepei: [3301]1
 * ex heteras hupostaseos: [3302]1 [3303]2 [3304]3 [3305]4 [3306]5
 * ex heteras hupostaseos e ousias: [3307]1 [3308]2 [3309]3 [3310]4
 * ex heteras hupostaseos kai me ek tou theou: [3311]1
 * ex heteras ousias: [3312]1 [3313]2
 * ex heteras tinos hupostaseos te kai ousias: [3314]1
 * ex holoklerou genous: [3315]1
 * ex homilias gunaikos ou semnes oude kata nomon sunelthouses:
 [3316]1
 * ex hupostaseos: [3317]1 [3318]2 [3319]3 [3320]4 [3321]5 [3322]6
 [3323]7 [3324]8 [3325]9
 * ex hupostaseos e ousias: [3326]1
 * ex autes tes patrikes: [3327]1
 * ex ouk onton: [3328]1 [3329]2 [3330]3 [3331]4 [3332]5 [3333]6
 [3334]7 [3335]8
 * ex ouk onton echei ten hupostasin: [3336]1
 * ex ousias: [3337]1 [3338]2 [3339]3 [3340]4 [3341]5 [3342]6 [3343]7
 [3344]8 [3345]9 [3346]10 [3347]11 [3348]12 [3349]13 [3350]14
 [3351]15 [3352]16
 * ex ousias tou patros: [3353]1
 * ex hou echei to einai: [3354]1
 * exaireton: [3355]1
 * exairetou: [3356]1
 * exomologoumenos en metanoia dia tou hi& 153;reos lambanei ten
 aphesin chariti Christou: [3357]1
 * exousi& 139; homou kai ousi& 139; patros monogenous huiou: [3358]1
 * epangelma: [3359]1
 * epekeina pases ousias: [3360]1
 * epelampse: [3361]1
 * epeplette: [3362]1
 * epekouse gar haplos: [3363]1
 * epi ten aitian anapherestho: [3364]1
 * epi ton hamaxon eisi pompeiai tines: [3365]1
 * epibasis: [3366]1 [3367]2
 * ep?keina ousias: [3368]1
 * epakouein: [3369]1
 * epakouousin: [3370]1
 * epei malistai, hoti malista: [3371]1
 * epetimese: [3372]1
 * epibebeken: [3373]1
 * epibainein: [3374]1 [3375]2
 * epibainon: [3376]1
 * epibaterios: [3377]1
 * epibebekenai: [3378]1
 * epigegone: [3379]1
 * epigegonos: [3380]1
 * epidemia: [3381]1 [3382]2
 * epinoesantes: [3383]1
 * epinoesasai: [3384]1
 * epinoiais: [3385]1
 * epiplettei: [3386]1
 * epispeirantos tou diabolou: [3387]1
 * epispeirousi, epinoousi, gonguzousi, kath' humas, atopon,
 lexeidion, heis ton panton: [3388]1
 * episumbebekota auto: [3389]1
 * epiteichisma: [3390]1
 * epitima ouk atimazon alla diorthoumenos: [3391]1
 * epitima: [3392]1
 * epicheirema: [3393]1 [3394]2
 * epicheiremata: [3395]1
 * ergazomenou tou patros, ergazesthai kai ton hui& 231;n: [3396]1
 * ergasias: [3397]1
 * erotontes emanthanon: [3398]1
 * eskenosen en hemin: [3399]1
 * etarachthesan: [3400]1
 * heauton aei kategoroi: [3401]1
 * heautou kurios: [3402]1
 * hexupereton thelemati: [3403]1
 * heterogenes kai heteroousios ton geneton, kai tes tou patros ousias
 idios kai homophues: [3404]1
 * hen thelema patros kai huiou kai boulema, epei kai he phusis mia:
 [3405]1
 * hen men to agenneton, ho pantokrator theos, hen de kai to
 progennethen di' ou ta panta egeneto, kai choris autou egeneto oude
 hen: [3406]1
 * hen to ageneton e duo: [3407]1
 * hen to agenneton hen de to hup' autou alethos, kai ouk ek tes
 ousias autou gegonos: [3408]1
 * hen te idioteti kai oikeioteti tes phuseos, kai te tautoteti tes
 mias theotetos: [3409]1
 * egrapsa di oligon: [3410]1
 * ethos esti te thei& 139; graphe: [3411]1
 * ekthesis": [3412]1
 * ektise: [3413]1
 * emele gar autois: [3414]1
 * emetoi kai nautiai` nautiai: [3415]1
 * endoxon: [3416]1
 * ennoia: [3417]1
 * ensarkos parousia: [3418]1
 * exo: [3419]1
 * exothen: [3420]1
 * erga: [3421]1
 * ergon: [3422]1
 * ergon prototokon tou patros ginetai. touton ismen tou kosmou ten
 archen: [3423]1
 * eti de hetton to pneuma to hagion: [3424]1
 * echei: [3425]1
 * henos ontos eidous theotetos: [3426]1
 * henosis: [3427]1
 * henosis tes monadikes ousias: [3428]1
 * hexin: [3429]1
 * hetera anth' heteron: [3430]1
 * heteron echousa to kat' ousian hupokeimenon,: [3431]1
 * heteron pros heteron semainete: [3432]1
 * heteros kat' ousian kai hupokeimenon: [3433]1
 * heteros kat' ousian kai hupokeimenon ho hui& 232;s tou patros:
 [3434]1
 * heteros kat' ousian tou patros: [3435]1
 * heteros para ton patera: [3436]1
 * egapesen, horon, k. t. l: [3437]1
 * ethelesen: [3438]1
 * ekousthe: [3439]1
 * ephanizeto: [3440]1
 * he: [3441]1
 * he agennesia: [3442]1
 * he anthropotes: [3443]1
 * he ano Ierousalem: [3444]1
 * he idea hoper logon eirekasi: [3445]1
 * he hupokeimene ousia hos hule, hule: [3446]1
 * he de arche agennetos: [3447]1
 * he de ge anaimaktos thusia exilasmos: [3448]1
 * he ktistike: [3449]1
 * he ousia haute tes ousias tes patrikes esti gennema: [3450]1
 * he patrike hupostasis: [3451]1
 * he patrike theotes: [3452]1
 * he patrike huiou theotes: [3453]1
 * he tou kat' eikona charis: [3454]1
 * he tou kreittonos gnosis: [3455]1
 * he philarchos kai philarguros prothesis; christemporian;
 phrenoblabous; idiotropon; homostoichois sullabais; theegorous
 apostolous; & 135;ntidiastolen tes patrikes maieuseos;
 melancholiken; philotheos sapheneia anosiourgias; phlenaphon
 muthon: [3456]1
 * he phusike gonimotes: [3457]1
 * hegoumenos: [3458]1
 * hemeis huioi, ouk hos ekeinos phusei kai aletheia: [3459]1
 * e hupostaseos: [3460]1
 * ede palai: [3461]1
 * heko: [3462]1 [3463]2
 * en hote ouk en: [3464]1 [3465]2 [3466]3 [3467]4
 * en pote hote ouk en: [3468]1
 * en prin gennethe: [3469]1
 * idea: [3470]1
 * idean ideon kai archen lekteon ton prototokon pases ktiseos:
 [3471]1
 * idian: [3472]1
 * idious: [3473]1
 * idiou; theotes: [3474]1
 * idios: [3475]1
 * idiopoieitai: [3476]1
 * idiopoioumenou: [3477]1
 * idiomaton: [3478]1
 * hiera anagraphe: [3479]1
 * hierateion: [3480]1
 * hieratikoi: [3481]1
 * hieratikoi: [3482]1
 * ideai: [3483]1 [3484]2
 * idion: [3485]1 [3486]2 [3487]3
 * idion tou Logou: [3488]1
 * idios tou Patros: [3489]1
 * idios hui& 232;s: [3490]1
 * idios;: [3491]1
 * idontes kai tous par' auton pathontas, tous kategorous, tous
 elenchous pro ophthalmon echontes: [3492]1
 * hina genetui theia: [3493]1
 * oligoi tines: [3494]1
 * omoousion: [3495]1 [3496]2 [3497]3
 * onomata monon: [3498]1
 * opisthia: [3499]1
 * organou: [3500]1
 * organon apsuchon: [3501]1
 * orthen echon ten dianoian: [3502]1
 * ho alethos Osios. kataskopoi, ou gar episkopoi: [3503]1
 * ho atheos: [3504]1
 * ho anthropos: [3505]1
 * ho anthr. tou soteros: [3506]1
 * ho ontos theos: [3507]1
 * ho on theos ton me onta ek tou me ontos: [3508]1
 * ho on theos ton me onta ek tou me ontos pepoieken: [3509]1
 * ho on ton onta: [3510]1
 * ho on ton me onta: [3511]1
 * ho on ton me onta ek tou ontos: [3512]1
 * ho on ton me onta ek tou ontos e ton onta: [3513]1
 * ho on: [3514]1
 * ho Theos: [3515]1
 * ho Kuriakos anthropus: [3516]1
 * ho de 'Ar. metagrapsas dedoke tois idiois: [3517]1
 * ho deuteros theos: [3518]1
 * ho theos peponthen: [3519]1
 * ho theos: [3520]1
 * ho kreitton, ton kreittona: [3521]1
 * ho ktisas: [3522]1
 * ho kuriakos anthropos: [3523]1
 * ho logos heauton genna: [3524]1
 * ho monos legomenos kurios hui& 232;s: [3525]1
 * ho nous hamartetikos esti: [3526]1
 * ho panu boomenos: [3527]1
 * ho soter aei gennatai: [3528]1
 * ho tes aletheias logos elenchei: [3529]1
 * homonumos: [3530]1
 * homoias ousias: [3531]1
 * homou: [3532]1
 * homogenes: [3533]1
 * homoioteta pos: [3534]1
 * homoiousion: [3535]1 [3536]2 [3537]3 [3538]4
 * homoiousion, aparallaktos eikon: [3539]1
 * homoiousios: [3540]1 [3541]2 [3542]3
 * homoiopathous hemin: [3543]1
 * homoousioi: [3544]1
 * homoousion: [3545]1 [3546]2 [3547]3 [3548]4 [3549]5 [3550]6 [3551]7
 [3552]8 [3553]9 [3554]10 [3555]11 [3556]12 [3557]13 [3558]14
 [3559]15 [3560]16 [3561]17 [3562]18 [3563]19 [3564]20 [3565]21
 [3566]22 [3567]23 [3568]24 [3569]25 [3570]26 [3571]27 [3572]28
 [3573]29 [3574]30 [3575]31 [3576]32 [3577]33 [3578]34 [3579]35
 [3580]36 [3581]37 [3582]38 [3583]39 [3584]40 [3585]41 [3586]42
 [3587]43 [3588]44 [3589]45 [3590]46 [3591]47 [3592]48 [3593]49
 [3594]50 [3595]51 [3596]52 [3597]53 [3598]54
 * homoousion e tautoousion: [3599]1
 * homoousion 'Aparallakton: [3600]1
 * homoousion to patri: [3601]1
 * homoousion, homoiousion: [3602]1
 * homoousios: [3603]1 [3604]2 [3605]3 [3606]4 [3607]5 [3608]6 [3609]7
 * homo-: [3610]1
 * horisthe: [3611]1
 * onta: [3612]1
 * onta gegenneke e ouk onta: [3613]1
 * onta proteron, gennethenta eis hui& 231;n: [3614]1
 * ontos: [3615]1
 * ontos en humin ho theos: [3616]1
 * organon: [3617]1 [3618]2 [3619]3 [3620]4 [3621]5 [3622]6 [3623]7
 * organon empsuchon: [3624]1
 * organon pros ten energeian kai ten eklampsin tes theotetos: [3625]1
 [3626]2
 * holos holou eikon: [3627]1
 * holos Theos: [3628]1
 * holos theos: [3629]1
 * holos theos: [3630]1 [3631]2
 * holou tou chriontos: [3632]1
 * homoion: [3633]1 [3634]2 [3635]3 [3636]4 [3637]5 [3638]6 [3639]7
 * homoion kata panta: [3640]1 [3641]2 [3642]3
 * homoion kata tas graphas: [3643]1
 * homoion kat' ousian: [3644]1 [3645]2 [3646]3
 * homoios: [3647]1 [3648]2 [3649]3
 * homoios kata panta: [3650]1 [3651]2
 * homoios kata panta: [3652]1
 * homoios kata ten ousian tou patros: [3653]1
 * homoios kat' ousian: [3654]1 [3655]2 [3656]3
 * homoios tes ousias: [3657]1 [3658]2
 * homoiou kata panta: [3659]1
 * hoper ego boulomai touto kanon: [3660]1
 * hoper en prin genetai sarx: [3661]1
 * hoson oudepo: [3662]1 [3663]2
 * hotan malista: [3664]1
 * hoti en pote: [3665]1
 * hoti ho logos kai hoti to pneuma kai estaurothe kai esphage kai
 apethanen kai aneste: [3666]1
 * upostaseis: [3667]1
 * hugious: [3668]1
 * hugiainouses didaskalias: [3669]1
 * hugiainousan: [3670]1
 * hugianouses: [3671]1
 * hugious did: [3672]1
 * humin: [3673]1
 * humon: [3674]1
 * huper autou: [3675]1
 * hupothesis: [3676]1 [3677]2
 * hupostasin, hen autoi hoi hairetikoi ousian prosagoreuousi: [3678]1
 * hupostasis: [3679]1 [3680]2 [3681]3 [3682]4 [3683]5 [3684]6 [3685]7
 [3686]8 [3687]9 [3688]10 [3689]11 [3690]12 [3691]13 [3692]14
 [3693]15 [3694]16 [3695]17 [3696]18 [3697]19 [3698]20 [3699]21
 [3700]22 [3701]23 [3702]24 [3703]25 [3704]26 [3705]27 [3706]28
 [3707]29 [3708]30 [3709]31 [3710]32 [3711]33 [3712]34 [3713]35
 [3714]36 [3715]37
 * hupostasis tou logou: [3716]1
 * hupo, monon: [3717]1
 * hup' opsei panton: [3718]1
 * hupakouein: [3719]1
 * hupakouon: [3720]1
 * hupekrinanto: [3721]1
 * huper: [3722]1
 * huperaulon: [3723]1
 * hupera& 203;lon: [3724]1
 * huperekeina pases ousias: [3725]1
 * huperaulos: [3726]1
 * huperoche: [3727]1
 * huperphues: [3728]1
 * huperetes: [3729]1
 * hupereton: [3730]1
 * hupereton te boule: [3731]1
 * huperetounta: [3732]1
 * hupourgos: [3733]1
 * hupodekten: [3734]1
 * hupokrites: [3735]1
 * hupopiazo: [3736]1
 * hupostasei: [3737]1 [3738]2
 * hupostaseis: [3739]1 [3740]2
 * hupostaseos: [3741]1 [3742]2
 * hupostemati: [3743]1
 * hupotage: [3744]1
 * hupourgon teleiotaton: [3745]1
 * hule: [3746]1
 * huparxis: [3747]1
 * onomasthe: [3748]1
 * homoiothe kata panta: [3749]1
 * hos anthropous atheous: [3750]1
 * hos an tous apeirous tais platonikais kalliphoniai peribombeseien:
 [3751]1
 * hos ethelesen, haper ethelesan, hotan thelosin, ous ethelesan:
 [3752]1
 * hos epi somatos henos: [3753]1
 * hos ethelesan: [3754]1 [3755]2
 * hos ethelesen: [3756]1 [3757]2 [3758]3
 * hos he sophia tou sophou hui& 232;s, ousia ousias: [3759]1
 * hos autoi thelousi: [3760]1
 * hos autoi thelousi': [3761]1
 * hos de ezeteito tes pisteos ho tropos: [3762]1
 * hos despotes epitima: [3763]1
 * hos dia cheiros: [3764]1
 * hos hoi& 231;n te en: [3765]1
 * hos tous gigantas: [3766]1
 * hora: [3767]1 [3768]2
 * hosper ex haluseo: [3769]1
 * hosper kanoni chresamenoi prosechomen te anagnosei tes theopneustou
 graphes: [3770]1
 * on mia energeia, touton kai ousia mia: [3771]1
 * hon an etheloi: [3772]1
 * he logos esti: [3773]1
 * 'Autoi: [3774]1
 * 'Ar& 191;abon: [3775]1
 * 'Alexandreus to genei, aner logios, dunatos on en tais graphais:
 [3776]1
 * 'Anomoion: [3777]1
 * 'Anomoios kat' ousian: [3778]1
 * 'Ares areie: [3779]1
 * 'Areiomanitai: [3780]1 [3781]2
 * 'Archai: [3782]1
 * 'En te palaia: [3783]1
 * 'Epikteton tina: [3784]1
 * 'Onesimon, ton pote soi achreston, nuni de euchreston: [3785]1
 * Alogos: [3786]1
 * Anthropos: [3787]1 [3788]2 [3789]3
 * Atreptos: [3790]1
 * Echon oun ho theos ton heautou logon endiatheton en tois idiois
 splanchnois, egennesen auton meta tes heautou sophias exereuxamenos
 pro ton holon...hopote de ethelesen ho theos poiesai hosa
 ebouleusato, touton ton logon egennese prophorikon, prototokon
 pases ktiseos: [3791]1
 * rhupon: [3792]1
 * rhusin: [3793]1
 * rhema: [3794]1 [3795]2
 * rhantizomenon: [3796]1
 * rheuste: [3797]1
 * rhematia.: [3798]1
 * rhupose: [3799]1
 * Ermeian louonta tous anexodous: [3800]1
 * Ermeneia: [3801]1
 * Ieros: [3802]1
 * O Pater en to Uio ton panton ten pronoian poieitai: [3803]1
 * O logos en pros ton Theon, kai Theos en ho Logos: [3804]1
 * Omoiousios: [3805]1
 * Omoousion: [3806]1
 * Up: [3807]1
 * to kat' eikona': [3808]1
 * Augoustou tou aioniou: [3809]1
 * Archiepiskopos: [3810]1
 * Ballesthosan para panton: [3811]1
 * Diatomitai: [3812]1
 * Didache ton ib' apostolon: [3813]1
 * Eite oun philosopheteon eite me philosopheteon, philosopheteon:
 [3814]1
 * Eipon, kai: [3815]1
 * Zephurinon andra idioten kai apeiron ton ekklesiastikon horon:
 [3816]1
 * Thee: [3817]1
 * Theos: [3818]1
 * Kurion: [3819]1
 * Kurion 'Iesoun: [3820]1
 * Logoi: [3821]1
 * Logos: [3822]1 [3823]2 [3824]3 [3825]4
 * Logos apo siges proelthon: [3826]1
 * Mian phusin tou Logou sesarkomenen: [3827]1
 * Monos: [3828]1
 * Meta de tauta, ou pollais hemerais husteron: [3829]1
 * Monas: [3830]1 [3831]2 [3832]3
 * Mone: [3833]1
 * Omoousion: [3834]1
 * Omoousios to Patri, ek tes ousias tou Patros: [3835]1
 * Or: [3836]1
 * Parthenon: [3837]1
 * Peri agalmaton: [3838]1
 * Stuloi: [3839]1
 * Sunkatabenai: [3840]1
 * Scholastikos: [3841]1
 * Tanis: [3842]1
 * Teleios: [3843]1
 * Ton de ginomenon archegon kai sumboulon kai ergaten egenna logon,
 hon logon echon en heauto a& 231;raton te onta to ktizomeno, kosmo,
 horaton poiei; proteran phonen phthengomenos, kai phos ek photos
 gennon, proeken te ktisei kurion: [3844]1
 * Trias: [3845]1
 * Trias de estin ouch heos onomatos monon...alla alethei& 139; kai
 huparxei trias...eipatosan palin...trias estin e duas: [3846]1
 * Trias: [3847]1
 * Triberon: [3848]1
 * Tropikoi: [3849]1
 * Charakter: [3850]1
 * Christos: [3851]1
 * Christophoros: [3852]1
 * a: [3853]1 [3854]2 [3855]3
 * aitia tes theotetos: [3856]1
 * aionotoke: [3857]1
 * ai& 240;nios: [3858]1 [3859]2
 * hai men gar kata nomon: [3860]1
 * ainigma: [3861]1
 * aion: [3862]1
 * auton anti sporas sullabousa ton logon, kekueke: [3863]1
 * autos: [3864]1
 * autos tou patros thelema: [3865]1
 * autotheos: [3866]1
 * autotheos, autoagathos, alethinos theos: [3867]1
 * auton: [3868]1
 * autos te kai: [3869]1
 * auton: [3870]1
 * autou: [3871]1
 * autozoen kai autoagathon: [3872]1
 * autozoe: [3873]1
 * autokatakritos: [3874]1
 * autoprosopos: [3875]1
 * autosophia: [3876]1
 * akarie: [3877]1
 * b: [3878]1 [3879]2 [3880]3 [3881]4
 * balletai: [3882]1
 * belon: [3883]1
 * beltiosei praxeos: [3884]1
 * beltiousthai: [3885]1
 * beteranos: [3886]1
 * blepontes: [3887]1
 * blepon humon ten taxin: [3888]1
 * blaptomenos: [3889]1
 * boulesin: [3890]1
 * boulesis: [3891]1
 * bouletai: [3892]1
 * boule: [3893]1
 * boule: [3894]1
 * boulen: [3895]1
 * bouletheis: [3896]1
 * g: [3897]1 [3898]2 [3899]3 [3900]4
 * genesthai: [3901]1
 * genesis: [3902]1
 * geneta: [3903]1
 * genetos: [3904]1 [3905]2
 * gennema: [3906]1
 * gennema, all' ouk hos hen ton gennematon: [3907]1
 * gennesis: [3908]1 [3909]2 [3910]3 [3911]4 [3912]5 [3913]6 [3914]7
 [3915]8 [3916]9 [3917]10 [3918]11 [3919]12 [3920]13 [3921]14
 [3922]15 [3923]16 [3924]17 [3925]18 [3926]19 [3927]20 [3928]21
 [3929]22 [3930]23 [3931]24 [3932]25
 * gennetos: [3933]1 [3934]2
 * genos: [3935]1
 * gigantas theomachountas: [3936]1
 * gigas: [3937]1
 * ginesthai: [3938]1
 * ginetai: [3939]1
 * gegennesthai: [3940]1
 * gegonenai: [3941]1 [3942]2
 * genesthai: [3943]1
 * genomenon: [3944]1
 * genomenos: [3945]1
 * geneta: [3946]1
 * geneta: [3947]1 [3948]2
 * geneton: [3949]1
 * genetos: [3950]1
 * geneton: [3951]1
 * genetos: [3952]1 [3953]2 [3954]3
 * genetes: [3955]1
 * genetes ousias: [3956]1
 * geneton: [3957]1
 * gennethenta: [3958]1
 * gennasthai: [3959]1
 * gennethenta: [3960]1 [3961]2
 * gennethenta e poiethenta: [3962]1 [3963]2
 * gennesis: [3964]1
 * genneta: [3965]1 [3966]2
 * gennete: [3967]1
 * genneton: [3968]1
 * gennetos: [3969]1
 * gennetos: [3970]1
 * gennetikos: [3971]1
 * gnesios: [3972]1
 * gnosis: [3973]1 [3974]2 [3975]3 [3976]4
 * goraion: [3977]1
 * gpostasis: [3978]1
 * gramma: [3979]1
 * g. ou poiethenta: [3980]1
 * de hos: [3981]1
 * despota: [3982]1
 * ditheoi este: [3983]1
 * dunamin de mian: [3984]1
 * dunamis: [3985]1 [3986]2 [3987]3
 * dunamis kuriou: [3988]1
 * dunamis logos: [3989]1
 * duo achorista pragmata: [3990]1
 * duo te hupostasei pragmata hen de te homonoi& 139; kai te tautoteti
 tou boulematos: [3991]1
 * delon an eie: [3992]1 [3993]2
 * doron tou theou to pneuma: [3994]1
 * daimones: [3995]1
 * dexion: [3996]1
 * despoten: [3997]1
 * despotes: [3998]1
 * deutera ousia: [3999]1
 * deuteraiou: [4000]1
 * deutereuon theos: [4001]1
 * dechestho tis: [4002]1
 * demiourgema: [4003]1
 * demiourgos: [4004]1
 * dia: [4005]1 [4006]2
 * dia pathous: [4007]1
 * dia ta polla ginetai polla: [4008]1
 * dia toutou: [4009]1 [4010]2
 * diabolos: [4011]1
 * diathesis: [4012]1
 * dianoian: [4013]1
 * dianoian, epinoian: [4014]1
 * diorthosis: [4015]1
 * di' entuchias gunaikarion atakton ha epatesan: [4016]1
 * di' heterou tinos: [4017]1
 * diairousin: [4018]1
 * diar& 191;agosin: [4019]1
 * diar& 191;eguosin heautous: [4020]1
 * diar& 191;egnuontai: [4021]1 [4022]2
 * diar& 191;egnuosin heautous;: [4023]1
 * diaballon: [4024]1
 * diabeblemai: [4025]1
 * diaboliken: [4026]1
 * diabolikoi: [4027]1
 * diathesei: [4028]1
 * dialelumenos: [4029]1
 * diameine: [4030]1
 * diameinomen: [4031]1
 * diameinosin: [4032]1
 * dianoias: [4033]1
 * dianoi& 139;: [4034]1
 * diataxeis: [4035]1 [4036]2 [4037]3
 * diatage: [4038]1
 * digamois: [4039]1
 * digamia: [4040]1
 * digunaiois: [4041]1
 * didaskontos peri tou patros: [4042]1
 * didachai: [4043]1
 * dieblethen: [4044]1
 * dielein: [4045]1
 * diephtharmene: [4046]1
 * dte ouk en; & 234;ti prin gennethenai ouk en; & 234;ti ex ouk onton
 egeneto: [4047]1
 * dunamei kai boule autou: [4048]1
 * dunamei te kai energei& 139; pater: [4049]1
 * dunameon: [4050]1
 * dunamei: [4051]1
 * dunasteia: [4052]1
 * dorodokoi: [4053]1
 * ei agonos kai anenergetos: [4054]1
 * ei de theos ho hui& 232;s, ouk epei hui& 231;s; homoios kai ho
 pater, ouk epei pater, theos; all' epei ousia toiade, heis esti
 pater kai ho hui& 232;s theos: [4055]1
 * eidolon atheoteta: [4056]1
 * eikon: [4057]1 [4058]2
 * eikon esti chronos to agennato chrono, hon aiona potagoreuomes:
 [4059]1
 * eis archen anapheretai: [4060]1
 * eis apeiron: [4061]1 [4062]2
 * eis ta erga: [4063]1
 * eis to einai: [4064]1
 * ei tines kai alloi: [4065]1
 * ei tis choris gnomes: [4066]1
 * eidous: [4067]1
 * eikon, sphragis, boule, energeia: [4068]1
 * eis ti chorion ekrupteto: [4069]1
 * eite archen eite archas: [4070]1
 * eidos: [4071]1 [4072]2 [4073]3 [4074]4 [4075]5 [4076]6 [4077]7
 [4078]8 [4079]9 [4080]10 [4081]11 [4082]12 [4083]13 [4084]14
 * eidos;: [4085]1
 * einai: [4086]1
 * heis ton askeon: [4087]1
 * euangelikos horos: [4088]1
 * eugenous: [4089]1
 * eusebeia: [4090]1
 * eusebeia, asebeia: [4091]1 [4092]2
 * eusebeia, asebountes: [4093]1
 * eusebeias: [4094]1
 * heuriskei: [4095]1
 * eotera: [4096]1
 * zon organon: [4097]1
 * zon kai huphestos kai tou patros huparchon ektos.: [4098]1
 * zon logos: [4099]1
 * zoon epistemes dektikon: [4100]1
 * zosa energeia: [4101]1
 * zosa ischus: [4102]1
 * zosa boule: [4103]1 [4104]2
 * zosa dunamis: [4105]1
 * zosa eikon: [4106]1
 * zosa sophia: [4107]1
 * zetein: [4108]1
 * zoe: [4109]1 [4110]2
 * zoen idian echon: [4111]1
 * thanatos: [4112]1
 * thea neotera: [4113]1
 * thelema: [4114]1 [4115]2
 * thelesis: [4116]1
 * thuos: [4117]1
 * thar& 191;ountes: [4118]1
 * theanthropos: [4119]1
 * theia: [4120]1
 * theon kata phusin teleion kai alethe: [4121]1
 * theon ton: [4122]1
 * theos en sarki: [4123]1
 * theos diphues: [4124]1
 * theon: [4125]1
 * theopneusta: [4126]1
 * theos: [4127]1 [4128]2
 * theotes: [4129]1
 * theotetos: [4130]1
 * theandrike energeia: [4131]1
 * thelemati kai boule hupeste: [4132]1
 * thelemati propeda ho logos: [4133]1
 * thelesei: [4134]1 [4135]2
 * thelesei gennethen: [4136]1
 * theleges esti: [4137]1
 * thelema ousiodes: [4138]1
 * theoi: [4139]1
 * theoi kata charin: [4140]1
 * theoi: [4141]1 [4142]2
 * theoumetha: [4143]1
 * theou en soma: [4144]1
 * theou doron: [4145]1
 * theousthai: [4146]1
 * theogonia: [4147]1
 * theologon: [4148]1
 * theologein: [4149]1
 * theologoumenos: [4150]1
 * theomachoi: [4151]1 [4152]2 [4153]3 [4154]4
 * theomachos: [4155]1
 * theomachos glossa: [4156]1
 * theomachein: [4157]1
 * theomachein, theomachoi: [4158]1
 * theopoieisthai: [4159]1
 * theopoiethomen: [4160]1
 * theostugeis: [4161]1 [4162]2 [4163]3
 * theotokon: [4164]1
 * theotokos: [4165]1 [4166]2 [4167]3 [4168]4 [4169]5 [4170]6
 * theotokou: [4171]1 [4172]2 [4173]3
 * theophoroumetha: [4174]1
 * theophoroumenous: [4175]1
 * therapeuein: [4176]1
 * theothen holon: [4177]1
 * theoria ton theion: [4178]1
 * thnetoi: [4179]1
 * thrulletai phonai, lexeis, epe, rheta: [4180]1
 * thrullountes: [4181]1
 * thusia: [4182]1
 * th. en somati: [4183]1
 * katharsis proeortios: [4184]1
 * kalumma: [4185]1
 * kerdos tes philochrematias: [4186]1
 * koptousin heautous: [4187]1
 * kurios: [4188]1 [4189]2
 * kai eboulomen men siope....epeide de....ananken eschon: [4190]1
 * kai diar& 191;agoien: [4191]1
 * kai malista: [4192]1
 * kai me ek tou theou: [4193]1
 * kai ta: [4194]1
 * kai to soma: [4195]1
 * kairos: [4196]1
 * kath' heauton ousiomenos: [4197]1
 * katholikos: [4198]1
 * kainoi: [4199]1
 * kakonoian: [4200]1
 * kalos anaginoskein: [4201]1
 * kanon: [4202]1
 * kanon: [4203]1
 * kanali& 251; etoi parodo: [4204]1
 * karpogonon: [4205]1
 * karpogonos: [4206]1
 * karpogonos he ousia: [4207]1
 * kata boulesin: [4208]1
 * kata gnomen kai proairesin: [4209]1
 * kata gnomen kai proairesin bouletheis ho theos; ek tes tou patros
 boules kai dunameos: [4210]1
 * kata katalepsin: [4211]1
 * kata mimesin: [4212]1
 * kata panta: [4213]1
 * kata panta homoion: [4214]1
 * kata panta kai en pasi: [4215]1
 * kata ten autou mimesin: [4216]1
 * kata ten dunamin: [4217]1
 * kata ten proteran genesin en to 'Adam: [4218]1
 * kata ten tou theou eikona: [4219]1
 * kata to boulema: [4220]1 [4221]2 [4222]3
 * kata tes eid;: [4223]1
 * kata tous mutheuomenous gigantas: [4224]1
 * kata tou puros: [4225]1
 * kata tou puros kata: [4226]1
 * kata phusin: [4227]1
 * kata charin: [4228]1
 * kata ti theoroumenon: [4229]1
 * katalepsis: [4230]1 [4231]2
 * katalusis: [4232]1
 * kat' epinoian: [4233]1 [4234]2 [4235]3 [4236]4
 * kat' autou tes ampelou ten phulaken para tou soteros epitetrammenou
 ten manian exeteine, legomen de tes ses hosiotetos: [4237]1
 * kat' eikona charis: [4238]1
 * kat' eudokian: [4239]1
 * kat' oikonomian: [4240]1 [4241]2 [4242]3
 * kat' ousian: [4243]1 [4244]2
 * kat' ousian aparallaktos eikon: [4245]1
 * kat' ousian esti theos: [4246]1
 * kat' ousian homoios: [4247]1
 * kat' ousian hui& 232;n tou Theou kai patros,: [4248]1
 * katabole kosmou: [4249]1
 * katapetasma: [4250]1
 * kataskopou, ouk episkopos: [4251]1
 * katachrontai: [4252]1
 * katachrestikos: [4253]1 [4254]2 [4255]3
 * keleuontos: [4256]1
 * keleuon: [4257]1
 * kenothenai tou einai aei: [4258]1
 * kephalaion: [4259]1
 * kephalaion tes pisteos: [4260]1
 * kechreostemenen: [4261]1
 * kedemonias: [4262]1
 * kinesei: [4263]1
 * koinon: [4264]1
 * koinonia photi: [4265]1
 * kratesei tes homologias tes pisteos: [4266]1
 * kratesai tou theiou: [4267]1
 * krataia cheir tou patros: [4268]1
 * kratouse: [4269]1
 * kratouse pistei: [4270]1
 * ktizein, poiein, demiourgein: [4271]1
 * ktisis: [4272]1
 * ktisma: [4273]1
 * ktisma ho hui& 231;s: [4274]1
 * ktismata: [4275]1
 * ktiston kai themelioton kai genneton: [4276]1
 * kuliomenoi: [4277]1
 * kurios: [4278]1 [4279]2 [4280]3 [4281]4 [4282]5 [4283]6 [4284]7
 [4285]8 [4286]9 [4287]10 [4288]11
 * kurios kai protos: [4289]1
 * kurios logos: [4290]1
 * kurios hui& 231;s: [4291]1
 * kurionumos: [4292]1
 * kuriotaton: [4293]1
 * kuriake: [4294]1 [4295]2
 * kuriakon deipnon: [4296]1
 * kuriakos anthropos: [4297]1 [4298]2
 * kuriologein: [4299]1 [4300]2
 * legei: [4301]1
 * logoi: [4302]1 [4303]2 [4304]3 [4305]4
 * logos: [4306]1 [4307]2 [4308]3 [4309]4 [4310]5 [4311]6 [4312]7
 [4313]8 [4314]9 [4315]10
 * logos apo siges proelthon: [4316]1
 * logos archiereus: [4317]1
 * logos en s.: [4318]1
 * logos en to theo ateles, gennetheis teleios: [4319]1
 * logos en to pneumati eplatte to soma: [4320]1
 * logos endiathetos: [4321]1 [4322]2
 * logos gnoseos: [4323]1
 * logos protos: [4324]1
 * logos prophorikos: [4325]1
 * logos prophorikos: [4326]1
 * logos sophias: [4327]1
 * logos spermatikos: [4328]1
 * logos phusikos: [4329]1
 * logosis: [4330]1
 * lutron katharsion: [4331]1
 * lutron panton: [4332]1
 * laura: [4333]1
 * laubanontes par' auton to lemma: [4334]1
 * lexeidia: [4335]1
 * llenike chresis: [4336]1
 * louonta: [4337]1
 * logisasthai tina boulesin: [4338]1
 * logika: [4339]1
 * logikos on: [4340]1
 * logikoi: [4341]1
 * logiste: [4342]1
 * logothetai: [4343]1
 * logomachein meletesantes, kai loipon pneumatomachountes, esontai
 met' oligon nekroi te alogi& 139;: [4344]1
 * logotheises tes sarkos: [4345]1
 * logotheises tes sarkos: [4346]1
 * loipon: [4347]1
 * l. en som: [4348]1
 * magistros: [4349]1
 * magistros ekei: [4350]1
 * mathema: [4351]1
 * memphetai: [4352]1
 * me phantasi& 139; all' alethos: [4353]1
 * me: [4354]1
 * mete ten horismenen para tes Pronoias krisin prolambanein: [4355]1
 * mian ten theoteta kai to idion tes ousias tou patros: [4356]1
 * monos ek monou: [4357]1
 * monos en mono: [4358]1
 * monos hupo monou: [4359]1
 * monos gennetheis: [4360]1
 * monos gennetos en tois genetois: [4361]1
 * monos monon: [4362]1
 * monos para: [4363]1
 * monos ouch hos ta somata: [4364]1
 * monos,: [4365]1
 * menas pente: [4366]1
 * mathon edidaxe: [4367]1
 * mathon edidasken: [4368]1
 * mathon edidasken: [4369]1
 * makran apephugon: [4370]1
 * manikoteron: [4371]1
 * manteuomenos kai progignoskon: [4372]1
 * mart: [4373]1
 * maphorion: [4374]1
 * megale: [4375]1
 * meinen: [4376]1
 * mem: [4377]1
 * memerismenai: [4378]1
 * memerismenai hupostaseis: [4379]1
 * memerismenas: [4380]1
 * mesiteuousa phusis monogenes: [4381]1 [4382]2 [4383]3
 * meta thallon; phallon: [4384]1
 * meta paratereseos: [4385]1
 * metechein: [4386]1
 * metechesthai: [4387]1
 * met' eusebeias: [4388]1
 * metaxu tes tou agen[n]etou kai tes ton geneton phuseos: [4389]1
 * metousias, hosper apo peges, ep' auton procheomenes pleroumenon:
 [4390]1
 * metoche: [4391]1
 * med' allote allen k.t.l: [4392]1
 * mounos e& 241;n agapetos: [4393]1
 * monas: [4394]1
 * mone: [4395]1
 * mone: [4396]1 [4397]2
 * monen: [4398]1
 * monotes: [4399]1
 * monai: [4400]1 [4401]2
 * monasterion: [4402]1
 * monachoi: [4403]1
 * mono: [4404]1
 * monogenes: [4405]1
 * monogenes: [4406]1 [4407]2 [4408]3 [4409]4
 * monogenes Theos: [4410]1
 * monogenes theos: [4411]1
 * monogenes proteuon en te ktisei: [4412]1
 * monogenes: [4413]1
 * monogene: [4414]1
 * monoousion kai ouch homoousion: [4415]1
 * monoousios: [4416]1
 * moousion: [4417]1
 * morphe: [4418]1
 * mustikotera cheirotonia: [4419]1
 * n: [4420]1 [4421]2
 * nea Isis echrematize: [4422]1
 * nothois hosper onomasi: [4423]1
 * nomo phuseos: [4424]1
 * nun genomenon: [4425]1
 * nun de kai diaballein tous pateras tetolmekasi: [4426]1
 * neumata: [4427]1
 * neoteron: [4428]1
 * neuma: [4429]1
 * neaniskos, O de 'Iesous emblepsas auto, egapesen auton: [4430]1
 * neanieuesthe: [4431]1
 * nn: [4432]1
 * noei: [4433]1
 * nomizomene: [4434]1
 * nuktomachias te ouden apeiche ta ginomena: [4435]1
 * xenas allelon pantapasi kechorismenas: [4436]1
 * xenon kat' ousian k.t.l: [4437]1
 * xenos tou huiou kat' ousian ho Pater hoti anarchos: [4438]1
 * xeton kai gumnazon: [4439]1
 * xunoris: [4440]1 [4441]2
 * oikeiosis phuseos: [4442]1
 * oikeiotai: [4443]1
 * oikeioseos: [4444]1
 * oikonomia: [4445]1 [4446]2 [4447]3
 * oikonomian: [4448]1
 * oikonomikos: [4449]1 [4450]2
 * hoi en to kanali& 251; tes 'Italias: [4451]1
 * hoi dolioi: [4452]1
 * hoi nun: [4453]1
 * hoi peri Eusebion: [4454]1
 * hoi pleistoi: [4455]1
 * hoi christomachoi: [4456]1
 * hois an ethelosi: [4457]1
 * ou kata metousian alla kat' ousian theos: [4458]1
 * ou treis hupostaseis memerismenas: [4459]1
 * oude kata metousian autou, all' holon idion autou gennema: [4460]1
 * ouden eblapteto: [4461]1
 * ouden heteron e ten ousian tou ontos: [4462]1
 * ouden gar onoma epi theou kuriologeisthai dunaton: [4463]1
 * oud' ek pollon heis: [4464]1
 * oud' ho hui& 231;s, ei me ho pater: [4465]1
 * oud' ho hui& 232;s e hos hoti ho pater: [4466]1
 * ouk aei en ho theos pater, ouk aei en ho huios: [4467]1
 * ouk aei pater: [4468]1
 * ouk allou, alla tou kuriou;: [4469]1
 * ouk edoulon ton logon;: [4470]1
 * ouk en diairesei prosopon: [4471]1
 * ouk epeplexen: [4472]1
 * ouk heterou tinos: [4473]1
 * ouk en prin: [4474]1 [4475]2
 * ouk en prin genetai: [4476]1
 * ouk en prin gennethe: [4477]1 [4478]2 [4479]3
 * ouk en prin gennethe, all' en pote hote ouk en k.t.l: [4480]1
 * ouk en prin gennethenai: [4481]1 [4482]2 [4483]3 [4484]4 [4485]5
 * ouk en prin gennethe: [4486]1
 * ouk en prin gennethenai: [4487]1
 * ouk oknei theon: [4488]1
 * ouk eichon to piston, kath' hemeran parerchomenai; & 211; de tou
 Soteros thusia hapax genomene teteleioke to pan: [4489]1
 * ousia: [4490]1 [4491]2 [4492]3 [4493]4 [4494]5 [4495]6 [4496]7
 [4497]8 [4498]9 [4499]10 [4500]11 [4501]12 [4502]13 [4503]14
 [4504]15 [4505]16 [4506]17 [4507]18 [4508]19 [4509]20 [4510]21
 [4511]22 [4512]23 [4513]24 [4514]25 [4515]26 [4516]27 [4517]28
 [4518]29 [4519]30 [4520]31 [4521]32 [4522]33 [4523]34 [4524]35
 [4525]36 [4526]37 [4527]38 [4528]39 [4529]40 [4530]41 [4531]42
 [4532]43 [4533]44 [4534]45 [4535]46 [4536]47 [4537]48 [4538]49
 [4539]50 [4540]51 [4541]52 [4542]53 [4543]54 [4544]55 [4545]56
 [4546]57 [4547]58 [4548]59 [4549]60 [4550]61 [4551]62 [4552]63
 [4553]64 [4554]65 [4555]66 [4556]67 [4557]68
 * ousia ex ousias: [4558]1
 * ousia tou logou: [4559]1
 * ousiai: [4560]1 [4561]2 [4562]3
 * ousiai, homoiai: [4563]1
 * ousian; ousia tou logou or tou huiou: [4564]1
 * ousias: [4565]1 [4566]2 [4567]3
 * ousias aparallakton eikona: [4568]1
 * ousiodes sophia: [4569]1
 * ouch haplos a& 188;dios: [4570]1
 * ouchi epinoia, paranoia de mallon: [4571]1
 * housia: [4572]1
 * ohus ethelon: [4573]1
 * oute ton Theon phobebeis ho atheos, oute tou patros ten diathesin
 aidestheis ho anosios, oute to geras aischuntheis ho astorgos:
 [4574]1
 * oute ton theon phobetheis ho atheos: [4575]1
 * houtos en tais ekklesiais diatassomai: [4576]1
 * houtos kai ho: [4577]1
 * houtos ten en Nikai& 139; piotin exetheto: [4578]1
 * pathe: [4579]1
 * pathos Christou tou theou mou: [4580]1
 * palin: [4581]1
 * panta ginoskein epangellomenos: [4582]1
 * panta dokimazete: [4583]1
 * panta taxei kai pronoi& 139; kinoumena: [4584]1
 * papas: [4585]1
 * parergon: [4586]1
 * parestin a& 204;los tois enulois ta a& 203;la: [4587]1
 * pempsas: [4588]1 [4589]2
 * pepautai: [4590]1
 * perusin: [4591]1
 * pistis: [4592]1 [4593]2 [4594]3 [4595]4 [4596]5
 * polis perioches: [4597]1
 * puktia: [4598]1 [4599]2
 * pasa gar he Ellas esiderophorei,: [4600]1
 * pur hosper noeton, ten tou hagiou Pneumatos methexin embalon:
 [4601]1
 * pos dunatai to ktizomenon ktizein; e pos ho ktizon ktizetai:
 [4602]1
 * paugasma: [4603]1
 * paula: [4604]1
 * pathon: [4605]1
 * palatinoi: [4606]1
 * panaretos: [4607]1
 * paneudaimon patris: [4608]1
 * pantelos: [4609]1
 * para monou: [4610]1
 * para ten aletheian: [4611]1
 * para tou patros: [4612]1
 * para: [4613]1
 * paradosis: [4614]1 [4615]2
 * paradosis agraphos: [4616]1
 * paranomoi: [4617]1
 * paranomos: [4618]1
 * parelabon: [4619]1
 * par' eautou: [4620]1
 * paranomian: [4621]1
 * parapetasma: [4622]1 [4623]2
 * parapepetasmenen: [4624]1
 * paraskeue: [4625]1
 * paratereseos: [4626]1
 * parousia: [4627]1
 * parresiazometha: [4628]1
 * pater tou kata phusin huiou: [4629]1
 * patrike theotes tou huiou: [4630]1
 * patriken: [4631]1
 * patrikos: [4632]1
 * pepoiekenai: [4633]1 [4634]2
 * peri ekeinon: [4635]1
 * peri hon para ton: [4636]1
 * peri auton: [4637]1
 * peri theon: [4638]1
 * peri panton presbeusui pros ton Patera: [4639]1
 * peri ton theon: [4640]1
 * peri ton tolmonton heautous ektemnein: [4641]1
 * peri psuches kai somatos eis to pathos: [4642]1
 * perierchetai: [4643]1
 * perierchontai: [4644]1
 * perierchontai hos hoi kantharoi: [4645]1
 * perierchontai peribombountes: [4646]1
 * peribole: [4647]1
 * peribombein: [4648]1
 * peribombousi: [4649]1
 * peribombousin: [4650]1
 * periergazesthai: [4651]1
 * periergazesthai;: [4652]1
 * periergazontai: [4653]1
 * periluontes tas nesteias--katapauontes tas nesteias--hespera
 bathei& 139; sabbatou--te epiphoskouse kuriake: [4654]1
 * peritithemenos ten estheta, ekalupteto, endusamenos soma: [4655]1
 * peripherousi: [4656]1
 * perich: [4657]1
 * perichoresis: [4658]1 [4659]2 [4660]3 [4661]4 [4662]5 [4663]6
 [4664]7 [4665]8 [4666]9 [4667]10 [4668]11 [4669]12
 * pege ek peges: [4670]1
 * pege theotetos: [4671]1 [4672]2
 * pege xera: [4673]1
 * pege: [4674]1
 * plen tes agennesias kai tes patrotetos: [4675]1
 * pleres eimi: [4676]1
 * plethos: [4677]1 [4678]2
 * planetheisan gennesin: [4679]1
 * platusmos: [4680]1 [4681]2
 * pleisten e emprosthen: [4682]1
 * plerotheises tes exousias en to kuriako souati: [4683]1
 * pneuma: [4684]1 [4685]2 [4686]3 [4687]4 [4688]5 [4689]6
 * poieo: [4690]1
 * poiemata: [4691]1
 * poion: [4692]1
 * poiein: [4693]1
 * poietes: [4694]1
 * poietai: [4695]1
 * poietikon aition: [4696]1
 * polutheos atheia: [4697]1
 * pollakis apololenai dikaioi: [4698]1
 * polloi logoi: [4699]1
 * polueidous: [4700]1
 * poluthrulleton: [4701]1
 * polukephalos hairesis: [4702]1
 * poluk. panourgia: [4703]1
 * poluk. sophistes: [4704]1
 * pompeia: [4705]1
 * pompeuein: [4706]1
 * pompeuete: [4707]1
 * pourgon: [4708]1
 * preda: [4709]1
 * prin genesthai tauta: [4710]1
 * prin gennethenai ouk en: [4711]1 [4712]2 [4713]3
 * prin gennethe etoi ktisthe, e oristhe, e themeliothe: [4714]1
 * prin poiethe: [4715]1
 * prin genesthai: [4716]1
 * pro tes genneseos: [4717]1 [4718]2
 * pro tou belou: [4719]1
 * prodromon 'Antichristou: [4720]1
 * prodromos: [4721]1
 * prokrima: [4722]1
 * pronoia: [4723]1 [4724]2
 * pronoia ton panton: [4725]1
 * prosopa: [4726]1 [4727]2
 * prosopon: [4728]1 [4729]2 [4730]3
 * prophasis: [4731]1
 * prote ousia: [4732]1
 * protos: [4733]1 [4734]2 [4735]3
 * proton hemin: [4736]1
 * proton gennema: [4737]1 [4738]2
 * protos: [4739]1
 * protos hemon: [4740]1
 * preptotes: [4741]1
 * proeleusis: [4742]1 [4743]2 [4744]3 [4745]4
 * proaionios: [4746]1
 * proballein: [4747]1
 * proballesthai: [4748]1
 * proballete: [4749]1
 * problethen gennema: [4750]1
 * probletheis: [4751]1
 * probole: [4752]1 [4753]2 [4754]3
 * probole: [4755]1 [4756]2 [4757]3 [4758]4
 * proboleus: [4759]1
 * proelthon: [4760]1
 * proegoumene: [4761]1 [4762]2
 * proegoumenen: [4763]1
 * prothesmia: [4764]1
 * prothesmian: [4765]1
 * prokalumma: [4766]1 [4767]2
 * prokope: [4768]1 [4769]2 [4770]3 [4771]4 [4772]5 [4773]6
 * prokopes: [4774]1
 * pronomia: [4775]1
 * propinontes: [4776]1
 * propeteusainto: [4777]1
 * prosopou: [4778]1
 * prostassonta: [4779]1
 * prostasias philon: [4780]1
 * prostattomenos kai hupourgon: [4781]1 [4782]2
 * prostattomenos, kai hupourgon: [4783]1
 * prosphora: [4784]1
 * prosphoneso: [4785]1
 * prophorikos logos: [4786]1
 * prophorikos: [4787]1 [4788]2
 * prototokos: [4789]1 [4790]2 [4791]3 [4792]4 [4793]5 [4794]6 [4795]7
 [4796]8 [4797]9 [4798]10 [4799]11 [4800]12 [4801]13 [4802]14
 [4803]15
 * prototokos pases ktiseos: [4804]1
 * prototokos pases ktiseos: [4805]1
 * prototokos tou Theou: [4806]1
 * prototupon gennema: [4807]1
 * prototokos: [4808]1 [4809]2
 * prototokos tes ktiseos: [4810]1
 * poles: [4811]1
 * re: [4812]1
 * sarx: [4813]1
 * sarx tou logou: [4814]1
 * sarx: [4815]1 [4816]2 [4817]3 [4818]4
 * sumbama: [4819]1
 * sumphonos: [4820]1
 * sundesmon pisteos: [4821]1
 * sundesmon tes agapes: [4822]1
 * sundromos: [4823]1 [4824]2
 * sundromos thelesis: [4825]1
 * soma: [4826]1 [4827]2 [4828]3
 * soma sophias: [4829]1
 * sathrothenta: [4830]1
 * sarkothenta: [4831]1
 * sebastos: [4832]1
 * semeia: [4833]1 [4834]2
 * skandalizetai: [4835]1
 * skopos: [4836]1
 * skopos: [4837]1
 * skotodiniontes: [4838]1
 * skotodiniosi: [4839]1
 * sophias exegetas: [4840]1
 * sophia, chrestotes, dunamis, thelema pantokratorikon: [4841]1
 * sparattetosan heautous: [4842]1
 * spermatikos: [4843]1
 * sticharia: [4844]1
 * stole: [4845]1
 * stratopedon: [4846]1 [4847]2
 * stratopedon;: [4848]1
 * strateia: [4849]1
 * strategoi: [4850]1 [4851]2
 * strategou: [4852]1 [4853]2 [4854]3
 * stratiotou: [4855]1
 * strobilous: [4856]1
 * sunkatabasin: [4857]1
 * sunkatabasis: [4858]1 [4859]2 [4860]3 [4861]4 [4862]5 [4863]6
 [4864]7 [4865]8 [4866]9
 * sunkritikos: [4867]1
 * sunkuliontai: [4868]1
 * sumbainousan kai aposumbainousan: [4869]1
 * sumbebekos: [4870]1
 * sumbebekos: [4871]1
 * sumbebekota: [4872]1
 * sumphonia: [4873]1 [4874]2
 * sunaxeis: [4875]1
 * sunesei: [4876]1
 * suneisaktai: [4877]1
 * suneton theou: [4878]1
 * sunegorou: [4879]1
 * sunientas: [4880]1
 * sunousion: [4881]1
 * sustole: [4882]1 [4883]2
 * sphodra eplemmelesan: [4884]1
 * sphodra loidoroi: [4885]1
 * sphragis: [4886]1
 * schizein: [4887]1
 * schema organikon: [4888]1 [4889]2
 * schematisamenos: [4890]1
 * tagathon: [4891]1
 * ta hiera grammata: [4892]1
 * ta de loipa diataxomai: [4893]1
 * ta theia ton pregmaton: [4894]1
 * ta kai: [4895]1
 * ta pros ti: [4896]1
 * tade legei: [4897]1
 * taxis: [4898]1
 * teknon: [4899]1
 * teleion: [4900]1
 * teleios: [4901]1 [4902]2
 * teleios ktistheis: [4903]1
 * teleios teleion gegenneken, pneuma pneuma: [4904]1
 * telos: [4905]1
 * ten en thanato kata phusin phthoran: [4906]1
 * ten idiotropon autou hupostasin; tes hupostaseos autou
 aperiergastou; neoteran tes hupostaseos genesin; he tou uonogenous
 anekdiegetos hupostasis; ten tou logou upostasin: [4907]1
 * ten huper autou dunamin: [4908]1
 * ten thrulloumenen apor& 191;oen: [4909]1
 * ten kata panta homoioteta: [4910]1
 * ten kata panta homoioteta autou ek phuseos apomaxamenos: [4911]1
 * ten manian exeteinan: [4912]1
 * ten patriken heautou theoteta: [4913]1
 * ten poluthrulleton dialektiken: [4914]1
 * ten poluthrulleton phonen: [4915]1
 * ten ptocheusasan phusin theou holen genomenen: [4916]1
 * ten p. hugiainousan: [4917]1
 * ten tes homoioseos henoteta: [4918]1
 * ten ton holon pronoian kath' heauton ouk einai mothologousin:
 [4919]1
 * ten tou archetupou plasin anastesasthai heauto: [4920]1
 * ten phusin: [4921]1
 * ti dei noein k.t.l: [4922]1
 * ti moi kai soi: [4923]1
 * tis egno noun Kuriou: [4924]1
 * tis gar ekouse: [4925]1
 * to akineton: [4926]1
 * to en auto: [4927]1
 * to ex autou: [4928]1
 * to hidion: [4929]1
 * to idion tes ousias, tautotes: [4930]1
 * to opheilomenon: [4931]1
 * to on: [4932]1
 * to ontos on: [4933]1
 * to hupokeimenon: [4934]1
 * to auto gar legein ouk okneteon: [4935]1
 * to brabeion tes ano kleseos: [4936]1
 * to gar exelthein: [4937]1
 * to de diokein diabolikon estin epicheirema: [4938]1
 * to de kai proskuneisthai: [4939]1
 * to dialuthentas menein en to thanato kai te phthora: [4940]1
 * to euangelion: [4941]1
 * to kalon katechete: [4942]1
 * to ktiston: [4943]1
 * to legomenon ktizesthai te phusei kai te ousi& 139; ktisma: [4944]1
 * to logikon: [4945]1
 * to monophues: [4946]1
 * to pathos tou logou: [4947]1
 * to para panton opheilomenon: [4948]1
 * to poion to en te ousi& 139;, to ti en einai,: [4949]1
 * to poluthrulleton sophisma: [4950]1
 * to teleion: [4951]1
 * to [kuriakon] soma: [4952]1
 * ton alethos hui& 232;n: [4953]1
 * ton anthropon: [4954]1
 * ton anthropon sathrothenta: [4955]1
 * ton en hemin hui& 231;n: [4956]1
 * ton en autois oikounta logon: [4957]1
 * ton hena kurion: [4958]1
 * ton Patera sumpeponthenai to hui& 254;: [4959]1
 * ton Chr: [4960]1
 * ton diabolou propon analabon: [4961]1
 * ton kreittona: [4962]1
 * ton logon: [4963]1
 * ton logon tropen hupomemenekota: [4964]1
 * ton pro ai& 240;non eudoki& 139; tou patros gennethenta: [4965]1
 * ton prostattonta kurion: [4966]1
 * ton prostattonta kurion, ton demiourgounta logon, to stereoun
 pneuma: [4967]1
 * ton tes taxeos: [4968]1
 * tode ti: [4969]1
 * tomos: [4970]1
 * topos: [4971]1
 * tote kai: [4972]1
 * tote kai nun: [4973]1
 * tes atheou peges: [4974]1
 * tes hupostaseos huparchouses, pantos euthus einai dei ton
 charaktera kai ten eikona tautes: [4975]1
 * tes autes ousias: [4976]1
 * tes graphes ethos echouses: [4977]1
 * tes eis ton episkopon diaboles: [4978]1
 * tes eusebeias: [4979]1
 * tes theotokou Marias: [4980]1
 * tes kt: [4981]1
 * tes ktiseos: [4982]1
 * tes mones tou kurizou: [4983]1
 * tes oikonomias: [4984]1
 * tes ousias: [4985]1
 * tes ousias homoia: [4986]1
 * te a& 187;dioteti tou patros tou monogenous sunapton ten gennesin:
 [4987]1
 * te homonoi& 139; kai te sumphoni& 139;: [4988]1
 * te hupostasei duo phuseis: [4989]1
 * te men hupostasei tria, te de sumphoni& 139; hen: [4990]1
 * ton agoraion: [4991]1
 * ton apostolon diataxis: [4992]1
 * ton enkuklion: [4993]1
 * ton exegeton tous akrous heilesthe: [4994]1
 * ton ergasion: [4995]1
 * ton 'Areiomaniton ten alogian: [4996]1
 * ton geneton: [4997]1
 * ton logon kairon: [4998]1
 * ton nun 'Ioudaion: [4999]1
 * ton palai kai propalai: [5000]1
 * ton sophias metachonton, kata panta sophon: [5001]1
 * ton chamai: [5002]1
 * to: [5003]1
 * to hagi& 251;: [5004]1
 * to rh& 208;to tethrullekasi ta pantachou: [5005]1
 * to skopo: [5006]1
 * ta homoia tois homoiois: [5007]1
 * tauton te homoiosei: [5008]1 [5009]2
 * tautotes boulematos: [5010]1
 * tautotes ousias: [5011]1
 * tautoteta tes ousias: [5012]1
 * tautoteta tes phuseos: [5013]1
 * tautoousion: [5014]1 [5015]2
 * tais ennoiais chromenoi, pros tas epinoias apentesamen: [5016]1
 * tais logomachiais: [5017]1
 * tauta: [5018]1
 * tapeinai lexeis: [5019]1
 * teknogonia: [5020]1
 * tie: [5021]1
 * tines: [5022]1
 * tinos philoponou gerontos: [5023]1
 * tous artous: [5024]1
 * tous en te xene monachous: [5025]1
 * tous de legontas ex ouk onton,....e poiema, e ex heteras ousias,
 toutous anathematizei k. t. l: [5026]1
 * tous logimoterous ton episkopon egeiras: [5027]1
 * tous mutheuomenous gigantas: [5028]1
 * tous pateras diaballonton: [5029]1
 * touto: [5030]1
 * touto chromenos organo: [5031]1 [5032]2
 * toutestin ek tes ousias tou patros: [5033]1
 * toutous kai parontas paredoken to 'Alexandro: [5034]1
 * touton kat' ichnos elthon: [5035]1
 * tois onomasi: [5036]1
 * tois tes sarkos epitimontes pathesin: [5037]1
 * tou dia tes idias pronoias: [5038]1
 * tou kat' eikona charis: [5039]1
 * tou logou: [5040]1
 * tou legomenou photeinou: [5041]1
 * tou monadikou biou nomothesian en plasmati diegeseos: [5042]1
 * tou patros: [5043]1 [5044]2
 * tou patros homoios: [5045]1
 * tou pneumatos: [5046]1
 * touto to heroon stephanoi he ergasia ton bapheon: [5047]1
 * ton: [5048]1
 * tonthoruzete: [5049]1
 * trias: [5050]1
 * trizosi tous odontos: [5051]1
 * tropon beltiosis: [5052]1
 * treis upostaseis: [5053]1
 * treis archikai hupostaseis: [5054]1
 * treis hupostaseis: [5055]1 [5056]2 [5057]3
 * treis memerismenas hupostaseis: [5058]1
 * trepton: [5059]1
 * treptos: [5060]1 [5061]2 [5062]3 [5063]4
 * trepton: [5064]1
 * trias: [5065]1 [5066]2 [5067]3
 * trias adiairetos te phusei, kai mia tautes he energeia: [5068]1
 * trizeto tous odontas: [5069]1
 * trizetosan: [5070]1
 * tropikos: [5071]1 [5072]2
 * huiopator: [5073]1
 * huiopatora: [5074]1
 * huiopator: [5075]1
 * huiopoioumetha alethos: [5076]1
 * hui& 231;s: [5077]1 [5078]2 [5079]3
 * hui& 232;n homoion kai kat' ousian ek tou patros: [5080]1
 * huion chrematizein: [5081]1
 * phaskontes, ou legomen duo ageneta, legousi duo theous: [5082]1
 * pheme: [5083]1 [5084]2 [5085]3 [5086]4 [5087]5
 * phusei: [5088]1
 * phusis: [5089]1 [5090]2 [5091]3 [5092]4 [5093]5 [5094]6 [5095]7
 [5096]8
 * phusis tou logou: [5097]1
 * phanerosis: [5098]1 [5099]2 [5100]3
 * phaneros: [5101]1
 * phthonos: [5102]1
 * phthora: [5103]1 [5104]2 [5105]3 [5106]4 [5107]5 [5108]6 [5109]7
 * phthartoi: [5110]1
 * phthoreas ton psuchon: [5111]1
 * phthoropoios: [5112]1
 * philoponou: [5113]1
 * philoptochia: [5114]1
 * philochrusous mallon e philochristous: [5115]1
 * phrontisterion: [5116]1
 * phusiken einai ten hamartian: [5117]1
 * phusikos logos: [5118]1
 * phusikes tinos gumnasias heneka: [5119]1
 * phusikos: [5120]1 [5121]2
 * phusiologein: [5122]1
 * charis tes kleseos: [5123]1
 * chamaileontes: [5124]1
 * charakter: [5125]1
 * charaktera: [5126]1
 * cheir: [5127]1
 * cheir demiourgike: [5128]1
 * chrezonton tes autou theotetos dia tou homoiou: [5129]1
 * christophoroi: [5130]1
 * christomachoi: [5131]1
 * christomachon: [5132]1
 * christomachein: [5133]1
 * psuchesthai: [5134]1
 * psuche logike: [5135]1
 * psuche: [5136]1
 * psuchikon: [5137]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [5138]i  [5139]iii  [5140]v  [5141]vi  [5142]vii  [5143]viii  [5144]xi
 [5145]xii  [5146]xiii  [5147]xiv  [5148]xv  [5149]xvi  [5150]xvii
 [5151]xviii  [5152]xix  [5153]xx  [5154]xxi  [5155]xxii  [5156]xxiii
 [5157]xxiv  [5158]xxv  [5159]xxvi  [5160]xxvii  [5161]xxviii
 [5162]xxix  [5163]xxx  [5164]xxxi  [5165]xxxii  [5166]xxxiii
 [5167]xxxiv  [5168]xxxv  [5169]xxxvi  [5170]xxxvii  [5171]xxxviii
 [5172]xxxix  [5173]xl  [5174]xli  [5175]xlii  [5176]xliii  [5177]xliv
 [5178]xlv  [5179]xlvi  [5180]xlvii  [5181]xlviii  [5182]xlix  [5183]l
 [5184]li  [5185]lii  [5186]liii  [5187]liv  [5188]lv  [5189]lvi
 [5190]lvii  [5191]lviii  [5192]lix  [5193]lx  [5194]lxi  [5195]lxii
 [5196]lxiii  [5197]lxiv  [5198]lxv  [5199]lxvi  [5200]lxvii
 [5201]lxviii  [5202]lxix  [5203]lxx  [5204]lxxi  [5205]lxxii
 [5206]lxxiii  [5207]lxxiv  [5208]lxxv  [5209]lxxvi  [5210]lxxvii
 [5211]lxxviii  [5212]lxxix  [5213]lxxx  [5214]lxxxi  [5215]lxxxii
 [5216]lxxxiii  [5217]lxxxiv  [5218]lxxxv  [5219]lxxxvi  [5220]lxxxvii
 [5221]lxxxviii  [5222]lxxxix  [5223]xc  [5224]xci  [5225]1  [5226]2
 [5227]3  [5228]4  [5229]5  [5230]6  [5231]7  [5232]8  [5233]9
 [5234]10  [5235]11  [5236]12  [5237]13  [5238]14  [5239]15  [5240]16
 [5241]17  [5242]18  [5243]19  [5244]20  [5245]21  [5246]22  [5247]23
 [5248]24  [5249]25  [5250]26  [5251]27  [5252]28  [5253]29  [5254]30
 [5255]31  [5256]32  [5257]33  [5258]34  [5259]35  [5260]36  [5261]37
 [5262]38  [5263]39  [5264]40  [5265]41  [5266]42  [5267]43  [5268]44
 [5269]45  [5270]46  [5271]47  [5272]48  [5273]49  [5274]50  [5275]51
 [5276]52  [5277]53  [5278]54  [5279]55  [5280]56  [5281]57  [5282]58
 [5283]59  [5284]60  [5285]61  [5286]62  [5287]63  [5288]64  [5289]65
 [5290]66  [5291]67  [5292]68  [5293]69  [5294]70  [5295]71  [5296]72
 [5297]73  [5298]74  [5299]75  [5300]76  [5301]77  [5302]78  [5303]79
 [5304]80  [5305]81  [5306]82  [5307]83  [5308]84  [5309]85  [5310]86
 [5311]87  [5312]88  [5313]89  [5314]90  [5315]91  [5316]92  [5317]93
 [5318]94  [5319]95  [5320]96  [5321]97  [5322]98  [5323]99  [5324]100
 [5325]101  [5326]102  [5327]103  [5328]104  [5329]105  [5330]106
 [5331]107  [5332]108  [5333]109  [5334]110  [5335]111  [5336]112
 [5337]113  [5338]114  [5339]115  [5340]116  [5341]117  [5342]118
 [5343]119  [5344]120  [5345]121  [5346]122  [5347]123  [5348]124
 [5349]125  [5350]126  [5351]127  [5352]128  [5353]129  [5354]130
 [5355]131  [5356]132  [5357]133  [5358]134  [5359]135  [5360]136
 [5361]137  [5362]138  [5363]139  [5364]140  [5365]141  [5366]142
 [5367]143  [5368]144  [5369]145  [5370]146  [5371]147  [5372]148
 [5373]149  [5374]150  [5375]151  [5376]152  [5377]153  [5378]154
 [5379]155  [5380]156  [5381]157  [5382]158  [5383]159  [5384]160
 [5385]161  [5386]162  [5387]163  [5388]164  [5389]165  [5390]166
 [5391]167  [5392]168  [5393]169  [5394]170  [5395]171  [5396]172
 [5397]173  [5398]174  [5399]175  [5400]176  [5401]177  [5402]178
 [5403]179  [5404]180  [5405]181  [5406]182  [5407]183  [5408]184
 [5409]185  [5410]186  [5411]187  [5412]188  [5413]189  [5414]190
 [5415]191  [5416]192  [5417]193  [5418]194  [5419]195  [5420]196
 [5421]197  [5422]198  [5423]199  [5424]200  [5425]201  [5426]202
 [5427]203  [5428]204  [5429]205  [5430]206  [5431]207  [5432]208
 [5433]209  [5434]210  [5435]211  [5436]212  [5437]213  [5438]214
 [5439]215  [5440]216  [5441]217  [5442]218  [5443]219  [5444]220
 [5445]221  [5446]222  [5447]223  [5448]224  [5449]225  [5450]226
 [5451]227  [5452]228  [5453]229  [5454]230  [5455]231  [5456]232
 [5457]233  [5458]234  [5459]235  [5460]236  [5461]237  [5462]238
 [5463]239  [5464]240  [5465]241  [5466]242  [5467]243  [5468]244
 [5469]245  [5470]246  [5471]247  [5472]248  [5473]249  [5474]250
 [5475]251  [5476]252  [5477]253  [5478]254  [5479]255  [5480]256
 [5481]257  [5482]258  [5483]259  [5484]260  [5485]261  [5486]262
 [5487]263  [5488]264  [5489]265  [5490]266  [5491]267  [5492]268
 [5493]269  [5494]270  [5495]271  [5496]272  [5497]273  [5498]274
 [5499]275  [5500]276  [5501]277  [5502]278  [5503]279  [5504]280
 [5505]281  [5506]282  [5507]283  [5508]284  [5509]285  [5510]286
 [5511]287  [5512]288  [5513]289  [5514]290  [5515]291  [5516]292
 [5517]293  [5518]294  [5519]295  [5520]296  [5521]297  [5522]298
 [5523]299  [5524]300  [5525]301  [5526]302  [5527]303  [5528]304
 [5529]305  [5530]306  [5531]307  [5532]308  [5533]309  [5534]310
 [5535]311  [5536]312  [5537]313  [5538]314  [5539]315  [5540]316
 [5541]317  [5542]318  [5543]319  [5544]320  [5545]321  [5546]322
 [5547]323  [5548]324  [5549]325  [5550]326  [5551]327  [5552]328
 [5553]329  [5554]330  [5555]331  [5556]332  [5557]333  [5558]334
 [5559]335  [5560]336  [5561]337  [5562]338  [5563]339  [5564]340
 [5565]341  [5566]342  [5567]343  [5568]344  [5569]345  [5570]346
 [5571]347  [5572]348  [5573]349  [5574]350  [5575]351  [5576]352
 [5577]353  [5578]354  [5579]355  [5580]356  [5581]357  [5582]358
 [5583]359  [5584]360  [5585]361  [5586]362  [5587]363  [5588]364
 [5589]365  [5590]366  [5591]367  [5592]368  [5593]369  [5594]370
 [5595]371  [5596]372  [5597]373  [5598]374  [5599]375  [5600]376
 [5601]377  [5602]378  [5603]379  [5604]380  [5605]381  [5606]382
 [5607]383  [5608]384  [5609]385  [5610]386  [5611]387  [5612]388
 [5613]389  [5614]390  [5615]391  [5616]392  [5617]393  [5618]394
 [5619]395  [5620]396  [5621]397  [5622]398  [5623]399  [5624]400
 [5625]401  [5626]402  [5627]403  [5628]404  [5629]405  [5630]406
 [5631]407  [5632]408  [5633]409  [5634]410  [5635]411  [5636]412
 [5637]413  [5638]414  [5639]415  [5640]416  [5641]417  [5642]418
 [5643]419  [5644]420  [5645]421  [5646]422  [5647]423  [5648]424
 [5649]425  [5650]426  [5651]427  [5652]428  [5653]429  [5654]430
 [5655]431  [5656]432  [5657]433  [5658]434  [5659]435  [5660]436
 [5661]437  [5662]438  [5663]439  [5664]440  [5665]441  [5666]442
 [5667]443  [5668]444  [5669]445  [5670]446  [5671]447  [5672]448
 [5673]449  [5674]450  [5675]451  [5676]452  [5677]453  [5678]454
 [5679]455  [5680]456  [5681]457  [5682]458  [5683]459  [5684]460
 [5685]461  [5686]462  [5687]463  [5688]464  [5689]465  [5690]466
 [5691]467  [5692]468  [5693]469  [5694]470  [5695]471  [5696]472
 [5697]473  [5698]474  [5699]475  [5700]476  [5701]477  [5702]478
 [5703]479  [5704]480  [5705]481  [5706]482  [5707]483  [5708]484
 [5709]485  [5710]486  [5711]487  [5712]488  [5713]489  [5714]490
 [5715]491  [5716]492  [5717]493  [5718]494  [5719]495  [5720]496
 [5721]497  [5722]498  [5723]499  [5724]500  [5725]501  [5726]502
 [5727]503  [5728]504  [5729]505  [5730]506  [5731]507  [5732]508
 [5733]509  [5734]510  [5735]511  [5736]512  [5737]513  [5738]514
 [5739]515  [5740]516  [5741]517  [5742]518  [5743]519  [5744]520
 [5745]521  [5746]522  [5747]523  [5748]524  [5749]525  [5750]526
 [5751]527  [5752]528  [5753]529  [5754]530  [5755]531  [5756]532
 [5757]533  [5758]534  [5759]535  [5760]536  [5761]537  [5762]538
 [5763]539  [5764]540  [5765]541  [5766]542  [5767]543  [5768]544
 [5769]545  [5770]546  [5771]547  [5772]548  [5773]549  [5774]550
 [5775]551  [5776]552  [5777]553  [5778]554  [5779]555  [5780]556
 [5781]557  [5782]558  [5783]559  [5784]560  [5785]561  [5786]562
 [5787]563  [5788]564  [5789]565  [5790]566  [5791]567  [5792]568
 [5793]569  [5794]570  [5795]571  [5796]572  [5797]573  [5798]574
 [5799]575  [5800]576  [5801]577  [5802]578  [5803]579  [5804]580
 [5805]581

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
