Ornithological Biography, Vol. II
John James Audubon (1834)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Audubon's 'Ornithological Biography', vol. II (1834). This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY.


*


ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY,


Oil  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HABITS  OF  THE

BIRDS  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA


ACCOMPANIED  BY  DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  OBJECTS  REPRESENTED
IN  THE  WORK  ENTITLED

THE  BIRDS  OF  AMERICA,

AND  INTERSPERSED  WITH  DELINEATIONS  OF  AMERICAN
SCENERY  AND  MANNERS.


BY  JOHN  JAMES  AUDUBON,  F.R.SS  L.&E.


FELLOW  OP  THE  LINNEaN  AND  ZOOLOGICAL  SOCIETIES  OF  LONDON  ; MEMBER  OF  THE  LYCEUM
OF  NEW  YORK,  OF  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  PARIS,  THE  WERNERIAN  NATURAL
HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  EDINBURGH  ; HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  SOCIETY  OP  NATURAL
HISTORY  OF  MANCHESTER,  AND  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  ACADEMY  OF  PAINTING,  SCULPTURE,
AND  ARCHITECTURE;  MEMBEjl  OF  THE  AMERICAN  PHILOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY,  OF  THE
ACADEMY  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCES  AT  PHILADELPHIA,  OF  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETIES
OF  BOSTON,  OP  CHARLESTON  IN  SOUTH  CAROLINA,  &C.  &C.


VOL.  III.


EDINBURGH:

ADAM  & CHARLES  BLACK,  EDINBURGH;

I.ONGMAN,  REES,  BROWN,  GREEN  & LONGMAN,  LONDON;  R.  HAVELL,
ENGRAVER,  77-  OXFORD  STREET,  LONDON  ; THOMAS  SOWLER,
MANCHESTER;  MRS  ROBINSON,  LEEDS;  ALEXANDER  HILL,  EDIN-
BURGH; J.  HENRY  BEILBY,  BIRMINGHAM ; E.  CHARNLEY,  NEW.
CASTLE-UPON-TYNE  ; AND  GEORGE  SMITH,  LIVERPOOL.


MDCCCXXXV.


PRINTED  BY  NEILL  & Co.
Old  Fishmarket,  Edinburgh.


INTRODUCTION.


Ten  years  have  now  elapsed  since  the  first  number  of  my
Illustrations  of  the  Birds  of  America  made  its  appearance.  At
that  period  I calculated  that  the  engravers  would  take  sixteen
years  in  accomplishing  their  task  ; and  this  I announced  in  my
prospectus,  and  talked  of  to  my  friends.  Of  the  latter  not  a
single  individual  seemed  to  have  the  least  hope  of  my  success,
and  several  strongly  advised  me  to  abandon  my  plans,  dispose  of
my  drawings,  and  return  to  my  country.  I listened  with  atten-
tion to  all  that  was  urged  on  the  subject,  and  often  felt  deeply
depressed,  for  I was  well  aware  of  many  of  the  difficulties  to  be
surmounted,  and  perceived  that  no  small  sum  of  money  would
be  required  to  defray  the  necessary  expenses.  Yet  never  did
I seriously  think  of  abandoning  the  cherished  object  of  my
hopes.  When  I delivered  the  first  drawings  to  the  engraver,  I
had  not  a single  subscriber.  Those  who  knew  me  best  called
me  rash  ; some  wrote  to  me  that  they  did  not  expect  to  see  a
second  fasciculus ; and  others  seemed  to  anticipate  the  total
failure  of  my  enterprise.  But  my  heart  was  nerved,  and  my
reliance  on  that  Power,  on  whom  all  must  depend,  brought
bright  anticipations  of  success.


VI


INTRODUCTION.


Having  made  arrangements  for  meeting  the  first  difficulties,
I turned  my  attention  to  the  improvement  of  my  drawings,  and
began  to  collect  from  the  pages  of  my  journals  the  scattered  notes
which  referred  to  the  habits  of  the  birds  represented  by  them.

I worked  early  and  late,  and  glad  I was  to  perceive  that  the
more  I laboured  the  more  I improved.  I was  happy,  too,  to
find,  that  in  general  each  succeeding  plate  was  better  than  its
predecessor,  and  when  those  who  had  at  first  endeavoiued  to  dis-
suade me  from  undertaking  so  vast  an  enterprise,  complimented
me  on  my  more  favourable  prospects,  I could  not  but  feel  happy.
Number  after  number  appeared  in  regular  succession,  until  at
the  end  of  four  years  of  anxiety,  my  engraver,  Mr  Haveli.,
presented  me  with  the  First  Volume  of  the  Birds  of  America.

Convinced,  from  a careful  comparison  of  the  plates,  that  at
least  there  had  been  no  falling  off  in  the  execution,  I looked  for-
ward with  confidence  to  the  termination  of  the  next  four  years’
labour.  Time  passed  on,  and  I returned  from  the  forests  and
vsdlds  of  the  western  world  to  congratulate  my  friend  Haveli.,
just  when  the  last  plate  of  the  second  volume  was  finished.

About  that  time,  a nobleman  called  upon  me  with  his  fa-
mily, and  requested  me  to  shew  them  some  of  the  original  draw-
ings, which  I did  with  the  more  pleasure  that  my  visitors  pos-
sessed a knowledge  of  Ornithology.  In  the  course  of  om’  con-
versation, I was  asked  how  long  it  might  be  until  the  work
should  be  finished.  When  I mentioned  eight  years  more,  the
nobleman  shrugged  up  his  shoulders,  and  sighing,  said,  “ I may
not  see  it  finished,  but  my  children  wiU,  and  you  may  please  to
add  my  name  to  yoiu  list  of  subscribers.”  The  young  people
exhibited  a mingled  expression  of  joy  and  sorrow,  and  wlien  I
with  them  strove  to  dispel  the  cloud  that  seemed  to  hang  over


INTRODUCTION.


vii

their  father’s  mind,  he  smiled,  bade  me  be  sm’e  to  see  that
the  whole  work  should  be  punctually  delivered,  and  took  his
leave.  The  solemnity  of  his  manner  I could  not  forget  for  seve-
ral days  ; I often  thought  that  neither  might  I see  the  work
completed,  but  at  length  I exclaimed  “ my  sons  may.”  And
now  that  another  volume,  both  of  my  Illustrations  and  of  my
Biographies  is  finished,  my  trust  in  Providence  is  augmented,
and  I cannot  but  hope  that  myself  and  my  family  together  may
be  permitted  to  see  the  completion  of  my  labours.

I have  performed  no  long  journey  since  I last  parted  from  you,
and  therefore  I have  little  of  personal  history  to  relate  to  you.
I have  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  interval  in  London  and
Edinburgh,  in  both  which  cities  I have  continued  to  enjoy  a
social  intercourse  with  many  valued  friends.  In  the  former,  it
has  been  my  good  fortune  to  add  to  the  list  the  names  of  Wil-
liam Yarrell,  Esq.,  Dr  Bell,  Dr  Boott,  Captain  James
Clark  Ross,  R.  N.,  and  Dr  Richardson.  From  Mr  Yar-
rell and  the  two  latter  gentlemen,  both  well  known  to  you  as
intrepid  and  successful  travellers,  1 have  received  much  valuable
information,  as  well  as  precious  specimens  of  birds  and  eggs,
collected  in  the  desolate  regions  of  the  extreme  north.  My
anxiety  to  compare  my  specimens  with  those  of  the  Zoological
Society  of  London,  induced  me  to  request  permission  to  do  so,
which  the  Council  freely  accorded.  For  this  favour  I now  pre-
sent my  warm  acknowledgments  to  the  Noble  Earl  of  Derby,
the  Members  of  the  Council,  their  amiable  Secretary  Mr  Ben-
nett, and  to  Mr  Gould,  who  had  the  kindness  to  select  for  me
such  specimens’as  I wanted.  My  friend  Professor  Jameson  of
Edinburgh  has  been  equally  kind  in  allowing  me  the  means  of
comparing  specimens.  From  America  I have  received  some


INTRODUCTION.


viii

valuable  information,  and  many  interesting  specimens  of  bird^
and  eggs,  for  which  I am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  John  Bach-
man, Dr  Richard  Harlan,  Dr  George  Parkman,  Ed-
ward Harris,  Esq.  and  others.

The  number  of  new  species  described  in  the  present  volume
is  not  great.  Among  them,  however,  you  will  find  the  largest
true  Heron  hitherto  discovered  in  the  United  States.  I have
corrected  some  errors  committed  by  authors,  and  have  added  to
our  Fauna  several  species  which,  although  described  by  Euro-
pean writers,  had  not  been  observed  in  America.  The  habits
of  many  species  previously  unknown  have  also  been  given  in
detail.

Having  long  ago  observed,  in  works  on  tlie  Birds  of  the
United  States,  the  omission  of  the  females  and  the  different  ap-
pearances produced  by  the  change  of  season  in  most  water  birds,

I have  represented  the  male  accompanied  by  his  mate,  and,  in
as  many  instances  as  possible,  the  young  also.  The  technical
descriptions  have  been  given  at  greater  length  than  in  the  for-
mer volumes,  with  the  view  of  preventing  error  even  in  com-
paring dried  skins  with  either  the  figures  or  the  description.s.

I have  also  given  the  average  measurement  of  the  eggs,  which
I regret  I had  omitted  to  do  in  the  other  volumes  ; an  error
which  I purpose  to  'atone  for  by  presenting  you,  in  the  last
number  of  my  Illustrations,  with  figures  of  all  those  which  I
have  collected.

The  figures  in  the  third  volume  of  my  Illustrations  amount
to  one  hundred  and  eighty-two,  and  are  thus  much  fewer  than
those  in  either  of  the  preceding  volumes.  This,  however,
was  rendered  necessary  by  the  comparatively  large  size  of  the
originals,  the  aquatic  species  of  Birds  greatly  exceeding  the


INTRODUCTION.


ix


terrestrial  in  this  respect.  Many  of  them  in  fact  are  so  large
that  only  a single  figure  could  be  given,  and  that  not  always  in
so  good  an  attitude  as  I could  have  wished.  For  this  reason  I
have  sometimes  been  obliged  to  give  the  figiue  of  the  young  in
a separate  plate ; and  this  I shall  in  a few  cases  continue  to  do,
in  order  to  correct  the  errors  of  authors  respecting  certain  spe-
cies, which  I have  proved  to  be  merely  nominal.  Still  the  num-
ber contained  in  the  three  volumes  being  six  hundred  and
seventy-four,  there  are  more  than  two  to  each  species.

The  engraving  and  coloiuing  of  the  plates  of  this  volume
have  generally  been  considered  as  much  superior  even  to  those
of  the  second.  Indeed,  some  of  my  patrons,  both  in  Europe
and  America,  have  voluntarily  expressed  their  conviction  of  the
superiority  of  these  plates.  This  is  the  more  gratifying  to  me,
that  it  proves  the  unremitted  care  and  perseverance  of  Mr
Havell  and  his  assistants,  of  whom  I mention  with  approba-
tion Messrs  Blake  and  Edington.

The  Ornithology  of  the  United  States  may  be  said  to  have
been  commenced  by  Alexander  Wilson,  whose  prematiue
death  prevented  him  from  completing  his  laboius.  It  is  un-
necessary for  me  to  say  how  well  he  performed  the  task  which
he  had  imposed  upon  himself  ; for  all  naturalists,  and  many  who
do  not  aspire  to  the  name,  acknowledge  his  great  merits.  But
although  he  succeeded  in  observing  and  obtaining  a very  great
number  of  our  birds,  he  left  for  others  many  species  which  he
was  unable  to  procure.  These  have  been  sought  for  with  eager-
ness, and  not  without  success,  by  persons  who  have  engaged  in
the  pursuit  with  equal  ardour.  The  Prince  of  Musignano,
full  of  enthusiasm,  having  his  judgment  matured  by  long  obser-
lation,  and  his  mind  stored  with  useful  learning,  collected  in


X


INTRODUCTION.


our  woods  and  prairies,  by  our  great  rivers,  and  along  our  extend-
ed shores,  materials  sufficient  for  four  superb  volumes,  intended
as  a continuation  of  Wilson’s  work.  Thomas  Nutt  all,
equally  learned  and  enthusiastic,  next  entered  the  field.  His
Manual  of  our  Birds  contains  a mass  of  useful  information,  and
is  for  the  most  part  excellent.  Many  others  have,  in  various
ways,  endeavoured  to  extend  our  knowledge  on  this  subject ;
but  with  the  exception  of  Thomas  Say,  none  have  published
their  discoveries  in  a connected  form.  Dr  Harlan  has  given
to  the  world  an  excellent  account  of  our  Mammalia ; various
works  on  Mollusca  have  appeared,  and  at  present  Dr  Horl-
BECK  of  Charleston  is  engaged  in  publishing  an  account  of  our
Reptiles.

Along  our  extended  frontiers  I have  striven  to  observe  and
gather  whatever  had  escaped  the  notice  of  the  different  collec-
tors ; and  now,  kind  Reader,  to  prove  to  you  that  if  not  so  for-
tunate as  I had  wished,  I yet  have  done  all  that  was  in  my
power,  I present  you  with  a third  volume  of  Ornithological  Bio-
graphies, in  which  you  will  find  some  account  of  about  sixty
species  of  Water  Birds  not  included  in  the  works  of  Wilson.
These,  at  one  season  or  other,  are  to  be  met  with  along  the
shores  or  streams  of  the  United  States.  Some  of  them  are  cer-
tainly very  rare,  others  remarkable  in  form  and  habits  ; but  all,
I trust,  you  will  find  distinct  from  each  other,  and  not  inaccu-
rately described.

The  difficulties  which  are  to  be  encountered  in  studying  the
habits  of  om*  Water  Birds  are  great.  He  who  follows  the  fea-
thered inhabitants  of  the  forests  and  plains,  however  rough  or
tangled  the  paths  may  be,  seldom  fails  to  obtain  the  objects  of
his  pursuit,  provided  he  be  possessed  of  due  enthusiasm  and  per-


INTRODUCTION.


XI


severance.  The  Land  Bird  flits  from  bush  to  bush,  runs  before
you,  and  seldom  extends  its  flight  beyond  the  range  of  your
vision.  It  is  very  different  with  the  Water  Bird,  which  sweeps
afar  over  the  wide  ocean,  hovers  above  the  surges,  or  betakes  it-
self for  refuge  to  the  inaccessible  rocks  on  the  shore.  There,
on  the  smooth  sea-beach,  you  see  the  lively  and  active  Sand-
piper ; on  that  rugged  promontory  the  Dusky  Cormorant ; un-
der the  dark  shade  of  yon  cypress  the  Ibis  and  Heron  ; above
you  in  the  still  air  floats  the  Pelican  or  the  Swan  ; while  far
over  the  angry  billows  scorn’  the  Fulmar  and  the  Frigate  bird.
If  you  endeavour  to  approach  these  birds  in  their  haunts,  they
betake  themselves  to  flight,  and  speed  to  places  where  they  are
secure  from  your  intrusion.

But  the  scarcer  the  fruit,  the  more  prized  it  is  ; and  seldom
have  I experienced  greater  pleasures  than  when  on  the  Florida
Keys,  under  a burning  sun,  after  pushing  my  bark  for  miles  over
a soapy  flat,  I have  striven  all  day  long,  tormented  by  myriads
of  insects,  to  procme  a heron  new  to  me,  and  have  at  length  suc-
ceeded in  my  efforts.  And  then  how  amply  are  the  labours  of
the  naturalist  compensated,  when,  after  observing  the  wildest
and  most  distrustful  birds,  in  their  remote  and  almost  inacces-
sible breeding  places,  he  returns  from  his  journeys,  and  relates
his  adventures  to  an  interested  and  friendly  audience.

I look  forward  to  the  summer  of  1838  with  an  anxious  hope
that  I may  then  be  able  to  present  you  with  the  last  plate  of
my  Illustrations,  and  the  concluding  volume  of  my  Biographies.
To  render  these  volumes  as  complete  as  possible,  I intend  to  un-
dertake a journey  to  the  southern  and  western  limits  of  the
Union,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  a more  accurate  knowledge
of  the  birds  of  those  remote  and  scarcely  inhabited  regions.


xil


INTRODUCTION.


On  this  tour  I shall  be  accompanied  by  my  youngest  son,  while
the  rest  of  my  family  will  remain  in  Britain,  to  direct  the  pro-
gress of  my  publication.

In  concluding  these  prefatory  remarks,  1 have  to  inform
you  that  one  of  the  tail-pieces  in  my  second  volume,  entitled
“ A Moose  Hunt,”  was  communicated  to  me  by  my  young  friend
Thomas  Lincoln  of  Dennisville  in  Maine  ; and  that  it  was
at  his  particular  request,  and  much  against  my  wishes,  that  his
name  was  not  mentioned  at  the  time.  I have  now,  however,
judged  it  proper  to  make  this  statement.

JOHN  J.  AUDUBON.


EmNnuKcii,  \st  Decemler  1835.


TABLE  OE  CON'I'EINTS


}


The  Canada  Goose,

The  Red-throated  Diver,  ....
The  Great  Red-breasted  Rail,  or  A
Fresh-water  Marsh-Hen,  . . ' J

The  Clapper  Rail,  or  Salt-water

Marsh-Hen,

The  Virginian  Rail,  ....

The  American  Sun  Perch,

The  Wood  Duck,  ....

The  Booby  Gannet,  ....

The  Esquimaux  Curlew,  .

Wilson’s  Plover,

The  Least  Bittern,  ....

The  Eggers  of  Labrador,


The  Great  Blue  Heron,  . .

The  Common  American  Gull,

The  Puffin,

The  Razor-billed  Auk,  . . .

The  Hypei'borean  Phalarope,

Fishing  in  the  Ohio,  . .


The  Wood  Ibis,  . .

The  Louisiana  Heron,
The  Foolish  Guillemot,
The  Black  Guillemot,
The  Piping  Plover,  .


Anser  canadensis,

Page

1

Colymbus  septentrionalis.

. 20

Rallus  elegans,  . . .

. 27

Rallus  crepitans,  . . .

. 33

Rallus  virginianus,  . .

. 41

. 47

Anas  Sponsa,  ....

. 52

Sula  fusca,

. 63

Numenius  borealis,  . .

69

Charadrius  Wilsonius,  .

. 73

Ardea  exilis,  ....

77

. 82

Ardea  Herodias,  . . .

. 87

Larus  zonorhynchus.

. 98

Mormon  arcticus,  . .

105

Alca  Torda,  ....

112

Phalaropus  hyperboreus.

. 118

. 122

Tantalus  Loculator,  . .

. 128

Ardea  ludoviciana,  . .

. 136

Uria  Troile,  ....

. 142

Uria  Grylle,  ....

. 148

Charadrius  melodus,  .

. 154

xiv  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

Page

The  Wreckers  of  Florida, 158

The  Mallard, Anas  Boschas,  ....  164

The  White  Ibis, Ibis  alba, 173

The  American  Oyster-Catcher,  . . Hcematopus  palliatus,  . . 181

The  Kittiwake  Gull, Larus  tridactylus,  . . . 186

The  Kildeer  Plover, Charadrius  vociferus,  . . 191

The  White  Perch  and  its  Favourite  Bait, 197

The  Whooping  Crane, Grus  americana,  ....  202

The  Pintail  Duck, Anas  acuta, 214

The  Green- winged  Teal,  ....  Anas  Crecca,  . . . . 219

The  Scaup  Duck, Fuligula  Marila,  ....  226

The  Sanderling, Tringa  arenaria,  . . . . 231

A Racoon  Hunt  in  Kentucky, 235

The  Long-billed  Curlew,  ....  Numenius  longirostris,  . . 240

The  Hooded  Merganser,  ....  Mergus  cucullatus,  . . . 246

The  Sora  Rail, Rallus  carolinus,  . . . . 251

The  Ring-necked  Duck,  ....  Fuligula  rufitorques,  . . . 259

The  Sooty  Tern, Sterna fuliginosa,  . . i 263

A Wild  Horse, 270

The  Night  Heron, Ardea  Nycticorax,  . . . 275

The  Hudsonian  Curlew,  ....  Numenius  hudsonicus,  . . 283

The  Great  Marbled  Godwit,  . . Limosa  Fedoa,  ....  287

The  American  Coot, Fulica  americana,  . . . 291

The  Roseate  Tern, Sterna  Dougallii,  ....  296

Reminiscences  of  Thomas  Bewick, 300

The  Great  Black-backed  Gull,  . . Larus  marinus,  ....  305

The  Snowy  Heron, Ardea  candidissima,  . . . 317

The  American  Snipe, Scolopax  Wilsonii,  . . . 322

The  Common  Gallinule,  ....  Gallinula  Chloropus,  . . 330

The  Large-billed  Guillemot,  . . . Uria  Brunnichii,  ....  336

Pitting  of  Wolves, 338

The  Eider  Duck, Fuligula  mollissima,  . . . 342

The  Velvet  Duck, Fuligula  fusca,  ....  354


TABLE  OF

CONTENTS.

XV

The  Pied-billed  Dobchick,

Podiceps  carolinensis,  . .

Page

359

The  Tufted  Puffiu,

Mormon  cirrhatus,  . . .

364

The  Ai’ctic  Tern,

Sterna  arctica,  ....

366

A Tough  Walk  fou  a Youth,

371

The  Brown  Pelican,

Pelecanus  fuscus, ....

376

The  Florida  Cormorant,  . . .

Phalacrocorax  Jloridanus,  .

387

The  Pomarine  Jager,

Lestris  pomarinus,  . . .

396

Wilson’s  Phalarope,

Phalaropm  Wilsonii,  . .

400

The  Red  Phalarope,

Phalaropus  fulicarius,  . .

404

Breaking  up  of  the  Ice,  . .


408

The  Reddish  Egret,

Ardea  rufescens,  ....

411

The  Double-crested  Cormorant,  .

Phalacrocorax  dilophus,

420

The  Hudsonian  Godwit,  . . . .

Limosa  hudsonica,  . . .

426

The  Horned  Grebe,

Podiceps  cornutus,  . . .

429

The  Forked-tailed  Petrel,  . .

Thalassidroma  Leachii,

434

A Maple-sugar  Camp,  . . . .

438

The  Whooping  Crane,

Grus  americana,  . . .

441

The  Tropic  Bird,

Phaeton  cethereus,  . . .

442

The  Curlew  Sandpiper,  . . . .

Tringa  subarquata,  . , ,

444

The  Fulmar  Petrel,

Procellaria  glacialis,

446

The  Buff-breasted  Sandpiper,  . .

Tringa  rufescens,  ....

451

The  Opossum,

454

The  Common  Cormorant,  . . . .

Phalacrocorax  Carbo,  . .

458

The  Arctic  Jager,

Lestris  parasiticus,  . .

470

The  American  Woodcock,

Scolopax  minor,  ....

474

The  Greenshank,

Totanus  Glottis,  ....

483

Wilson’s  Petrel,

Thalassidroma  Wilsonii,

486

A Long  Calm  at  Sea,  . . . .

491

The  Frigate  Pelican,

Tachypetes  Aquilus,  . . .

495

Richardson’s  Jager,

Lestris  Richardsonii,

503

The  Cayenne  Tern,

Sterna  cayana,  ....

505

The  Semipalmated  Snipe,  or  Willet,

Totanus  semipalmatus,  . .

510

The  Noddy  Tern,

Sterna  stolida,

516

Still  Becalmed,  . . . . .

520

XVI


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Page

Fuligula  speclubilis,  . . . 523

Anser  Hutchinsii,  . . , 526

Tringa  Schinzii,  ....  529

Sterna  cantiaca,  . . . . 531

Sterna  nigra^ 535

539


The  King  Duck,  .

Hutchins’s  Goose,

Schinz’s  Sandpiper,

The  Sandwich  Tern
The  Black  Tern,

Natchez  in  1820,

The  Great  White  Heron,  .

The  White-winged  Silvery  Gull,
The  Wandering  Shearwater,  .
The  Purple  Sandpiper,  . . .

The  Forked-tailed  Gull,  . .


Ardea  occidentalism  . . . 542

Larus  leucopterus,  . . . 553

Puffinus  cinereus,  . . . 555

Tringa  maritima,  . . . 558

Larus  Sabinif  . . . . . 561


564

568

571

573

576

580

584

588

559

599

601

604

606

609

612

617

620

623

629


The  Lost  Portfolio,


The  White-fronted  Goose,  .
The  Ivory  Gull,  ....
The  Yellowshank,  . . .

The  Solitary  Sandpiper,
The  Red-backed  Sandpiper,

Labrador,

The  Herring  Gull,  . .

The  Crested  Grebe,  . .

The  Large-billed  Puffin,
The  Pectoral  Sandpiper,
The  Manks  Shearwater,

Great  Egg  Harbour,

The  Barnacle  Goose,’  .

The  Harlequin  Duck,  .

The  Red-necked  Grebe,

The  Dusky  Petrel,  . .

The  Golden  Plover,  . .


Anser  albifrons,  .
Larus  eburneus,  .
Totanus  Jlavipes,  .
Totanus  chloropygius,
Tringa  alpina,


Larus  argentatus^
Podiceps  cristatusm
Mormon  glacialis,
Tringa  pectoralis,
Puffinus  Anghrum,


Anser  leucopsis,
Fuligula  histrionicam
Podiceps  rubricollism
Puffinus  obscurus,
Charadrius  pluvialis,


Remarks  on  the  Form  of  the  Toes  of  Birds,


ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY.


THE  CANADA  GOOSE.

Anser  canadensis,  Vieill.

PLATE  CCI.  Male  and  Female.

Although  the  Canada  Goose  is  considered  as  a northern  species,  the
number  of  individuals  that  remain  at  all  seasons  in  the  milder  latitudes,
and  in  different  portions  of  the  United  States,  fully  entitles  this  bird  to
be  looked  upon  as  a permanent  resident  there.  It  is  found  to  breed  spa-
ringly at  the  present  day,  by  many  of  the  lakes,  lagoons,  and  large
streams  of  our  Western  Districts,  on  the  Missouri,  the  Mississippi,  the
lower  parts  of  the  Ohio,  on  Lake  Erie,  the  lakes  farther  north,  and  in  se-
veral large  pools  situated  in  the  interior  of  the  eastern  parts  of  the  States
of  Massachusetts  and  Maine.  As  you  advance  farther  toward  the  east
and  north,  you  find  it  breeding' more  abundantly.  While  on  my  way  to
Labrador,  I found  it  in  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  early  in  June,  sitting  on
its  eggs.  In  the  Island  of  Anticosti  there  is  a considerable  stream,  near
the  borders  of  which  great  numbers  are  said  to  be  annually  reared ; and
in  Labrador  these  birds  breed  in  every  suitable  marshy  plain.  The
greater  number  of  those  which  visit  us  from  still  more  northern  regions,
return  in  the  vernal  season,  like  many  other  species,  to  the  dismal  coun-
tries which  gave  them  birth.

Few  if  any  of  these  birds  spend  the  winter  in  Nova  Scotia,  my  friend
Mr  Thomas  M‘Culloch  having  informed  me  that  he  never  saw  one  about
Pictou  at  that  period.  In  spring,  as  they  proceed  northward,  thousands
are  now  and  then  seen  passing  high  in  the  air;  but  in  autumn,  the  flocks
are  considerably  smaller,  and  fly  much  lower.  During  their  spring  move-
ments, the  principal  places  at  which  they  stop  to  wait  for  milder  days  are


VOL.  III.


A


2


CANADA  GOOSE.


Bay  Chaleur,  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  Newfoundland,  and  Labrador,  at
all  of  which  some  remain  to  breed  and  spend  the  summer.

The  general  spring  migration  of  the  Canada  Goose,  may  be  stated  to
commence  with  the  first  melting  of  the  snows  in  our  Middle  and  Western
Districts,  or  from  the  20th  of  March  to  the  end  of  April  ; but  the  pre-
cise time  of  its  departure  is  always  determined  by  the  advance  of  the  sea-
son, and  the  vast  flocks  that  winter  in  the  great  savannahs  or  swampy
prairies  south-west  of  the  Mississippi,  such  as  exist  in  Opellousas,  on  the
borders  of  the  Arkansas  River,  or  in  the  dismal  “ Ever  Glades”  of  the
Floridas,  are  often  seen  to  take  their  flight,  and  steer  their  course  north-
ward, a month  earlier  than  the  first  of  the  above  mentioned  periods.  It
is  indeed  probable  that  the  individuals  of  a species  most  remote  from  the
point  at  which  the  greater  number  ultimately  assemble,  commence  their
flight  earlier  than  those  which  have  passed  the  winter  in  stations  nearer
to  it.

It  is  my  opinion  that  all  the  birds  of  this  species,  which  leave  our
States  and  territories  each  spring  for  the  distant  north,  pair  before  they
depart.  This,  no  doubt,  necessarily  results  from  the  nature  of  their  place
of  summer  residence,  where  the  genial  season  is  so  short  as  scarcely  to  af-
ford them  sufficient  time  for  bringing  up  their  young  and  renewing  their
plumage,  before  the  rigours  of  advancing  winter  force  them  to  com-
mence their  flight  towards  milder  countries.  This  opinion  is  founded
on  the  following  facts : — I have  frequently  observed  large  flocks  of
Geese,  in  ponds,  on  marshy  grounds,  or  even  on  dry  sand  bars,  the  mated
birds  renewing  their  courtship  as  early  as  the  month  of  January,  while
the  other  individuals  would  be  contending  or  coquetting  for  hours  every
day,  until  all  seemed  satisfied  with  the  choice  they  had  made,  after  which,
although  they  remained  together,  any  person  could  easily  perceive  that
they  were  careful  to  keep  in  pairs.  I have  observed  also  that  the  older
the  birds,  the  shorter  were  the  preliminaries  of  their  courtship,  and  that
the  barren  individuals  were  altogether  insensible  to  the  manifestations  of
love  and  mutual  affection  that  were  displayed  around  them.  The  bache-
lors and  old  maids,  whether  in  regret,  or  not  caring  to  be  disturbed  by
the  bustle,  quietly  moved  aside,  and  lay  down  on  the  grass  or  sand  at
some  distance  from  the  rest ; and  whenever  the  flocks  rose  on  wing,  or
betook  themselves  to  the  water,  these  forlorn  birds  always  kept  behind.
This  mode  of  preparing  for  the  breeding  season  has  appeared  to  me  the
more  remarkable,  that,  on  reaching  the  place  appointed  for  their  summer


CANADA  GOOSE.


3


residence,  the  birds  of  a flock  separate  in  pairs,  which  form  their  nests
and  rear  their  young  at  a considerable  distance  from  each  other.

It  is  extremely  amusing  to  witness  the  courtship  of  the  Canada  Goose
in  all  its  stages;  and  let  me  assure  you,  reader,  that  although  a Gander
does  not  strut  before  his  beloved  with  the  pomposity  of  a Turkey,  or  the
grace  of  a Dove,  his  ways  are  quite  as  agreeable  to  the  female  of  his
choice.  I can  imagine  before  me  one  who  has  just  accomplished  the  de-
feat of  another  male  after  a struggle  of  half  an  hour  or  more.  He  ad-
vances gallantly  towards  the  object  of  contention,  his  head  scarcely  raised
an  inch  from  the  ground,  his  bill  open  to  its  full  sti'etch,  his  fleshy  tongue
elevated,  his  eyes  darting  fiery  glances,  and  as  he  moves  he  hisses  loudly,
while  the  emotion  which  he  experiences,  causes  his  quills  to  shake,  and
his  feathers  to  rustle.  Now  he  is  close  to  her  who  in  his  eyes  is  all  love-
liness ; his  neck  bending  gracefully  in  all  directions,  passes  all  round  her,
and  occasionally  touches  her  body  ; and  as  she  congratulates  him  on  his
victory,  and  acknowledges  his  affection,  they  move  their  necks  in  a hun-
dred curious  ways.  At  this  moment  fierce  jealousy  urges  the  defeated
gander  to  renew  his  efforts  to  obtain  his  love ; he  advances  apace,  his
eye  glowing  with  the  fire  of  rage  ; he  shakes  his  broad  wings,  ruffles  up
his  whole  plumage,  and  as  he  rushes  on  the  foe,  hisses  with  the  intensity
of  anger.  The  whole  flock  seems  to  stand  amazed,  and  opening  up  a
space,  the  birds  gather  round  to  view  the  combat.  The  bold  bird  who
has  been  caressing  his  mate,  scarcely  deigns  to  take  notice  of  his  foe,  but
seems  to  send  a scornful  glance  towards  him.  He  of  the  mortified  feel-
ings, however,  raises  his  body,  half  opens  his  sinewy  wings,  and  with  a
powerful  blow,  sends  forth  his  defiance.  The  affront  cannot  be  borne  in
the  presence  of  so  large  a company,  nor  indeed  is  there  much  disposition
to  bear  it  in  any  circumstances ; the  blow  is  returned  with  vigour,  the
aggressor  reels  for  a moment,  but  he  soon  recovers,  and  now  the  combat
rages.  Were  the  weapons  more  deadly,  feats  of  chivalry  would  now  be
performed  ; as  it  is,  thrust  and  blow  succeed  each  other  like  the  strokes
of  hammers  driven  by  sturdy  forgers.  But  now,  the  mated  gander  has
caught  hold  of  his  antagonist’s  head  with  his  bill ; no  bull-dog  could  cling
faster  to  his  victim  ; he  squeezes  him  with  all  the  energy  of  rage,  lashes
him  with  his  powerful  wings,  and  at  length  drives  him  away,  spreads  out
his  pinions,  runs  with  joy  to  his  mate,  and  fills  the  air  with  cries  of  exub
tation.

But  now,  see  yonder,  not  a couple,  but  half  a dozren  of  ganders  are

A 2


4?


CANADA  GOOSE.


engaged  in  battle  ! Some  desperado,  it  seems,  has  fallen  upon  a mated
bird,  and  several  bystanders,  as  if  sensible  of  the  impropriety  of  such  con-
duct, rush  to  the  assistance  of  the  wronged  one.  How  they  strive  and
tug,  biting,  and  striking  with  their  wings!  and  how  their  feathers  flv
about  ! Exhausted,  abashed,  and  mortified,  the  presumptuous  intruder
retreats  in  disgrace  ; — there  he  lies  almost  breathless  on  the  sand  !

Such  are  the  conflicts  of  these  ardent  lovers,  and  so  full  of  couraare-
and  of  affection  towards  their  females  are  they,  that  the  approach  of  a
male  invariably  ruffles  their  tempers  as  well  as  their  feathers.  No  sooner
has  the  goose  laid  her  first  egg,  than  her  bold  mate  stands  almost  erect
by  her  side,  Avatching  even  the  rustling  sound  of  the  breeze.  The  least
noise  brings  from  him  a sound  of  anger.  Should  he  spy  a racoon  making
its  way  among  the  grass,  he  walks  up  to  him  undauntedly,  hurls  a vigor-
ous blow  at  him,  and  drives  him  instantly  away.  Nay  I doubt  if  man
himself,  if  unarmed,  would  come  off  unscathed  in  such  an  encounter.
The  brave  gander  does  more ; for,  if  imminent  danger  excite  him,  he
urges  his  mate  to  fly  off,  and  resolutely  remains  near  the  nest  until  he  is
assured  of  her  safety,  when  he  also  betakes  himself  to  flight,  mocking  as
it  were  by  his  notes  his  disappointed  enemy.

Suppose  all  to  be  peace  and  quiet  around  the  fond  pair,  and  the  fe-
male to  be  sitting  in  security  upon  her  eggs.  The  nest  is  placed  near,
the  bank  of  a noble  stream  or  lake;  the  clear  sky  is  spread  over  the
scene,  the  bright  beams  glitter  on  the  waters,  and  a thousand  odorous
flowers  give  beauty  to  the  swamp  which  of  late  was  so  dismal.  The  gan-
der passes  to  and  fro  over  the  liquid  element,  moving  as  if  lord  of  the
waters ; now  he  inclines  his  head  with  a graceful  curve,  now  sips  to
quench  his  thirst ; and,'  as  noontide  has  arrived,  he  paddles  his  way  to-
wards the  shore,  to  relieve  for  a while  his  affectionate  and  patient  consort.
The  lisping  sounds  of  their  offspring  are  heard  through  the  shell ; their
little  bills  have  formed  a breach  in  the  inclosing  walls  ; full  of  life,  and
bedecked  with  beauty,  they  come  forth,  Avith  tottering  steps  and  downy
covering.  ToAvard  the  Avater  they  noAv  follow  their  careful  parent,  they
reach  the  border  of  the  stream,  their  mother  already  floats  on  the  loved
element,  one  after  another  launches  forth,  and  now  the  flock  glides
gently  along.  What  a beautiful  sight ! Close  by  the  grassy  margin,
the  mother  slowly  leads  her  innocent  younglings ; to  one  she  shews  the
seed  of  the  floating  grass,  to  another  points  out  the  crawling  slug.  Her
careful  eye  watches  the  cruel  turtle,  the  garfish,  and  the  pike,  that  are


CANADA  GOOSE.


lur'king  for  their  prey,  and,  with  head  inclined,  she  glances  upwards  to
•the  eagle  or  the  gull  that  are  hovering  over  the  water  in  search  of  food.
A ferocious  bird  dashes  at  her  young  ones  ; .she  instantly  plunges  beneath
•the  surface,  and,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  her  brood  disappear  after
her  ; now  they  are  among  the  thick  rushes,  with  nothing  above  water  but
.their  little  bills.  The  mother  is  marching  towards  the  land,  having  lisp-
ed to  her  brood  in  accents  so  gentle  that  none  but  they  and  her  mate  can
understand  their  import,  and  all  are  safely  lodged  under  cover  until  the
disappointed  eagle  or  gull  bears  away.

More  than  six  weeks  have  now  elapsed.  The  down  of  the  goslings,
which  was  at  first  soft  and  tufty,  has  become  coarse  and  hair, like.  Their
wings  are  edged  w’ith  quills,  and  their  bodies  bristled  with  feathers.  They
have  increased  in  size,  and,  living  in  the  midst  of  abundance,  they  have
become 'fat,  so  that  on  shore  they  make  their  way  with  difficulty,  and  as
they  are  yet  unable  to  fly,  the  greatest  care  is  required  to  save  them  from
their  numerous  enemies.  They  grow  apace,  and  now  the  burning  days
-of  August  are  over.  They  are  able  to  fly  with  ease  from  one  shore  to
another,  and  as  each  successive  night  the  hoarfrosts  cover  the  country,
and  the  streams  are  closed  over  by  the  ice,  the  family  joins  that  in  their
neighbourhood,  which  is  also  joined  by  others.  At  length  they  spy  the
advance  of  a snow-storm,  when  the  ganders  with  one  accord  sound  the
order  for  their  departure.

After  many  wide  circlings,  the  flock  has  risen  high  in  the  thin  air,  and
an  hour  or  more  is  spent  in  teaching  the  young  the  order  in  which  they
are  to  move.  But  now,  the  host  has  been  marshalled,  and  off  it  starts,
shewing,  as  it  proceeds,  at  one  time  an  extended  front,  at  another  a single
lengthened  file,  and  now  arraying  itself  in  an  angular  form.  The  old
males  advance  in  front,  the  females  follow,  the  young  come  in  succession
according  to  their  strength,  the  weakest  forming  the  rear.  -Should  one
feel  fatigued,  his  position  is  changed  in  the  ranks,  and  he  assumes  a place
in  the  wake  of  another,  who  cleaves  the  air  before  him  ; perhaps  the  pa-
rent bird  flies  for  a while  by  his  side  to  encourage  him.  Two,  three,  or
more  days  elapse  before  they  reach  a secure  resting  place.  The  fat  M'ith
which  they  were  loaded  at  their  departure  has  rapidly  wasted  ; they  are
fatigued,  and  experience  the  keen  gnawings  of  hunger  ; but  no\y  they  spy
a wide  estuary,  towards  which  they  direct  their  course.  Alighting  on  the
water,  they  swim  to  the  beach,  stand,  and  gaze  around  them ; the  young
full  of  joy,  the  old  fidl  of  fear,  for  well  are  they  aware  that  many  foes


6


CANADA  GOOSE.


have  been  waiting  their  arrival.  Silent  all  night  remains  the  flock,  but
not  inactive ; with  care  they  betake  themselves  to  the  grassy  shores,  where
they  allay  the  cravings  of  appetite,  and  recruit  their  wasted  strength.
Soon  as  the  early  dawn  lightens  the  surface  of  the  deep  they  rise  into  the
air,  extend  their  lines,  and  proceed  southward,  until  arriving  in  some  place
where  they  think  they  may  be  enabled  to  rest  in  security,  they  remain
during  the  winter.  At  length,  after  many  annoyances,  they  joyfully  per-
ceive the  return  of  spring,  and  prepare  to  fly  away  from  their  greatest
enemy  man.

The  Canada  Goose  often  arrives  in  our  Western  and  Middle  Districts
as  early  as  the  beginning  of  September,  and  does  not  by  any  means  confine
itself  to  the  seashore.  Indeed,  my  opinion  is,  that  for  every  hundred
seen  dun'ng  the  winter  along  our  large  bays  and  estuaries,  as  many  thou-
sands may  be  found  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  where  they  frequent
the  large  ponds,  rivers,  and  wet  savannahs.  During  my  residence  in  the
State  of  Kentucky,  I never  spent  a winter  without  observing  immense
flocks  of  these  birds,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Henderson,  where
I have  killed  many  hundreds  of  them,  as  well  as  on  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio
at  Louisville,  and  in  the  neighbouring  country,  which  abounds  in  ponds
overgrown  with  grasses  and  various  species  of  Nympheae,  on  the  seeds  of
which  they  greedily  feed.  Indeed  all  the  lakes  situated  within  a few  miles
of  the  Missouri  and  Mississippi,  or  their  tributaries,  are  still  amply  sup-
plied with  them  from  the  middle  of  autumn  to  the  beginning  of  spring.
In  these  places,  too,  I have  found  them  breeding,  although  sparingly.
It  seems  to  me  more  than  probable,  that  the  species  bred  abundantlv  in
the  temperate  parts  of  North  America  before  the  white  population  ex-
tended over  them.  This  opinion  is  founded  on  the  relations  of  many  old
and  respectable  citizens  of  our  country,  and  in  particular  of  General
Geouge  Clakx,  one  of  the  first  settlers  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  who,
at  a very  advanced  age,  assured  me  that,  fifty  years  before  the  period
when  our  conversation  took  place  (about  seventy-five  years  from  the  pre-
sent time),  wild  geese  were  so  plentiful  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  that  he
was  in  the  habit  of  having  them  shot  to  feed  his  soldiers,  then  garrisoned
near  Vincennes,  in  the  present  State  of  Indiana.  My  father,  who  tra-
velled down  the  Ohio  shortly  after  Bradock’s  defeat,  related  the  same  to
me ; and  I,  as  well  as  many  persons  now  residing  at  Louisville  in  Ken-
tucky, well  remember  that,  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  ago,  it  was  quite
easy  to  procure  young  Canada  Geese  in  the  ponds  around.  So  late  a?


CANADA  GOOSE.


7


1819,  I have  met  with  the  nests,  eggs,  and  young  of  this  species  near
Henderson.  However,  as  I have  already  said,  the  greater  number  re-
move far  north  to  breed.  I have  never  heard  of  an  instance  of  their
breeding  in  the  Southern  States.  Indeed,  so  uncongenial  to  their  consti-
tution seems  the  extreme  heat  of  these  parts  to  be,  that  the  attempts  luade
to  rear  them  in  a state  of  domestication  very  rarely  succeed.

The  Canada  Goose,  when  it  remains  with  us  to  breed,  begins  to  form
its  nest  in  March,  making  choice  of  some  retired  place  not  far  from  the
water,  generally  among  the  rankest  grass,  and  not  unfrequently  under  a
bush.  It  is  carefully  formed  of  dry  plants  of  various  kinds,  and  is  of  a
large  size,  flat,  and  raised  to  the  height  of  several  inches.  Once  only  did
1 find  a nest  elevated  above  the  ground.  It  was  placed  on  the  stump  of
a large  tree,  standing  in  the  centre  of  a small  pond,  about  twenty  feet
high,  and  contained  five  eggs.  As  the  spot  was  very  secluded,  I did  not
disturb  the  birds,  anxious  as  I was  to  see  in  what  manner  they  should
convey  the  young  to  the  water.  But  in  this  I was  disappointed,  for,  on
going  to  the  nest,  near  the  time  at  which  I expected  the  process  of  incu-
bation to  terminate,  I had  the  mortification  to  find  that  a racoon,  or  some
other  animal,  had  destroyed  the  w'hole  of  the  eggs,  and  that  the  birds  had
abandoned  the  place.  The  greatest  number  of  eggs  which  I have  found
in  the  nest  of  this  species  was  nine,  which  I think  is  more  by  three  than
these  birds  usually  lay  in  a wild  state.  In  the  nests  of  those  which  I
have  had  in  a domesticated  state,  I have  sometimes  counted  as  many  as
eleven,  several  of  them,  however,  usually  proving  unproductive.  The
eggs  measure,  on  an  average,  3^  inches  by  2^,  are  thick  shelled,  rather
smooth,  and  of  a very  dull  yellowish- green  colour.  The  period  of  incu-
bation is  twenty-eight  days.  They  never  have  more  than  one  brood  in  a
season,  unless  their  eggs  are  removed  or  broken  at  an  early  period.

The  young  follow  their  parents  to  the  water  a day  or  two  after  they
have  issued  from  the  egg,  but  generally  return  to  land  to  repose  in  the
sunshine  in  the  evening,  and  pass  the  night  there  under  their  mother,  who
employs  all  imaginable  care  to  ensure  their  comfort  and  safety,  as  does
her  mate,  who  never  leaves  her  during  incubation  for  a longer  time  than
is  necessary  for  procuring  food,  and  takes  her  place  at  intervals.  Both
remain  with  their  brood  until  the  following  spring.  It  is  during  the
breeding-season  that  the  gander  displays  his  courage  and  strength  to  the
greatest  advantage.  I knew  one  that  appeared  larger  than  usual,  and  of
which  all  the  lower  parts  were  of  a rich  cream  colour.  It  returned  three


CANADA  GOOSE.


-years  in  succession  to  a large  pond  a few  miles  from  the  mouth  of
Green  River  in  Kentucky,  and  whenever  I visited  the  nest,  it  seemed  to
look  upon  me  with  utter  contempt.  It  would  stand  in  a stately  attitude,
until  I reached  within  a few  yards  of  the  nest,  when  suddenly  lowering
its  head,  and  shaking  it  as  if  it  were  dislocated  from  the  neck,  it  would
open  its  wings,  and  launch  into  the  air,  flying  directly  at  me.  So  daring
was  this  fine  fellow,  that  in  two  instances  he  struck  me  a blow  with  one
-of  his  wings  on  the  right  arm,  which,  for  an  instant,  I thought,  was
broken.  I observed  that  immediately  after  such  an  effort  to  defend  his
nest  and  mate,  he  would  run  swiftly  towards  them,  pass  his  head  and  neck
several  times  over  and  around  the  female,  and  again  assume  his  attitude
of  defiance.

Always  intent  on  making  experiments,  I thought  of  endeavouring  to
conciliate  this  bold  son  of  the  waters.  For  this  purpose  I always  after-
wards took  with  me  several  ears  of  corn,  which  I shelled,  and  threw  to  wards
him.  It  remained  untouched  for  several  days  ; but  I succeeded  at  last,
and  before  the  end  of  a week  both  birds  fed  freely  on  the  grain  even
in  my  sight ! I felt  much  pleasure  on  this  occasion,  and  repeating  my
visit  daily,  found,  that  before  the  eggs  were  hatched,  they  would  allow
me  to  approach  within  a few  feet  of  them,  although  they  never  suffered
me  to  touch  them.  Whenever  I attempted  this  the  male  met  my  fingers
with  his  bill,  and  bit  me  so  severely  that  I gave  it  up.  The  great
beauty  and  courage  of  the  male  rendered  me  desirous  of  obtaining  pos-
session of  him.  I had  marked  the  time  at  which  the  young  were  likely
to  appear,  and  on  the  preceding  day  I baited  with  corn  a large  coop
made  of  twine,  and  waited  until  he  should  enter.  He  walked  in,  I
drew  the  string,  and  he  was  my  prisoner.  The  next  morning  the  female
was  about  to  lead  her  offspring  to  the  river,  which  was  distant  nearly  half
a mile,  when  I caught  the  whole  of  the  young  birds,  and  with  them  the
mother  too,  who  came  within  reach  in  attempting  to  rescue  one  of  hei-
brood,  and  had  them  taken  home.  There  I took  a cruel  method  of  pre-
venting their  escape,  for  with  a knife  I pinioned  each  of  them  on  the
same  side,  and  turned  them  loose  in  my  garden,  where  I had  a small  but
convenient  artificial  pond.  For  more  than  a fortnight,  both  the  old  birds
appeared  completely  cowed.  Indeed,  for  some  days  I felt  apprehensive
that  they  would  ab^don  the  care  of  the  young  ones.  However,  with
much  attention,  I succeeded  in  rearing  the  latter  by  feeding  them  abun-
dantly with  the  larvae  of  locusts,  which  they  ate  greedily,  as  well  as  with
corn-meal  moistened  with  water,  and  the  whole  flock,  consisting  of  eleven


CANADA  GOOSE.


S


individuals,  went  on  prosperously.  In  December  the  weather  became  in-
tensely cold,  and  I observed  that  now  and  then  the  gander  would  spread
his  winss,  and  sound  a loud  note,  to  which  the  female  first,  and  then  all
the  young  ones  in  succession,  would  respond,  when  they  would  all  run
as  far  as  the  ground  allowed  them  in  a southerly  direction,  and  attempt
to  fly  off".  1 kept  the  whole  flock  three  years.  The  old  pair  never
bred  while  in  my  possession,  but  two  pairs  of  the  young  ones  did,  one
of  them  raising  three,  the  other  seven.  They  all  bore  a special  enmity
to  dogs,  and  shewed  dislike  to  cats ; but  they  manifested  a still  greater
animosity  towards  an  old  swan  and  a wild  turkey-cock  which  I had.  I
found  them  useful  in  clearing  the  garden  of  slugs  and  snails ; and  al-
though they  now  and  then  nipped  the  vegetables,  I liked  their  company.
When  I left  Henderson,  my  flock  of  geese  was  given  away,  and  I have
not  since  heard  how  it  has  fared  with  them.

On  one  of  my  shooting  excursions  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  I chan-
ced one  day  to  kill  a wild  Canada  Goose,  which,  on  my  return,  was  sent
to  the  kitchen.  The  cook,  while  dressing  it,  found  in  it  an  egg  ready
for  being  laid,  and  brought  it  to  me.  It  was  placed  under  a common
hen,  and  in  due  time  hatched.  Two  years  afterwards  the  bird  thus  rais-
ed, mated  with  a male  of  the  same  species,  and  produced  a brood.  This
goose  was  so  gentle  that  she  would  suffer  any  person  to  caress  her,  and
would  readily  feed  from  the  hand.  She  was  smaller  than  usual,  but  in
every  other  respect  as  perfect  as  any  I have  ever  seen.  At  the  period  of
migration  she  shewed  by  her  movements  less  desire  to  fly  off  than  any
other  I have  known  4 but  her  mate,  who  had  once  been  free,  did  not  par-
ticipate in  this  apathy.

I have  not  been  able  to  discover  why  many  of  those  birds  which  1 have
known  to  have  been  reared  from  the  egg,  or  to  have  been  found  when  very
young  and  brought  up  in  captivity,  were  so  averse  to  reproduce,  unless
they  were  naturally  sterile.  I have  seen  several  that  had  been  kept  for  more
than  eight  years,  without  ever  mating  during  that  peidod,  while  other  indi-
viduals had  young  the  second  spring  after  their  birth.  I have  also  observed
that  an  impatient  male  would  sometimes  abandon  the  females  of  his  specie^,
and  pay  his  addresses  to  a common  tame  goose,  by  which  a brood  would
in  due  time  be  brought  up,  and  would  thrive.  That  this  tardiness  is  not
the  case  in  the  wild  state  I feel  pretty  confident,  for  I have  observed  ha-
ving broods  of  their  own  many  individuals  which,  by  their  size,  the  dul-
ness  of  their  plumage,  and  such  other  marks  as  are  known  to  the  practi-


10


CANADA  GOOSE,


cal  ornithologist,  I judged  to  be  not  more  than  fifteen  or  sixteen  months
old.  I have  therefore  thought  that  in  this,  as  in  many  other  species,  a
long  series  of  years  is  necessary  for  counteracting  the  original  wild  and
free  nature  which  has  been  given  them  ; and  indeed  it  seems  probable
that  our  attempts  to  domesticate  many  species  of  wild  fowls,  which  would
prove  useful  to  mankind,  have  often  been  abandoned  in  despair,  when  a
few  years  more  of  constant  care  might  have  produced  the  desired  effect.

The  Canada  Goose,  although  immediately  after  the  full  development
of  its  young  it  becomes  gregarious,  does  not  seem  to  be  fond  of  the  com-
pany of  any  other  species.  Thus,  whenever  the  White-fronted  Goose,
the  Snow  Goose,  the  Brent  Goose,  or  others,  alight  in  the  same  ponds,  it
forces  them  to  keep  at  a respectful  distance ; and  during  its  migrations  I
have  never  observed  a single  bird  of  any  other  kind  in  its  ranks.

The  flight  of  this  species  of  Goose  is  firm,  rather  rapid,  and  capable
of  being  protracted  to  a great  extent.  When  once  high  in  the  air,  they
advance  with  exti’eme  steadiness  and  regularity  of  motion.  In  rising
from  the  water  or  from  the  ground,  they  usually  run  a few  feet  with  out-
spread wings  ; but  when  suddenly  surprised  and  in  full  plumage,  a sin-
gle spring  on  their  broad  webbed  feet  is  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  get
on  wing.  While  travelling  to  some  considerable  distance,  they  pass
through  the  air  at  the  height  of  about  a mile,  steadily  following  a direct
course  towards  the  point  to  which  they  are  bound.  Their  notes  are  dis-
tinctly heard,  and  the  various  changes  made  in  the  disposition  of  their
ranks  are  easily  seen.  But  although  on  these  occasions  they  move  with
the  greatest  regularity,  yet  when  they  are  slowly  advancing  from  south
to  north  at  an  early  period  of  the  season,  they  fly  much  lower,  alight
more  frequently,  and  are  more  likely  to  be  bewildered  by  suddenly  formed
banks  of  fog,  or  by  passing  over  cities  or  arms  of  the  sea  where  much
shipping  may  be  in  sight.  On  such  occasions  great  consternation  prevails
among  them,  they  crowd  together  in  a confused  manner,  wheel  irregularly,
and  utter  a constant  cackling  resembling  the  sounds  from  a disconcerted
mob.  Sornetimes  the  flock  separates,  some  individuals  leave  the  rest,  pro-
ceed in  a direction  contrary  to  that  in  which  they  came,  and  after  a while,
as  if  quite  confused,  sail  towards  the  ground,  once  alighted  on  which  they
appear  to  become  almost  stupified,  so  as  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  shot
with  ease,  or  even  knocked  down  with  sticks.  This  I have  known  to  take
place  on  many  occasions,  besides  those  of  which  I have  myself  been  a wit-
ness. Heavy  snow-storms  also  cause  them  great  distress,  and  in  the  midst


CANADA  GOOSE.


11


of  them  some  have  been  known  to  fly  against  beacons  and  lighthouses,
dashing  their  heads  against  the  walls  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  In  the
night  they  are  attracted  by  the  lights  of  these  buildings,  and  now  and  then
a whole  flock  is  caught  on  such  occasions.  At  other  times  their  migra-
tions northward  are  suddenly  checked  by  a change  of  weather,  the  ap-
proach of  which  seems  to  be  well  known  to  them,  for  they  will  suddenly
wheel  and  fly  back  in  a southern  direction  several  hundred  miles.  In
this  manner  I have  known  flocks  to  return  to  the  places  which  they  had
left  a fortnight  before.  Nay  even  during  the  winter  months,  they  are
keenly  sensible  to  changes  of  temperature,  flying  north  or  south  in  search
of  feeding-grounds,  with  so  much  knowledge  of  the  future  state  of  the
weather,  that  one  may  be  assured  when  he  sees  them  proceeding  south-
ward in  the  evening,  that  the  next  morning  will  be  cold,  and  vice  versa.

The  Canada  Goose  is  less  shy  when  met  with  far  inland,  than  when
on  the  sea-coast,  and  the  smaller  the  ponds  or  lakes  to  which  they  I'esort,
the  more  easy  it  is  to  approach  them.  They  usually  feed  in  the  manner
of  Swans  and  fresh-water  Ducks,  that  is,  by  plunging  their  heads  towards
the  bottom  of  shallow  ponds  or  the  borders  of  lakes  and  rivers,  immersing
their  fore  parts,  and  frequently  exhibiting  their  legs  and  feet  with  the
posterior  portion  of  their  body  elevated  in  the  air.  They  never  dive  on
such  occasions.  If  feeding  in  the  fields  or  meadows,  they  nip  the  blades
of  grass  sidewise,  in  the  manner  of  the  Domestic  Goose,  and  after  rainy
weather,  they  are  frequently  seen  rapidly  patting  the  earth  with  both
feet,  as  if  to  force  the  earth-worms  from  their  burrows.  If  they  dabble
at  times  with  their  bills  in  muddy  water,  in  search  of  food,  this  action  is
by  no  means  so  common  with  them  as  it  is  with  Ducks,  the  Mallard  for
example.  They  are  extremely  fond  of  alighting  in  corn-fields  covered
with  tender  blades,  where  they  often  remain  through  the  night  and  com-
mit great  havoc.  Wherever  you  find  them,  and  however  remote  from
the  haunts  of  man  the  place  may  be,  they  are  at  all  times  so  vigilant  and
suspicious,  that  it  is  extremely  rare  to  surprise  them.  In  keenness  of
sight  and  acuteness  of  hearing,  they  are  perhaps  surpassed  by  no  bird
whatever.  They  act  as  sentinels  towards  each  other,  and  during  the
hours  at  which  the  flock  reposes,  one  or  more  ganders  stand  on  the  watch.
At  the  sight  of  cattle,  horses,  or  animals  of  the  deer  kind,  they  are  sel-
dom alarmed,  but  a bear  or  a cougar  is  instantly  announced,  and  if  on
such  occasions  the  flock  is  on  the  ground  near  water,  the  birds  imme-
diately betake  themselves  in  silence  to  the  latter,  swim  to  the  middle  of


12


CANADA  GOOSE.


the  pond  or  river,  and  there  remain  until  danger  is  over.  Should  their
enemies  pursue  them  in  the  water,  the  males  utter  loud  cries,  and  the
birds  arrange  themselves  in  close  ranks,  rise  simultaneously  in  a few  se-
conds, and  fly  off  in  a .compact  body,  seldom  at  such  times  forming  lines
or  angles,  it  being  in  fact  only  when  the  distance  they  have  to  travel  is
great  that  they  dispose  themselves  in  those  forms.  So  acute  is  their  sense
of  hearing,  that  they  are  able  to  distinguish  the  different  sounds  or  foot-
steps of  their  foes  with  astonishing  accuracy.  Thus  the  breaking  of  a
dry  stick  by  a deer  is  at  once  distinguished  from  the  same  accident  occa-
sioned by  a man.  If  a dozen  of  large  turtles  drop  into  the  water,  making
a great  noise  in  their  fall,  or  if  the  same  effect  is  produced  by  an  alligator,
the  Wild  Goose  pays  no  regard  to  it ; but  however  faint  and  distant  may
be  the  sound  of  an  Indian’s  paddle,  that  may  by  accident  have  struck  the
side  of  his  canoe,  it  is  at  once  marked,  every  individual  raises  its  head
and  looks  intently  towards  the  place  from  which  the  noise  has  proceeded,
and  in  silence  all  watch  the  movements  of  their  enemy.

These  birds  are  extremely  cunning  also,  and  should  fhey  conceive
themselves  unseen,  they  silently  move  into  the  tall  grasses  by  the  margin
of  the  water,  lower  their  heads,  and  lie  perfectly  quiet  until  the  boat  has
passed  by.  I have  seen  them  walk  off  from  a large  frozen  pond  into  the
woods,  to  elude  the  sight  of  the  hunter,  and  return  as  soon  as  he  had
crossed  the  pond.  But  should  there  be  snow  on  the  ice  or  in  the  woods,
they  prefer  watching  the  intruder,  and  take  to  wing  long  before  he  is
within  shooting  distance,  as  if  aware  of  the  ease  with  which  they  could  be
followed  by  their  tracks  over  the  treacherous  surface.

The  Canada  Geese  are  fond  of  returning  regularly  to  the  place  which
they  have  chosen  for  resting  in,  and  this  they  continue  to  do  until  they
find  themselves  greatly  molested  while  there.  In  parts  of  the  country
where  they  are  little  disturbed,  they  seldom  go  farther  than  the  nearest
sandbank  or  the  dry  shore  of  the  places  in  which  they  feed ; but  in  other
parts  they  retire  many  miles  to  spots  of  greater  security,  and  of  such  ex-
tent as  will  enable  them  to  discover  danger  long  before  it  can  reach  them.
When  such  a place  is  found,  and  proves  secure,  many  flocks  resort  to  it,
but  alight  apart  in  separate  groups.  Thus,  on  some  of  the  great  sand-
bars of  the  Ohio,  the  Mississippi,  and  other  large  streams,  congregated
flocks,  often  amounting  to  a thousand  individuals,  may  be  seen  at  the  ap-
proach of  night,  which  they  spend  there,  lying  on  the  sand  within  a few
feet  of  each  other,  every  flock  having  its  own  sentinel.  In  tlie  dawn  of


CANADA  GOOSE.


13


next  morning  they  rise  on  their  feet,  arrange  and  clean  their  featliers,
perhaps  walk  to  the  water  to  drink,  and  then  depart  for  their  feeding
grounds.

When  I first  went  to  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  the  rocky  shelvings  of
which  are  often  bare  for  fully  half  a mile,  thousands  of  wild  geese  of  this
species  rested  there  at  night.  The  breadth  of  the  various  channels  that
separate  the  rocky  islands  from  either  shore,  and  the  rapidity  of  the  cur-
rents which  sweep  along  them,  render  this  place  of  resort  more  secure
than  most  others.  The  wild  geese  still  betake  themselves  to  these  islands
during  winter  for  the  same  purpose,  but  their  number  has  become  very
small ; and  so  shy  are  these  birds  at  present  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Louisville,  that  the  moment  they  are  disturbed  at  the  ponds  where  they
go  to  feed  each  morning,  were  it  but  by  the  report  of  a single  gun,  they
immediately  return  to  their  rocky  asylums.  Even  there,  however,  they
are  by  no  means  secure,  for  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  a flock
alights  within  half  gunshot  of  a person  concealed  in  a pile  of  drifted  wood,
whose  aim  generally  proves  too  true  for  their  peace.  Nay,  I knew  a gen-
tleman, who  had  a large  mill  opposite  Rock  Island,  and  who  used  to  kill
the  poor  geese  at  the  distance  of  about  a quarter  of  a mile,  by  means  of
a small  cannon  heavily  charged  with  rifle  bullets ; and,  if  I recollect  truly,
Mr  Tarascon  in  this  manner  not  unfrequently  obtained  a dozen  or  more
geese  at  a shot.  This  was  done  at  dawn,  when  the  birds  were  busily  en-
gaged in  trimming  their  plumage  with  the  view  of  flying  olF  in  a few  mi-
nutes to  their  feeding  grounds.  This  war  of  extermination  could  not  last
long  : the  geese  deserted  the  fatal  rock,  and  the  gj*eat  gun  of  the  mighty
miller  was  used  only  for  a few  weeks.

While  on  the  water,  the  Canada  Goose  moves  with  considerable  grace,
and  in  its  general  deportment  resembles  the  wild  Swan,  to  which  I think
it  is  nearly  allied.  If  wounded  in  the  wing,  they  sometimes  dive  to  a
small  depth,  and  make  off  with  astonishing  address,  always  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  shore,  the  moment  they  reach  which,  you  see  them  sneaking
through  the  grass  or  bushes,  their  necks  extended  an  inch  or  so  above  the
ground,  and  in  this  manner  proceeding  so  silently,  that,  unless  closely
watched,  they  are  pretty  sure  to  escape.  If  shot  at  and  wounded  while
on  the  ice,  they  immediately  walk  off  in  a dignified  manner,  as  if  anxious
to  make  you  believe  that  they  have  not  been  injured,  emitting  a loud  note
all  the  while ; but  the  instant  they  reach  the  shore  they  become  silent,
and  make  off  in  the  manner  described.  I was  much  surprised  one  day.


14


CANADA  GOOSE.


while  oil  the  coast  of  Labrador,  to  see  how  cunningly  one  of  these  birds,
which,  in  consequence  of  the  moult,  was  quite  unable  to  fly,  managed  for
a while  to  elude  our  pursuit.  It  was  first  perceived  at  some  distance  from
the  shore,  when  the  boat  was  swiftly  rowed  towards  it,  and  it  swam  be-
fore us  with  great  speed,  making  directly  towards  the  land ; but  when  w-e
came  within  a few  yards  of  it,  it  dived,  and  nothing  could  be  seen  of  it
for  a long  time.  Every  one  of  the  party  stood  on  tiptoe  to  mark  the  spot
at  which  it  should  rise,  but  all  in  vain,  when  the  man  at  the  rudder
accidentally  looked  down  over  the  stern  and  there  saw  the  goose,  its
body  immensed,  the  point  of  its  bill  alone  above  water,  and  its  feet  busily
engaged  in  propelling  it  so  as  to  keep  pace  with  the  movements  of  the
boat.  The  sailor  attempted  to  catch  it  v;hile  within  a foot  or  two  of  him,
but  with  the  swiftness  of  thought  it  shifted  from  side  to  side,  fore  and  aft,
until  delighted  at  having  witnessed  so  much  sagacity  in  a goose,  I begged
the  party  to  suffer  the  poor  bird  to  escape.

The  crossing  of  the  Canada  Goose  with  the  common  domestic  species
has  proved  as  advantageous  as  that  of  the  wild  with  the  tame  Turkey,
the  cross  breed  being  much  larger  than  the  original  one,  more  easily  raised,
and  more  speedily  fattened.  This  process  is  at  present  carried  on  to  a con-
siderable extent  in  our  Western  and  Eastern  States,  where  the  hybrids  are
regularly  offered  for  sale  during  autumn  and  winter,  and  where  they  bring
a higher  price  than  either  of  the  species  from  which  they  are  derived.

The  Canada  Goose  makes  its  first  appearance  in  the  western  country,
as  well  as  along  our  Atlantic  coast,  from  the  middle  of  September  to  that
of  October,  arriving  in  flocks  composed  of  a few  families.  The  young
birds  procured  at  this  early  season  soon  get  into  good  order,  become  ten-
der and  juicy,  and  therefore  afford  excellent  eating.  If  a sportsman  is
expert  and  manages  to  shoot  the  old  birds  first,  he  is  pretty  sure  to  cap-
ture the  less  wily  young  ones  afterwards,  as  they  will  be  very  apt  to  re-
turn to  the  same  feeding  places  to  which  their  parents  had  led  them  at
their  first  arrival.  To  await  their  coming  to  a pond  where  they  are  known
to  feed  is  generally  effectual,  but  to  me  this  mode  of  proceeding  never
afforded  much  pleasiu’e,  more  especially  because  the  appearance  of  any
other  bird  which  I wished  to  obtain  would  at  once  induce  me  to  go  after
it,  and  thus  frighten  the  game,  so  that  I rarely  procured  any  on  such  oc-
casions. But  yet,  as  I have  witnessed  the  killing  of  many  a fine  goose,  I
hope  you  will  suffer  me  to  relate  one  or  two  anecdotes  connected  with  the
shooting  of  this  kind  of  game.


CANADA  GOOSE.


15


Reader,  I am  well  acquainted  with  one  of  the  best  sportsmen  now
living  in  the  whole  of  the  western  country,  one  possessed  of  strength,  ac-
tivity, courage,  and  patience, — qualities  of  great  importance  in  a gunner.
I have  frequently  seen  him  mount  a capital  horse  of  speed  and  bottom  at
midnight,  when  the  mercury  in  the  thermometer  was  about  the  freezing
point,  and  the  ground  was  covered  with  snow  and  ice,  the  latter  of
which  so  encased  the  trees  that  you  might  imagine  them  converted  into
glass.  Well,  off  he  goes  at  a round  gallop,  his  steed  rough  shod,  but  no-
body knows  whither,  save  myself,  who  am  always  by  his  side.  He  has  a
wallet  containing  our  breakfast,  and  abundance  of  ammunition,  together
with  such  implements  as  are  necessary  on  occasions  like  the  present.  The
night  is  pitch-dark,  and  dismal  enough  ; but  who  cares  ! He  knows  the
woods  as  well  as  any  Kentucky  hunter,  and  in  this  respect  I am  not  much
behind  him.  A long  interval  has  passed,  and  now  the  first  glimpse  of  day
appears  in  the  east.  We  know  quite  well  where  we  are,  and  that  we  have
travelled  just  twenty  miles.  The  Barred  Owl  alone  interrupts  the  melan-
choly silence  of  the  hour.  Our  horses  we  secure,  and  on  foot  we  move
cautiously  towards  a “ long  pond,”  the  feeding-place  of  several  flocks  of
geese,  none  of  which  have  yet  arrived,  although  the  whole  surface  of  open
water  is  covered  with  Mallards,  Widgeons,  Pintail  Ducks,  Blue-winged
and  Green-winged  Teals.  My  friend’s  gun,  like  mine,  is  a long  and
trusty  one,  and  the  opportunity  is  too  tempting.  On  all  fours  we  cau-
tiously creep  to  the  very  edge  of  the  pond ; we  now  raise  ourselves  on
our  knees,  level  our  pieces,  and  let  fly.  The  woods  resound  with  re-
peated echoes,  the  air  is  filled  with  Ducks  of  all  sorts,  our  dogs  dash
into  the  half  frozen  water,  and  in  a few  minutes  a small  heap  of  game
lies  at  our  feet.  Now,  we  retire,  separate,  and  betake  ourselves  to  diffe-
rent sides  of  the  pond.  If  I may  judge  of  ray  companion’s  fingers  by
the  state  of  my  own,  I may  feel  certain  that  it  would  be  difficult  for
him  to  fasten  a button.  There  we  are  shivering,  with  contracted  feet  and
chattering  teeth  ; but  the  geese  are  coming,  and  their  well  known  cry,
hauk,  hauk,  awliawk,  awhawk,  resounds  through  the  air.  They  wheel
and  wheel  for  a while,  but  at  length  gracefully  alight  on  the  water,
and  now  they  play  and  wash  themselves,  and  begin  to  look  about  for
food.  There  must  be  at  least  twenty  of  them.  Twenty  more  soon  ar-
rive, and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  we  have  before  us  a flock  of  a hundred
individuals.  My  experienced  friend  has  put  a snow-white  shirt  over  his
apparel,  and  although  I am  greatly  intent  on  obser\  ing  his  motions,  I


16


CANADA  GOOSE.


see  tliat  it  is  impossible  even  for  the  keen  eye  of  the  sentinel  goose  to  fol-
low them.  Bang,  bang,  quoth  his  long  gun,  and  the  birds  in  dismay  in-
stantly start,  and  fly  towards  the  spot  where  I am.  When  they  approach
I spring  up  on  my  feet,  the  geese  shuffle,  and  instantaneously  rise  upright ;
I touch  my  triggers  singly,  and  broken-winged  and  dead  two  birds  come
heavily  to  the  ground  at  my  feet.  Oh  that  we  had  more  guns  ! But  the
business  at  this  pond  has  been  transacted.  We  collect  our  game,  return
to  our  horses,  fasten  the  necks  of  the  geese  and  ducks  together,  and  throw-
ing them  across  our  saddles,  proceed  towards  another  pond.  In  this
manner  we  continue  to  shoot  until  the  number  of  geese  obtained  would
seem  to  you  so  very  large  that  I shall  not  specify  it.

At  another  time  my  friend  proceeds  alone  to  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,
and,  as  usual,  reaches  the  margins  of  the  stream  long  before  day.  His
well- trained  steed  plunges  into  the  whirls  of  the  rapid  current,  and,  with
some  difficulty,  carries  his  bold  rider  to  an  island,  where  he  lands  drench-
ed and  cold.  The  horse  knows  what  he  has  to  do  as  well  as  his  master,
and  while  the  former  ranges  about  and  nips  the  frozen  herbage,  the  lat-
ter carefully  approaches  a well-known  pile  of  drifted  wood,  and  conceals
himself  in  it.  His  famous  dog  Nep  is  close  at  his  heels.  Now  the  dull
grey  dawn  gives  him  a dim  view  of  the  geese ; he  fires,  several  fall  on  the
spot,  and  one  severely  wounded  rises  and  alights  in  the  Indian  Chute.
Neptune  dashes  after  it,  but  as  the  current  is  powerful,  the  gunner  whist-
les to  his  horse,  who,  with  pricked  ears,  gallops  up.  He  instantly  vaults
into  the  saddle,  and  now  see  them  plunge  into  the  treacherous  stream.
The  wounded  game  is  overtaken,  the  dog  is  dragged  along,  and  at  length
on  the  Indiana  shore  the  horse  and  his  rider  have  effected  a landing.  Any
other  man  than  he  of  whose  exploits  I am  the  faithful  recorder,  would
have  perished  long  ago.  But  it  is  not  half  so  much  for  the  sake  of  the
plunder  that  he  undergoes  all  this  labour  and  danger,  as  for  the  gratifi  -
cation  it  affords  his  kind  heart  to  distribute  the  game  among  his  nume-
rous friends  in  Louisville.

On  our  eastern  shores  matters  are  differently  managed.  The  gunners
there  shoot  geese  with  the  prospect  of  pecuniary  gain,  and  go  to  work  in
another  way.  Some  attract  them  with  wooden  geese,  others  with  ac-
tual birds ; they  lie  in  ambush  for  many  hours  at  a time,  and  destroy  an
immense  number  of  them,  by  using  extremely  long  guns  ; but  as  there  is
little  sport  in  this  sort  of  shooting,  I shall  say  no  more  about  it.  Here
the  Canada  Goose  feeds  much  on  a species  of  long  slender  grass,  the  Zos-


CANADA  GOOSE.


17


iera  7narina,  along  with  marine  insects,  Crustacea,  and  small  shell-fish,
all  of  which  have  a tendency  to  destroy  the  agreeable  flavour  which  their
flesh  has  when  their  food  consists  of  fresh-water  plants,  corn,  and  grass.
They  spend  much  of  their  time  at  some  distance  from  the  shores,  become
more  shy,  diminish  in  bulk,  and  are  much  inferior  as  food  to  those  which
visit  the  interior  of  the  country.  None  of  these,  however,  are  at  all  to
be  compared  Avith  the  goslings  bred  in  the  inland  districts,  and  procured
in  September,  when,  in  my  opinion,  they  far  surpass  the  renowned  Can-
vass-backed  Duck.

A curious  mode  of  shooting  the  Canada  Goose  I have  practised  with
much  success.  I have  sunk  in  the  sand  of  the  bars  to  which  these  birds
resort  at  night,  a tight  hogshead,  to  within  an  inch  of  its  upper  edges,
and  placing  myself  within  it  at  the  approach  of  evening,  have  drawn  over
me  a quantity  of  brushwood,  placing  my  gun  on  the  sand,  and  covering
it  in  like  manner  with  twigs  and  leaves.  The  birds  would  sometimes
alight  very  near  me,  and  in  this  concealment  I have  killed  several  at  a
shot ; but  the  stratagem  answers  for  only  a few  nights  in  the  season.  Du-
ring severe  winters  these  birds  are  able  to  keep  certain  portions  of  the
deepest  parts  of  a pond  quite  open  and  free  from  ice,  by  their  continued
movements  in  the  water  ; at  all  events,  such  open  spaces  occasionally  oc-
cur in  ponds  and  lakes,  and  are  resorted  to  by  the  geese,  among  which
great  havoc  is  made.

It  is  alleged  in  the  State  of  Maine  that  a distinct  species  of  Canada
Goose  resides  there,  which  is  said  to  be  much  smaller  than  the  one  now-
under  your  notice,  and  is  described  as  resembling  it  in  all  other  particu-
lars. Like  the  true  Canada  Goose,  it  builds  a large  nest,  which  it  lines
with  its  own  down.  Sometimes  it  is  placed  on  the  sea-shore,  at  other
times  by  the  margin  of  a fresh-water  lake  or  pond.  That  species  is  dis-
tinguished there  by  the  name  of  Flight  Goose,  and  is  said  to  be  entirely
migratory,  whereas  the  Canada  Goose  is  resident.  But,  notwithstanding
all  my  exertions,  I did  not  succeed  in  procuring  so  much  as  a feather  of
this  alleged  species.

While  we  were  at  Newfoundland,  on  our  return  from  Labrador,  on
the  15th  August  1833,  small  flocks  of  the  Canada  Goose  were  already
observed  flying  southward.  In  that  country  their  appearance  is  hailed
with  delight,  and  great  numbers  of  them  are  shot.  They  breed  rather
abundantly  by  the  lakes  of  the  interior  of  that  interesting  country.  In
the  harbour  of  Great  Macatina  in  Labrador,  I saw  a large  pile  of  young


VOL.  III.


a


18


CANADA  GOOSE.


Canada  Geese,  that  had  been  procured  a few  days  before,  and  were  al-
ready salted  for  winter  use.  The  pile  consisted  of  several  hundred  indi-
viduals, all  of  which  had  been  killed  before  they  were  able  to  fly.  I was
told  there  that  this  species  fed  much  on  the  leaves  of  the  dwarf  firs,  and,
on  examining  their  gizzards,  found  the  statement  to  be  correct.

The  young  dive  very  expertly,  soon  after  their  reaching  the  water,  at
the  least  appearance  of  danger.  In  the  Southern  and  Western  States,  the
enemies  of  the  Canada  Goose  are,  by  water,  the  Alligator,  the  Garfish,
and  the  Turtle ; and  on  land,  the  Cougar,  the  Lynx,  and  the  Racoon.
While  in  the  air,  they  are  liable  to  be  attacked  by  the  White-headed
Eagle.  It  is  a very  hardy  bird,  and  individuals  have  been  kept  in  a state
of  captivity  or  domestication  for  upwards  of  forty  years.  Every  portion
of  it  is  useful  to  man,  for  besides  the  value  of  the  flesh  as  an  article  of
food,  the  feathers,  the  quills,  and  the  fat,  are  held  in  request.  The  eggs
also  afford  very  good  eating.

Anas  canadensis,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  198 — Lath.  Iiid.  Orriith.  vol.  ii.  p.  838.

Anser  canadensis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  377-

Canada  Goose,  Anas  canadensis,  Wih.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  52.  pi.  67.  fig.  4.

Anser  canadensis,  Canada  Goose,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  p.  468.

Canada  Goose,  Nvttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  349.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  rather  higher  than  broad  at  the  base,  some-
what conical,  depressed  towards  the  end,  rounded  at  the  tip.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  sloping,  the  ridge  broad  and  flattened,  the
sides  sloping,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  the  oblique  marginal  lamellsB
short,  transverse,  about  thirty  on  each  side ; the  unguis  obovate,  convex,
denticulate  on  the  inner  edge.  Nasal  groove  oblong,  parallel  to  the  ridge,
filled  by  the  soft  membrane  of  the  bill ; nostrils  medial,  lateral,  longitu-
dinal, narrow-elliptical,  open,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  straight,  with
the  angle  very  long,  narrow,  and  rounded,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  with
about  thirty  oblique  lamellae  on  a perpendicular  plane.

Head  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  long  and  slender.  Body  full,
slightly  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  behind  the  centre  of  the
body  ; legs  bare  a little  above  the  tibio-tarsal  joint ; tarsus  short,  a lit-
tle compressed,  covered  all  round  with  angular  reticulated  scales,  which
are  smaller  behind  ; hind  toe  very  small,  with  a narrow  membrane ;
third  toe  longest,  fourth  a little  shorter,  but  longer  than  second ; all  the


CANADA  GOOSE.


19


toes  reticulated  above  at  the  base,  but  with  narrow  transverse  scutella  to-
wards the  end ; the  three  anterior  connected  by  a reticulated  membrane,
the  outer  with  a thick  margin,  the  inner  with  the  margin  extended  into  a
two-lobed  web  ; claws  small,  arched,  rather  compressed,  except  that  of
the  middle  toe,  which  is  bent  obliquely  outwards  and  depressed,  with  a
curved  edge.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  with  an  obtuse  protuberance  at
the  flexure.

Plumage  close,  rather  short,  compact  above,  blended  on  the  neck  and
lower  parts  of  the  body.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  very  narrow,
of  the  back  very  broad  and  abrupt,  of  the  breast  and  belly  broadly  round-
ed. Wings,  when  closed,  extending  to  about  an  inch  from  the  end  of  the
tail,  acute ; primaries  very  strong,  curved,  the  second  longest,  the  third
slightly  shorter,  the  flrst  almost  as  long  as  the  third,  the  rest  rapidly
graduated  ; secondaries  long,  rather  narrow,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,
rounded,  of  eighteen  stiff,  rounded,  but  acuminate,  feathers.

Bill,  feet,  and  claws  black.  Iris  chestnut-brown.  Head  and  two
upper  thirds  of  the  neck  glossy  black  ; forehead,  cheeks,  and  chin,  tinged
with  brown ; lower  eyelid  white ; a broad  band  of  the  same  across  the
throat  to  behind  the  eyes  ; rump  and  tail-feathers  also  black.  The  gene-
ral colour  of  the  rest  of  the  upper  parts  is  greyish-brown,  the  wing- coverts
shaded  into  ash-grey ; all  the  feathers  terminally  edged  with  very  pale
brown ; the  lower  part  of  the  neck  passing  into  gi’eyish-white,  which  is
the  general  colour  of  the  lower  parts,  with  the  exception  of  the  abdomen,
which  is  pure  white,  the  sides,  which  are  pale  brownish-grey,  the  feathers
tipped  with  white,  and  the  lower  wing-coverts,  which  are  also  pale  brown-
ish-grey. The  margins  of  the  rump,  and  the  upper  tail- coverts,  pure
w'hite.

In  very  old  males,  I have  found  the  breast  of  a fine  pale  buff.

Length  to  end  of  tail  43  inches,  extent  of  wings  65 ; bill  along  the
ridge  2^,  in  depth  at  the  base  1 in  breadth  1 ; tarsus  3/g  ; middle  toe
and  claw  ; wing  from  flexure  20 ; tail  7^.  Weight  7 lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  somewhat  less  than  the  male,  but  similar  in  colouring,
although  the  tints  are  duller.  The  white  of  the  throat  is  tinged  with
brown;  the  lower  parts  are  always  more  grey,  and  the  black  of  the  head,
neck,  rump,  and  tail,  is  shaded  with  brown.

Length  41  inches.  Weight  5f  lb.

IS  2


( 20  )


THE  RED-THROATED  DIVER.

COLYMBUS  SEPTENTRIONALIS,  LiNN.

PLATE  CCII.  Male  in  summer,  Young  Male  in  winter,  Female,  and  Young

UNFLEDGED.

Whilst  the  icicles  are  yet  hanging  from  the  rocks  of  our  eastern
shores,  and  the  snows  are  gradually  giving  way  under  the  influence  of
the  April  rains,  the  Bluebird  is  heard  to  sound  the  first  notes  of  his  love-
song,  and  the  Red-throated  Diver  is  seen  to  commence  his  flight.  Al-
ready paired,  the  male  and  female,  side  by  side,  move  swiftly  through
the  air,  steering  their  course,  at  a great  height,  towards  some  far  distant
region  of  the  dreary  north.  Pair  after  pair  advance  at  intervals  during
the  whole  day,  and  perhaps  continue  their  journey  all  night.  Their  long
necks  are  extended,  their  feet  stretched  out  rudder-like  beyond  the  short
tail,  and  onwards  they  speed,  beating  the  air  with  great  regularity.  Now
they  traverse  a great  arm  of  the  sea,  now  cross  a peninsula ; but  let  what
may  intervene,  their  undeviating  course  holds  straight  forwards,  as  the
needle  points  to  its  pole.  High  as  they  are,  you  can  perceive  the  brilliant
white  of  their  lower  parts.  Onward  they  speed  in  silence,  and  as  I stand
gazing  after  them,  they  have  already  disappeared  from  my  view.

The  middle  of  May  has  arrived  ; our  woods  are  once  more  filled  with
the  melodies  of  numberless  warblers,  and  the  Divers  have  ceased  to  be
seen  on  our  easteim  coasts.  To  study  their  habits  at  this  season,  we  must
follow  them  to  the  islands  in  the  mouth  of  the  broad  St  Lawrence,  or  to
the  granitic  rocks  of  Labrador.  The  voyage  cannot  be  performed  with-
out great  expense,  and  may  be  attended  with  danger,  but  enthusiasm
urges  me  on,  and  now  my  bark  skims  over  the  blue  waters.  At  length
arrived  on  the  rocky  shores,  I prepare  to  visit  the  interior  of  that  rude
and  moss-clad  region.  Thousands  of  little  lakes  are  seen,  on  which  are
numberless  islets  richly  clad  with  grass  and  sedge,  the  whole  of  which
seems  as  if  it  had  grown  in  a day,  so  tender  are  the  fresh  blades,  and  so
pure  their  light  green  tint.  Iligh  over  these  waters,  the  produce  of  the
melted  snows,  the  Red-throated  Diver  is  seen  gambolling  by  the  side  of
his  mate.  The  males  emit  their  love-notes,  and,  with  necks  gracefully
curved  downwards,  speed  by  the  females,  saluting  them  with  mellow  tones
as  they  pass.  In  broad  circles  they  wheel  their  giddy  flight,  and  now.


RED-THROATED  DIVER.


21


with  fantastic  glidings  and  curves,  they  dive  towards  the  spot  of  their
choice.  Alighted  on  the  water,  how  gracefully  they  swim,  how  sportive-
ly they  beat  it  with  their  sti’ong  pinions,  how  quickly  they  plunge  and
rise  again,  and  how  joyously  do  they  manifest  to  each  other  the  depth
and  intensity  of  their  affection  ! Now  with  erected  neck  and  body  deeply
immersed  they  swim  side  by  side.  Reynard  they  perceive  cunningly  ad-
vancing at  a distance ; but  they  are  too  vigilant  for  him,  and  down  like
a flash  they  go,  nor  rise  again  until  far  beyond  his  reach.  Methinks  I
see  them  curiously  concealed  among  the  rank  weeds  under  the  bank  of
their  ov/n  islet,  their  bills  alone  raised  above  the  water,  and  there  will
they  remain  for  an  hour,  rather  than  shew  themselves  to  their  insidious
enemy,  who,  disappointed,  leaves  them  to  pursue  their  avocations.

The  Red-throated  Diver  is  found,  in  tolerable  abundance,  on  the  sea-
coast  of  the  United  States  during  autumn,  winter,  and  early  spring,  from
Maryland  to  the  extremities  of  Maine.  The  younger  the  birds,  the  far-
ther south  do  they  proceed  to  spend  the  winter,  and  it  is  rare  to  see  an
old  bird,  of  either  sex,  at  any  season  to  the  south  of  the  Bay  of  Boston.
Farther  eastward  they  become  more  common,  and  they  may  be  said  to  be
plentiful  towards  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  in  the  vicinity  of
which  a few  remain  and  breed.  I found  some  in  December,  January,
and  February  at  Boston,  where  I procured  males,  females,  and  young
birds.  The  old  had  the  red  patch  on  the  throat  rather  darker  than  in
the  breeding  season  ; the  delicate  grey  and  white  lines  on  the  neck  were
as  pure  as  I observed  them  to  be  during  summer  in  Labrador ; and  I
have  since  been  convinced  that  birds  of  this  family  undergo  very  little  if
any  change  of  colouring  after  they  have  once  acquired  their  perfect
plumage,  the  Loon  and  the  Black-throated  Diver  being  included  in  this
remark ; while,  on  the  contrary,  all  the  Grebes  with  which  I am  ac-
quainted, lose  the  beauty  of  their  plumage  as  soon  as  the  breeding  season
is  over.  This  remarkable  difference  between  the  Divers  and  the  Grebes
would  of  itself  be  sufficient  to  separate  the  two  genera,  were  there  not
also  other  distinctions.  The  Divers,  moreover,  live  on  the  sea  during  the
greater  part  of  the  year,  and  resort  to  ponds,  lakes,  or  the  borders  of
rivers  to  breed ; whilst  the  Grebes  spend  most  of  their  time  on  inland
lakes,  marshes,  and  streams.  Immediately  after  the  breeding  season,  as
soon  as  the  young  are  able  to  fly,  the  families  of  Divers  make  their  way
to  the  arms  and  inlets  of  the  sea,  rarely  entering  the  fresh  waters  until
the  following  spring.


22


RED-THROATED  DIVER.


The  Red-throated  Diver  is  at  all  times  an  extremely  shy  and  vigilant
bird,  ever  on  the  alert  to  elude  its  numerous  enemies.  The  sight  of
man  seems  invariably  to  alarm  it,  even  in  the  wildest  countries  in  which
it  breeds.  I have  often  observed  that,  while  yet  several  hundred  yards
from  them,  they  marked  my  approach  with  great  watchfulness.  First
they  would  dive  and  make  their  way  to  the  farther  end  of  the  pond,  after
which,  with  outstretched  necks,  they  would  remain  silent  and  motionless,
until  I approached  within  about  a hundred  yards,  when,  instead  of  diving
again,  as  the  Loon  always  does,  they  at  once,  with  a single  spring,  rose
from  the  water,  and  ere  I had  proceeded  a few  yards,  they  were  already
eight  or  ten  feet  above  it.  If  I crept  towards  them  through  the  tangled
mosses  or  shrubs,  they  would  swim  about  with  their  heads  elevated,  as  if
determined  to  make  their  escape  on  the  appearance  of  imminent  danger.
In  many  instances,  my  party  observed  this  species  in  small  flocks  of  five
or  six  in  the  same  lake,  when  it  happened  to  be  of  considerable  extent ;
and  as  this  was  during  the  height  of  the  breeding  season,  we  concluded
that  these  associated  birds  were  barren,  as  I ascertained  that  males  and
females,  when  once  paired,  remain  together  until  their  young  are  able  to
fly,  when  they  part  company,  until  the  next  pairing  season,  which  is  about
the  first  of  March.

This  species  begins  to  breed  in  Labrador  in  the  beginning  of  June,
and  about  a fortnight  earlier  along  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  The  numerous
nests  which  our  party  found  in  the  former  district  were  all  placed  on
small  sequestered  islands  in  the  middle  of  lakes  or  large  ponds  of  fresh
water,  rarely  more  than  one  mile  distant  from  the  sea-shore.  These  nests
consisted  merely  of  a few  blades  of  rank  grasses  loosely  put  together,  and
were  quite  flat,  without  any  down  to  warm  or  conceal  the  eggs  at  any  pe-
riod of  incubation.  The  nest  was  placed  vvithin  a few  feet  of  the  water,
and  well-beaten  tracks,  such  as  are  made  by  otters,  led  to  it.  Whenever
the  birds  went  to  this  spot  they  walked  nearly  erect  in  an  awkward  man-
ner, but  when  they  sat  in  their  nest  they  laid  themselves  flat  on  the  eggs,
in  the  manner  of  a Goose  or  Duck.  In  no  instance  did  they  alight  on  the
islands,  but  always  on  the  water,  at  some  distance,  when,  after  examining
all  around  them  for  a while,  they  crawled  silently  out,  and  moved  to  the
spot  which  contained  their  treasure.

Having  been  told  that  the  Red-throated  Diver  covers  its  eggs  with
down  in  the  manner  of  many  duck.s,  I was  surprised  to  find  the  assertion
incorrect,  and  having  killed  several  individuals  during  the  period  of  in-


RED-THROATED  DIVER.


23


cubation  and  immediately  after  it,  I carefully  examined  them,  and  found
all  of  them  fully  covered  with  down,  they  being,  in  this  respect,  quite
different  from  the  Eider  Duck,  the  Velvet  Duck,  the  Harlequin  Duck,
and  other  species  of  that  family,  nay  even  from  the  Black  Guillemot,  of
which  I shall  speak  in  the  present  volume.  Probably  it  is  on  account  of
those  birds  breeding  much  farther  north,  that,  according  to  Dr  Richakd-
soN.  they  there  line  their  nest  with  down.  We  also  found  the  Colymbus  gla-
cialis  incubating  without  any*in  its  nest.  The  idea  generally  entertained
that  this  species  never  lays  more  than  two  eggs  I found  equally  incorrect,
for  of  five  nests,  two  contained  two  eggs  each,  two  had  three  each,  and
the  fifth  had  three  young  birds.  The  eggs  measure  3 inches  in  length
by  1|  in  breadth,  and  are  of  an  elongated  elliptical  form,  nearly  equally
rounded  at  both  ends ; they  are  of  a deep  olive-brown  colour,  irregularly
marked  with  spots  of  a darker  dull  brown.  The  male  incubates  as  well
as  the  female,  and  both  are  extremely  solicitous  about  the  safety  of  their
young,  which  betake  themselves  to  the  water  on  the  day  succeeding  that
of  their  escape  from  the  egg,  and  are  from  the  first  most  expert  swimmers
and  divers.  Two  of  the  young  were  shot  by  Captain  Emery,  having
been  easily  approached  in  the  absence  of  their  parents,  at  which  he  had
shot  without  success,  they  not  having  yet  learned  from  experience  the  dan-
ger of  the  proximity  of  man.  They  dived  beautifully,  and  swam  with
great  buoyancy,  inclining  their  necks  forwards,  in  the  manner  of  the  old
birds.  This  was  on  the  5th  July  1833.  On  the  1 5th  of  the  same  month,
Thomas  Lincoln  and  my  son  John  Woodhouse,  saw  several  young
ones,  which,  although  quite  small,  were  equally  expert  at  diving.  When
swimming  by  the  side  of  their  mother  they  floated  high,  with  the  neck
quite  erect,  while  the  old  bird  swam  deep,  with  her  neck  inclined  forward.
When  the  little  ones  dived,  they  moved  under  the  water  like  so  many
turtles,  and  at  last  were  caught  on  the  bottom  of  the  pond,  which  was
small  and  shallow,  by  placing  the  gun-rods  upon  them.  So  averse  from
moving  are  the  old  birds  when  sitting  on  their  eggs,  that  they  will  not
bestir  themselves  until  in  imminent  danger,  on  which,  however,  they
scramble  to  the  water,  dive,  and,  on  emerging,  immediately  rise  on  wing
without  uttering  any  note.  The  male  only  is  noisy  on  such  occasions,
and  more  especially  when  it  returns  from  afar  to  its  mate,  when  it  evinces
its  satisfaction  by  calling  aloud,  as  it  repeatedly  passes  and  repasses  over
the  spot,  and  then  alights  in  a pompous  manner  on  the  water.

The  sexes  differ  materially  in  size,  the  male  birds  being  much  larger


24


RED-THROATED  DIVER.


than  the  females,  and  weighing  at  an  average  fully  a pound  more.  These
birds  are  extremely  tenacious  of  life.  One  which  my  son  shot  on  the
wing  fell,  dived  instantly,  and  swam  to  a considerable  distance  under
water,  but  returned  to  the  surface,  back  downwards,  and  quite  dead.

The  notes  of  the  Red-throated  Diver  are  harsh  and  rather  loud ; they
resemble  the  syllables  cac,  cac,  cac,  carah,  carali,  enounced  in  rapid  succes-
sion. In  some  instances  the  young  men  of  my  party  found  that  the  most
successful  method  of  approaching  these  birds  whilst  on  the  water,  was  to
run  as  fast  as  possible  towards  them  and  shout  loudly,  for  on  such  occa-
sions the  birds  dived  instead  of  flying  at  once,  and  on  emerging  again,  af-
forded them  much  better  chances  as  they  took  to  wing.  At  certain  times,
when  approached  while  they  have  young,  they  utter  a soft  plaintive  note,
which  evidently  conveys  to  their  offspring  their  wish  that  they  should  re-
main quiet  in  their  hiding-places.

The  Red-throated  Diver  does  not  acquire  the  full  beauty  of  its  plu-
mage until  its  fourth  year.  The  young  are  at  first  covered  with  thick
hairy  down,  of  a blackish  colour,  incbning  to  brown.  Before  they  are
fully  able  to  fly,  this  is  changed  into  a dull  grey  on  the  upper  parts,  thick-
ly sprinkled  with  white  dots  on  the  extremity  of  each  feather,  the  lower
parts  being  of  a sullied  white.  During  the  second  year  these  tints  are
firmer,  there  are  fewer  spots  above,  and  the  texture  of  the  lower  parts  is
more  silky.  In  the  third,  both  sexes  assume  the  fine  grey  of  the  hind-
neck,  with  its  longitudinal  white  stripes,  and  here  and  there  a few  spots
of  red  on  the  lower  part  of  the  throat.  The  next  spring  their  plumage  is
perfect.

I have  never  observed  any  of  these  birds  on  our  inland  lakes  or  rivers.
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Boston,  and  along  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  they  are
best  known  by  the  names  of  “ Scape-grace”  and  “ Cape-racer.”  By  the
9th  of  August  the  young  birds  had  left  the  fresh- water  lakes  and  ponds
for  the  bays  on  the  coast,  and  we  were  informed  by  the  settlers,  both  in
Newfoundland  and  Labrador,  that,  by  the  last  days  of  September,  none
were  to  be  found  in  those  countries.

The  dislike  which  this  species  shews  to  fresh-water  after  the  breeding-
season  is  such,  that  they  are  rarely  seen  in  the  upper  part  of  large  bays,
but  prefer  for  their  winter  residence  the  shores  of  sea-islands  and  barren
rocks.  Thus,  at  that  season,  they  are  met  with  about  the  outer  islands  of
the  Bay  of  F undy,  and  those  along  our  eastern  coast.

Wliile  in  fresh  water,  the  Red-throated  Diver  feeds  principally  on


RED-THROATED  DIVER.


25


small  fish,  shrimps,  leeches,  snails,  and  aquatic  insects.  The  masses  of
feather-like  substances  often  found  in  the  stomachs  of  Grebes,  I have
never  met  with  in  this  species.  Its  flesh  is  oily,  tough,  dark-coloured,  and
disagreeable  to  the  taste,  although  I saw  some  Mountain  Indians  feeding
upon  it  at  Labrador  with  apparent  pleasure.


CoLYMBUs  SEPTENTRIONAI.IS,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vo!.  i.  p.  220 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.
vol.  ii.  p.  801 Ch.  Bonap.  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  421.

Bed-throated  Diver,  Colymbus  septentrionalis,  Richards  and  Swains.  Fauna
Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  476 Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  519.

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  slender  but  strong,  straight,  rather  com-
pressed, tapering  to  a point.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  almost
straight,  the  ridge  convex,  as  are  the  sides,  the  edges  sharp  and  involute ;
nasal  groove  basal,  short ; nostrils  basal,  lateral,  direct,  oblong,  pervious.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  extremely  narrow  and  extending  beyond
the  middle,  the  dorsal  line  straight  and  sloping  upwards  to  the  point,  the
ridge  convex,  but  narrower  than  that  of  the  upper  mandible,  the  edges
sharp  and  involute ; the  point  of  both  mandibles  rather  sharp.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  rather  long
and  slender.  Eyes  rather  small.  Body  elongated,  somewhat  depressed.
Wings  small.  Feet  short,  rather  large,  placed  very  far  back  ; tibia  al-
most entirely  concealed;  tarsus  short,  exceedingly  compressed,  sharp-
edged  before  and  behind,  covered  all  over  with  reticulated  angular  scales ;
hind  toe  extremely  small,  connected  with  the  second  by  a very  small
membrane ; the  anterior  toes  united  by  reticulated  membranes,  the  fourth
longest,  the  third  a little  shorter,  the  second  considerably  shorter  than  the
third ; all  covered  anteriorly  with  very  narrow  transverse  scutella,  the
second  toe  with  a free  two-lobed  membrane ; claws  very  small,  depressed,
rounded.

Plumage  short  and  dense ; of  the  head  and  neck  very  short,  blended ;
of  the  lower  parts  blended,  short,  and  with  a silky  gloss  ; of  the  upper
slightly  glossed  and  somewhat  compact ; the  feathers  in  general  oblong
and  rounded.  Wings  proportionally  very  small  and  narrow,  curved  ;
primaries  strong,  tapering,  first  longest,  second  almost  as  long,  the  rest
rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  broad,  rounded.  Tail  extremely  short,
rounded,  of  twenty  rounded  feathers.


26


RED-THliOATED  DIVER.


Bill  bluish-black.  Iris  deep  bright  red.  Feet  brownish-black,  the
anterior  edge  of  the  tarsus,  the  upper  surface  of  the  toes,  the  claws,  and
part  of  the  webs,  pale  livid  flesh-colour.  Fore  part  and  sides  of  the  head,
throat,  and  sides  of  the  neck,  of  a fine  bluish-grey  ; fore  part  of  the  neck
rich  brownish-red ; hind  part  of  the  head  and  hind  neck  longitudinally
streaked  with  greenish-black  and  pure  white,  each  feather  black  in  the
middle,  with  the  sides  white,  the  colours  disposed  in  lines.  The  upper
surface  brownish-black,  tinged  with  green,  more  or  less  mottled  with
white  according  to  age,  excepting  the  primary  quills  and  the  tail-feathers,
the  latter  of  which  are  merely  paler  at  the  end.  The  whole  under  sur-
face pure  white,  excepting  the  feathers  on  the  sides  under  the  wings,
some  of  those  about  the  vent,  and  the  lower  tail-coverts,  which  are  grey-
ish-brown, with  white  margins  and  tips.

Length  to  end  of  tail  25|  inches,  to  end  of  claws  27,  extent  of  wings
; bill  2j^j,  gape  3|  ; tarsus  3,  fourth  toe  and  claw  3| ; wing  from
flexure  11|,  tail  3.  Weight  4 lb.

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  CCII.  Fig.  3.

The  female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male  in  form  and  colouring,  but
is  considerably  smaller.

Length  to  end  of  tail  25  inches,  to  end  of  claws  28^;  ^ ; extent  of  wings
43.  Weight  3 lb.

Male  in  winter  immature.  Plate  CCII.  Fig.  2.

In  this  state  the  principal  differences  are  the  following : — The  fore
part  of  the  neck,  instead  of  being  of  a uniform  rich  brownish-red,  is  mere-
ly mottled  with  that  colour ; all  the  feathers  of  the  upper  surface  have
each  two  white  spots  towards  the  end ; the  tail-feathers  are  edged  and  ter-
minated with  white ; the  colouring  in  general  is  somewhat  less  pure  and
deep,  and  the  bill  is  of  a much  paler  tint.

Young  bird  unfledged.  Plate  CCII.  Fig.  4.

The  young  are  at  first  covered  with  a dense  elastic  down  of  a greyish
black  colour,  tinged  with  brown.  The  bill  is  bluish-black,  its  basal  edges
yellow ; the  iris  reddish-brown.


( 27  )


THE  GREA.T  RED-BREASTED  RAIL,  OR  FRESH-
WATER MARSH-HEN.

Rallus  e leg  a ns.

PLATE  CCIII.  Male  and  Young.

No  doubt  exists  in  my  mind  that  Wilson  considered  this  beautiful
bird  as  merely  the  adult  of  Rallus  crepitans,  the  manners  of  which  he  de-
scribed, as  studied  at  Great  Egg  Harbour  in  New  Jersey,  while  he  gave
in  his  works  the  figure  and  colouring  of  the  present  species.  My  friend
Thomas  Nuttall  has  done  the  same,  without,  I apprehend,  having  seen
the  two  birds  together.  Always  unwilling  to  find  faults  in  so  ardent  a stu-
dent of  nature  as  Wilson,  I felt  almost  mortified  when,  after  having,  in
the  company  of  my  worthy  and  learned  friend,  the  Reverend  John  Bach-
man, carefully  examined  the  habits  of  both  species,  which,  in  form  and
general  appearance,  are  closely  allied,  I discovered  the  error  which  he  had
in  this  instance  committed.  Independently  of  the  great  difference  as  to
size  between  the  two  species,  there  are  circumstances  connected  with  their
habits  which  mark  them  as  distinct.  The  Rallus  elegans  is  altogether  a
fresh-water  bird,  while  the  R.  crepitans  never  removes  from  the  salt-water
marshes,  that  are  met  with  along  our  eastern  Atlantic  coasts,  from  the
Jerseys  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Nay,  the  present  species  is  found  at  con-
siderable distances  inland,  where  it  breeds  and  spends  the  whole  year ;
whereas  the  latter  never  goes  farther  from  its  maritime  haunts  than  the
borders  of  the  salt-marshes,  and  this  merely  on  certain  occasions,  when
driven  thither  by  the  high  risings  of  tides.  The  Fresh-water  Marsh-hen,
besides,  is  confined  to  the  Southern  States,  a few  stragglers  only  having
been  observed  farther  eastward  than  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  and  these
only  in  fresh-water  meadows.

So  long  ago  as  the  year  1810,  on  the  29th  May,  I caught  one  of  these
birds,  a female,  at  Henderson,  in  the  State  of  Kentucky,  when  I made
the  following  memorandum  respecting  it : — “ It  is  an  excessively  shy  bird,
runs  with  great  celerity,  and  when  caught,  cries  like  a common  fowl.”
It  weighed  eleven  ounces  avoirdupois  ; its  total  length  was  20^  inches,
and  its  alar  extent  22.

This  species  constantly  resides  in  the  fresh-water  marshes  and  ponds


23


GREAT  RED-BREASTED  RAIL.


in  the  interior  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  the  Floridas,  and  Louisiana,
from  which  a few  migrate,  and  probably  breed  as  far  to  the  eastward  as  the
wet  meadows  of  the  Delaware  and  Schuylkil  rivers,  in.the  vicinity  of  which
I killed  one  female  in  New  Jersey,  a few  miles  from  Camden,  in  July  1832,
in  company  with  my  friends  Edward  Harris  and  Mr  Ogden,  of  that
city.  On  inquiring  of  numerous  hunters,  I was  told  by  several  of  them
that  they  now  and  then  obtained  a few  of  these  birds,  which  they  consi-
dered as  very  rare,  and  knew  only  by  the  name  of  “ King  Rails.”  On
recently  examining  the  museums  of  our  eastern  cities  my  friend  John
Bachman  saw  only  one  specimen;  and  Mr  William  Cooper  of  NewYork
assured  him  that  he  had  never  seen  any  other  individuals  than  those  sent
to  him  from  Charleston.  Mr  Bachman  was  present  at  the  killing  of  a
specimen  near  Philadelphia,  which  ivas  considered  as  a very  old  individual
of  the  Rallus  crepitans.  In  Louisiana,  the  Creoles  know  this  bird  by  the
name  of  Grand  Rale  de  Prairie.

x\s  the  Fresh- water  Marsh-Hen  is  abundant  in  South  Carolina,  I
shall  attempt  to  describe  its  habits  as  observed  in  that  State,  both  by  my-
self and  by  my  friend  John  Bachman,  of  whose  notes,  delivered  to  me  for
the  purpose,  I shall  make  free  use.  “ Although  not  nearly  so  numerous
as  the  other  species,  they  are  not  rare  in  that  country,  in  certain  favour-
able situations.  Wherever  there  are  extensive  marshes  by  the  sides  of
sluggish  streams,  where  the  bellowings  of  the  alligator  are  heard  at  inter-
vals, and  the  pipings  of  myriads  of  frogs  fill  the  air,  there  is  found  the
Fresh-water  Marsh-hen,  and  there  it  may  be  seen  gliding  swiftly  among
the  tangled  rank  grasses  and  aquatic  weeds,  or  standing  on  the  broad
leaves  of  the  yellow  Cyamus  and  fragrant  Water-lily,  or  forcing  its  way
through  the  dense  foliage  of  Pontederiae  and  Sagittarise.  There,  during
the  sickly  season,  it  remains  secure  from  the  search  of  man,  and  there,  on
some  hillock  or  little  island  of  the  marsh,  it  builds  its  nest.  In  such
places  I have  found  so  many  as  twenty  pairs  breeding  within  a space  ha-
ving a diameter  of  thirty  yards.  The  nests  were  placed  on  the  ground,
and  raised  to  the  height  of  six  or  eight  inches  by  means  of  withered  weeds
and  grasses.  The  number  of  eggs  was  nine  or  ten.  About  the  middle
of  March  I found  a few  nests  containing  two  or  three  eggs  each  ; but,  in
my  opinion,  the  greater  number  of  these  birds  commence  breeding  about
the  middle  of  April.  They  appear  to  repair  their  nests  from  time  to  time,
and  to  return  to  them  several  years  in  succession.”

The  young,  which  are  at  first  black,  leave  the  nest  as  soon  as  they


GREAT  RED-BREASTED  RAIL.


29


burst  the  shell,  and  follow  their  mother,  who  leads  them  along  the  bor-
ders of  the  streams  and  pools,  where  they  find  abundance  of  food,  con-
sisting of  grass-seeds,  insects,  tadpoles,  leeches,  and  small  crayfish.  At
this  early  period,  when  running  among  the  grass,  which  they  do  with
great  activity,  they  may  easily  be  mistaken  for  meadow-mice.  My  friend
Bachman,  who  had  several  times  attempted  to  raise  these  birds,  with  the
view  of  domesticating  them,  did  not  succeed,  principally,  he  thinks,  on
account  of  the  difficulty  of  procuring  enough  of  their  accustomed  food.
They  all  died  in  a few  days,  although  the  greatest  attention  was  paid  to
them.

When  grown  they  feed  on  a variety  of  substances,  and  it  has  appeared
to  me  that  they  eat  a much  greater  proportion  of  seeds  and  other  vege-
table matters  than  the  Salt-water  Marsh-PIens.  It  is  true,  however,
that,  in  the  gizzard  of  the  latter  we  find  portions  of  the  Spartina  glabra  ;
but  when  that  kind  of  food  is  not  to  be  procured,  which  is  the  case  du-
ring three-fourths  of  the  year,  they  feed  principally  on  “ Fiddlers,”  small
fish,  and  mollusca.  In  the  gizzard  of  the  present  species,  besides  the  food
already  mentioned,  I have  always  found  a much  greater  quantity  of  the
seeds  of  such  grasses  as  grow  in  the  places  frequented  by  them.  On  one
occasion  I found  the  gizzard  crammed  with  seeds  of  tlie  cane  (Jrundo
tecta)  ; and  that  of  another  contained  a large  quantity  of  the  seed  of  the
common  oat,  which  had  evidently  been  picked  up  on  a newly  sown  field
adjoining  to  the  marsh.  In  autumn  I have  killed  this  species  in  corn-
fields, in  the  company  of  John  Bachman,  Paul  H.  Lees,  Esq.  and
others.  These  birds  are  rarely  shot  by  common  gunners,  on  account  of
the  difficulty  of  raising  them,  and  because  they  generally  confine  them-
selves to  places  so  swampy  and  covered  with  briars,  smilaxes,  and  rough
weeds,  that  they  are  scarcely  accessible.  But  although  they  are  thus
safe  from  man,  they  are  not  without  numerous  enemies.

My  friend  Bachman  once  killed  a large  Moccasin  snake,  on  opening
which  he  found  an  old  bird  of  this  species,  that  had  evidently  been  swal-
lowed but  a short  time  before.  Its  feathers  are  frequently  found  lying  on
the  banks  of  rice-fields,  ponds,  and  lagoons,  in  places  where  the  tracks  of
the  minx  plainly  disclose  the  plunderer.  The  Barred  Owl  and  the  Great
Horned  Owl  also  occasionally  succeed  in  capturing  them  in  the  dusk.
“ On  one  occasion,”  says  my  friend  Bachman,  in  a note  addressed  to  me,
“ while  placed  on  a stand  for  deer,  I saw  a wild  cat  creeping  through  a
marsh  that  was  near  to  me,  evidently  following  by  stealthy  steps  some-


3U


GREAT  REG-BREASTED  RAIL.


thing  that  he  was  desirous  of  making  his  prey.  Presently  he  made  a sud-
den pounce  into  a bunch  of  grass,  when  I immediately  heard  the  piercing
cries  of  the  Marsh-Hen,  and  shortly  after  came  passing  by  me  the  suc-
cessful murderer  with  the  bird  in  his  mouth.”

“ In  seasons  of  great  drought,  when  the  marshes  which  are  their  fa-
vourite haunts  become  dry,  these  birds  have  been  known  entirely  to  dis-
appear from  the  neighbourhood,  and  riot  to  return  until  after  heavy  rains,
having  in  the  mean  time,  no  doubt,  retired  to  the  shores  of  the  larger  and
deeper  ponds  of  the  swamps  of  the  interior.”

The  young  of  this  species  acquire  the  redness  of  their  plumage  du-
ring the  first  summer,  and  increase  in  size  and  beauty  for  several  years,
without  experiencing  any  change  in  their  colouring  after  the  spring  fol-
lowing that  of  their  birth.  The  sexes  are  scarcely  distinguishable  other-
wise than  by  the  difference  of  size,  the  males  being  considerably  larger
than  the  females.  I am  not  aware  that  this  species  raises  more  than  one
brood  in  the  season,  although,  when  its  eggs  have  been  destroyed,  it  may
lay  a second  time.

The  flight  of  this  Rail  resembles  that  of  the  salt-water  kind,  but
is  considerably  stronger  and  more  protracted.  When  suddenly  flushed,
they  rise  and  go  off  with  a chuck,  their  legs  dangling  beneath,  and  gene-
rally proceed  in  a straight  line  for  some  distance,  after  which  they  drop
among  the  thickest  grass,  and  run  off  with  surprising  speed.  In  several
instances  they  have  been  known  to  stand  before  a careful  pointer.  They
are  less  apt  to  take  to  the  water  than  the  Rallus  crepitans,  and  are  by  no
means  so  expert  at  diving.  Their  number  does  not  appear  to  be  dimi-
nished in  winter  by  any  migratory  movements.  Their  cries,  which  do
not  differ  much  from  those  of  the  other  species,  are  less  frequently  re-
peated after  the  breeding  season.

Few  birds  afford  better  food  than  this  species : during  autumn,  when,
feeding  chiefly  on  grass  seeds,  they  are  juicy  and  tender ; in  spring,  how-
ever, they  are  less  delicate.  Their  superiority  in  size  over  all  other  birds
of  the  genus  that  occur  in  the  United  States,  renders  them  valuable  game
to  the  knowing  sportsman  and  epicure.  Their  eggs  also  are  excellent  as
food,  being  much  preferable  to  those  of  the  common  fowl.

I regret  that  I am  obliged  to  conclude  this  account,  without  being
able  to  describe  the  eggs,  which,  although  well  known  to  my  friend  John
Bachman,  have  not  yet  come  under  my  inspection,  but  which  I trust  I
shall  have  an  opportunity  of  figuring  in  the  concluding  plates  of  my  work.


GREAT  RED-BREASTED  RAIL.


31


Great  Eed-breasted  Rail,  or  Fresh-water  Marsh  FIen.

Rallus  elegans.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  compressed,  very  slightly
curved,  deep  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  almost
straight  until  towards  the  end,  where  it  is  slightly  curved,  the  ridge
flattish  at  the  base,  and  extending  a little  on  the  forehead,  convex  to-
wards the  end ; a deep  groove  runs  on  either  side  parallel  to  the  ridge
for  two-thirds  of  the  whole  length  ; the  edges  inflected,  with  a very  slight
notch  close  to  the  tip.  Nostrils  lateral,  linear,  direct,  open  and  pervious.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long,  extremely  narrow,  the  sides
erect,  slightly  convex,  the  edges  inflected,  the  tip  narrowed.

Head  small,  oblong,  much  compressed.  Neck  long  and  slender.
Body  slender,  much  compressed.  Feet  long;  tibia  bare  a considerable
way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  rather  long,  strong,  compressed,  anteriorly
covered  with  broad  scutella,  posteriorly  with  smaller,  and  on  the  sides  re-
ticulated ; hind  toe  very  small  and  slender,  middle  toe  longest,  fourth
considerably  shorter,  and  but  little  longer  than  the  second ; toes  free,  scu-
tellate  above,  compressed,  granulate  beneath  ; claws  of  moderate  length,
arched,  slender,  much  compressed,  acute,  flat,  and  marginate  beneath.

Plumage  rather  stiff,  compact  and  glossed  on  the  upper  parts.  Feathers
of  the  head  and  neck  short  and  blended ; of  the  forehead  with  the  shaft
enlarged,  and  extended  beyond  the  tip.  Wings  very  short  and  broad  ;
alula  large  ; primaries  curved,  broad,  tapering  but  obtuse,  third  longest,
second  scarcely  shorter,  first  and  seventh  about  equal ; secondaries  weak,
broad,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  feeble  rounded
feathers ; the  upper  and  lower  coverts  nearly  as  long  as  the  tail-feathers.

Lower  mandible  and  edges  of  upper  brownish-yellow  ; ridge  of  upper,
and  tips  of  both,  deep  brown.  Iris  bright  red.  Feet  yellowish-brown,
tinged  with  olive ; claws  of  the  same  colour.  Upper  part  of  head
and  hind  neck  dull  brown,  the  bristle-like  shafts  of  the  frontal  feathers
brownish-black ; a brownish-orange  line  from  the  bill  over  the  eye ; a
broader  band  of  the  same  colour  from  the  lower  mandible,  the  interme-
diate space  dusky ; chin  white.  The  upper  parts  in  general  are  streaked
with  brownish-black  and  light  olive-brown,  the  two  sides  of  each  featlier
being  of  the  latter  colour.  Wing-coverts  dull  chestnut,  most  of  them  ir-
regidarly  tipped  with  brownish-white.  Alula  and  primaries  deep  olive-


32


GREAT  RED-BREASTED  RAIL.


brown ; secondaries  and  tail-feathers  like  the  back.  Sides  and  fore  part
of  the  neck,  and  greater  part  of  the  breast,  bright  orange-brown  ; sides
and  lower  wing-coverts  undulated  with  deep  brown  and  greyish- white ;
tibial  feathers  pale  greyish-brown,  faintly  barred  with  darker,  as  is  the
hind  part  of  the  abdomen,  the  fore  part  being  uniform  pale  greyish-
brown  ; lateral  lower  tail-coverts  white,  each  with  a blackish-brown  spot
near  the  end  ; those  in  the  middle  banned  with  black  and  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  19  inches,  to  end  of  claws  26,  extent  of  wings
25;  bill  2f  ; tarsus  2J,  middle  toe  and  claw  2^§  ; wing  from  flexure  7,
tail  2|.  Weight  1 lb.  9 oz.

Adult  Female.

The  female,  which  is  smaller,  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  has  the  tints
somewhat  duller.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18  inches,  to  end  of  claws  22|,  extent  of  wings
24.  W'eight  1 lb.  2 oz.

Young  in  autumn.  Plate  CCIII.  Fig.  2.

The  young  in  autumn  and  fully  fledged  resemble  the  fenlale,  but
are  duller  in  their  colours.


( 33  )


THE  CLAPPER  RAIL,  OR  SALT-WATER  MARSH-

HEN.

Rallus  crepitans,  Gmel.

PLATE  CCIV.  Male  and  Female.

Although  this  species  is  a constant  resident,  and  extremely  abundant
along  the  salt  marshes  and  reedy  sea  islands  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia^
Florida,  Alabama,  and  Louisiana,  to  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi,  and
probably  farther  south,  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  it  leaves  these  districts
in  considerable  numbers  in  spring,  and  extends  its  movements  along  the
Atlantic  shores  as  far  as  the  Middle  States.  They  confine  themselves  en-
tirely to  the  salt-marshes  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Atlantic,  the
islands  and  the  channels  between  them  and  the  main  shores,  but  are  never
seen  inland  or  on  fresh  waters,  unless  when,  during  high  tides,  they  remove
to  the  margins  of  the  main,  where,  indeed,  during  heavy  gales  and  high
seas,  these  poor  birds  are  forced  to  take  refuge,  in  order  to  escape  the  de-
structive fury  of  the  tempest  that,  notwithstanding  their  utmost  exertions,
destroys  great  numbers  of  them.  On  all  such  occasions  the  birds  appear
greatly  intimidated  and  stupified,  and  as  if  out  of  their  proper  element.
Those  individuals  which  leave  the  south  for  a season,  reach  the  shores  of
New  Jersey  about  the  middle  of  April,  and  return  to  the  southern  States
about  the  beginning  of  October,  to  spend  the  winter  along  with  their
young,  after  which  period  none  are  to  be  found  in  the  Middle  Districts.
Few  if  any  ever  go  beyond  Long  Island  in  the  State  of  New  York;  at  least
I have  never  seen  or  heard  of  one  farther  east.  Their  migrations  take  place
under  night,  and  in  perfect  silence ; but  the  moment  they  arrive  at  their
destination,  they  announce  their  presence  by  a continuation  of  loud  cack-
lings,  meant  no  doubt  as  an  expression  of  their  joy.  Having  studied  the
habits  of  these  interesting  birds  in  the  Jerseys,  in  South  Carolina,  and  in
the  Floridas,  on  the  maritime  borders  of  all  of  which  they  breed,  I shall
here  attempt  to  describe  them.

In  these  countries,  from  about  the  beginning  of  March  to  that  of
April,  the  salt-marshes  resound  witli  the  cries  of  the  Clapper  Rail,  which
resemble  the  syllables  cac,  cac,  cac,  cac,  cd,  cdhd,  cdhd.  The  commence-
ment of  the  cry,  which  is  heard  quite  as  frequently  during  day  as  by


c


S4


CLAPPER  RAIL.


night,  is  extremely  loud  and  rapid,  its  termination  lower  and  protracted.
At  the  report  of  a gun,  when  thousands  of  these  birds  instantaneously
burst  forth  Avith  their  cries,  you  may  imagine  what  an  uproar  they  make.
This  bird  seems  to  possess  the  power  of  ventriloquism,  for,  when  several
hundred  yards  off,  its  voice  often  seems  to  be  issuing  from  the  grass
around  you.  At  this  period,  the  males  are  very  pugnacious,  and  combats
are  rife  until  each  has  selected  a female  for  the  season.  The  males  stand
erect  and  cry  aloud  the  least  sound  they  hear,  guard  their  mates,  and
continue  faithfully  to  protect  them  until  the  young  make  their  appear-
ance. These  come  more  under  the  care  of  the  mother,  who  leads  them
about  until  they  have  attained  a considerable  size,  and  are  able  to  shift
for  themselves.  The  nest  is  large,  constructed  of  marsh  plants,  and  fas-
tened to  the  stems  in  the  midst  of  the  thickest  tufts,  above  high-water
mark.  The  materials  of  which  it  is  formed  are  so  well  interlaced  with
the  plants  around  them,  as  to  prevent  their  being  washed  away  by  extra-
ordinarily high  tides,  Avhich,  however,  sometimes  carry  off  and  destroy
the  eggs,  as  well  as  many  of  the  sitting  birds,  whose  attachment  to  them
is  so  great,  that  they  are  now  and  then  drowned  while  endeavouring  to
keep  them  safe.  The  nest  is  very  deep,  so  that  the  eggs  seem  placed  in
the  bottom  of  a bowl  or  funnel.  They  are  from  eight  to  fifteen  in  num-
ber, measure  an  inch  and  a half  in  length  by  one  and  an  eighth  in  breadth,
and  have  a pale  buff  colour,  sparingly  sprinkled  with  light  umber  , and
purplish  spots.  The  period  of  incubation  is  fourteen  days.  When  un-
disturbed, this  species  lays  only  one  set  of  eggs  in  the  season ; but  as  the
eggs  are  in  request  as  a delicious  article  of  food,  they  are  gathered  in
great  numbers,  and  I myself  have  collected  so  many  as  seventy-two
dozens  in  the  course  of  a day.  The  nest  is  generally  open  at  top,  and
then  is  very  easily  discovered,  although  sometimes  the  reeds  are  so  arranged
about  them  as  to  conceal  them  from  the  view.  When  the  birds  are  sit-
ting, they  suffer  you  to  approach  within  a few  feet ; but,  as  if  aware  of
your  intention,  they  glide  away  in  silence  to  some  distance,  and  remain
crouched  among  the  grass  until  you  have  retired.  When,  on  returning,
the  poor  bird  finds  that  her  treasure  has  been  stolen,  she  immediately
proclaims  her  grief  aloud,  and  in  this  is  joined  by  her  faithful  mate.  In
a few  days,  however,  more  eggs  are  deposited,  although,  I believe,  never
in  the  same  nest.  This  species  may  be  called  gregarious,  yet  the  nests
are  seldom  nearer  to  each  other  than  five  or  ten  yards.  They  are  placed
in  the  thickest  and  most  elevated  tufts  of  grass,  principally  near  the  edges


CLAPPER  RAIL.


.35


of  the  many  lagoons  that  everywhere  intersect  the  sea  marshes,  so  that  a
man  may  go  from  one  to  another,  finding  them  with  ease  as  he  proceeds
along  the  muddy  shores.  In  the  Jerseys,  it  forms  almost  a regular  occu-
pation to  collect  the  eggs  of  this  bird,  and  there  I have  seen  twenty  or
more  persons  gathering  them  by  thousands  dui’ing  the  season ; in  fact,  it
is  not  an  uncommon  occurrence  for  an  egger  to  carry  home  a hundred
dozens  in  a day ; and  when  this  havock  is  continued  upwards  of  a month,
you  may  imagine  its  extent.  The  abundance  of  the  birds  themselves  is
almost  beyond  belief ; but  if  you  suppose  a series  of  salt  marshes  twenty
miles  in  length,  and  a mile  in  breadth,  while  at  every  eight  or  ten  steps
one  or  two  birds  may  be  met  with,  you  may  calculate  their  probable
number.

During  ebb,  the  Clapper  Rail  advances  towards  the  edge  of  the  wa-
ters as  they  recede,  and  searches,  either  among  the  grasses,  or  along  the
deep  furrows  made  by  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tides,  for  its  food,  which
consists  principally  of  small  crabs,  a species  of  salt-water  snail  attached
to  the  rushes,  the  fry  of  fishes,  aquatic  insects,  and  plants.  When  the
tide  flows,  they  gradually  return,  and  at  high-water  they  resort  to  the
banks,  where  they  remain  concealed  until  the  waters  begin  to  retreat.
This  species  is  by  no  means  exclusively  nocturnal,  for  it  moves  about  in
search  of  food  during  the  whole  of  the  day,  in  this  respect  resembling  the
Gallinules.  Their  courage  is  now  and  then  brought  to  the  test  by  the
sudden  approach  of  some  of  their  winged  enemies,  such  as  a Hawk  or  an
Owl,  especially  the  Marsh  Hawk,  which  is  often  attacked  by  them  while
sailing  low  over  the  grass  in  which  they  are  commonly  concealed.  On
such  occasions,  the  Rail  rises  a few  yards  in  the  air,  strikes  at  the  ma-
rauder with  bill  and  claws,  screaming  aloud  all  the  while,  and  dives  again
among  the  grass,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  bird  of  prey,  which  usually
moves  oft*  at  full  speed.  They  are  not  so  fortunate  in  their  encounters
with  such  hawks  as  pounce  from  on  high  on  their  prey,  such  as  the  Red-
tailed and  Red-shouldered  Hawks,  against  which  they  have  no  chance  of
defending  themselves.  Minxes,  racoons,  and  wild  cats  destroy  a great
number  of  them  during  night,  and  many  are  devoured  by  turtles  and  ra-
venous fishes  ; but  their  worst  enemy  is  man.  My  friend  Bachman  has
shot  so  many  as  sixty  in  the  course  of  four  hours,  and  others  have  killed
double  that  number  in  double  the  time.

The  Salt-water  Marsh  Hen  swims  with  considerable  ease,  though  not
swiftly  or  gracefully.  While  in  this  act,  it  extends  its  neck  forward,  and

c 2


36


CLAPPER  RAIL.


strikes  the  water  with  its  feet,  as  if  unwilling  to  move  far  at  a time,  the
motion  of  its  neck  resembling  that  of  the  Gallinules.  It  dives  well,  re-
mains a considerable  time  under  water,  and  in  this  manner  dexterously
eludes  its  pursuers,  although  it  certainly  does  not  possess  the  power  of
holding  fast  to  the  bottom,  as  some  persons  have  alleged.  When  hard
pressed,  it  often  sinks  just  below  the  surface,  keeping  the  bill  above  in
order  to  breathe,  and  in  this  position,  if  not  detected,  remains  for  a consi-
derable time.  If  perceived  and  approached,  it  instantly  dives,  and  uses
its  wings  to  accelerate  its  progress,  but  rises  as  soon  as  it  comes  to  a place
of  safety.

Their  movements  on  the  ground,  or  over  the  partially  submersed  or
floating  beds  of  weeds,  are  extremely  rapid,  and  they  run  swiftly  off  be-
fore a dog,  the  utmost  exertions  of  which  are  required  to  force  them  on
wing.  Such  an  attempt  by  man  would  prove  utterly  futile,  unless  he
were  to  come  upon  them  unawares.  When  not  pursued,  and  feeling  se-
cure, they  walk  in  a deliberate  manner,  the  body  considerably  inclined,
now  and  then  jerking  the  tail  upwards,  although  by  no  means  so  fre-
quently as  Gallinules  are  wont  to  do.  On  the  least  appearance  of  danger,
they  lower  the  head,  stretch  out  the  neck,  and  move  off  with  incompara-
ble speed,  always  in  perfect  silence.  They  have  thousands  of  paths
among  the  rank  herbage,  crossing  each  other  so  often  that  they  can  very
easily  escape  pursuit ; and  besides,  they  have  a power  of  compressing
their  body  to  such  a degree,  as  frequently  to  force  a passage  between  two
stems  so  close,  that  one  could  hardly  believe  it  possible  for  them  to  squeeze
themselves  through.  When  put  up,  they  fly  slowly  and  generally  straight
before  you,  with  their  legs  dangling,  so  that  they  are  very  easily  shot  by
a quick  sportsman,  as  they  rarely  fly  far  at  a time  on  such  occasions,  but
prefer  pitching  down  again  into  the  first  tuft  of  rank  grass  in  their  way.
When  on  their  migrations,  however,*  they  pass  low  and  swiftly  over  the
marshes,  or  the  water,  stretched  to  their  full  extent,  and  with  a constant
beat  of  the  wings.

The  young,  which  are  at  first  covered  with  down  of  a black  colour,
obtain  their  full  plumage  before  the  winter  arrives,  and  after  this  under-
go little  change  of  colour,  although  they  increase  in  size  for  a year  after.
In  the  Eastern  States,  this  species  is  not  held  in  much  estimation  as  an
article  of  food,  perhaps  in  a great  measure  on  account  of  the  quantity  of
Soras  met  with  there  during  early  autumn,  and  which  are  certainly  more
delicate ; but  in  the  Southern  States,  especially  during  winter,  they  are


CLAPPER  RAIL.


37


considered  good  for  the  table,  and  a great  number  are  killed  and  offered
for  sale  in  the  markets.  Numbers  are  destroyed  by  torch  light,  which  so
dazzles  their  eyes,  as  to  enable  persons  fond  of  the  sport  to  knock  them
down  with  poles  or  paddles  during  high  tides.  It  is  by  day,  however,
that  they  are  usually  shot,  and  as  this  kind  of  sport  is  exceedingly  plea-
sant, I will  attempt  to  describe  it.

About  Charleston,  in  South  Carolina,  the  shooting  of  Marsh  Hens
takes  place  from  September  to  February,  a few  days  in  each  month  du-
ring the  spring-tides.  A light  skiff  or  canoe  is  procured,  the  latter  being
much  preferable,  and  paddled  by  one  or  two  experienced  persons,  the
sportsman  standing  in  the  bow,  and  his  friend,  if  he  has  one  with  him,
taking  his  station  in  the  stern.  At  an  early  hour  they  proceed  to  the
marshes,  amid  many  boats  containing  parties  on  the  same  errand.  There
is  no  lack  of  shooting-grounds,  for  every  creek  of  salt-water  swarms  with
Marsh  Hens.  The  sportsman  who  leads  has  already  discharged  his  bar-
rels, and  on  either  side  of  his  canoe  a bird  has  fallen.  As  the  boat  moves
swiftly  towards  them,  more  are  raised,  and  although  he  may  not  be  ready,
the  safety  of  the  bird  is  in  imminent  jeopardy,  for  now  from  another  bark
double  reports  are  heard  in  succession.  The  tide  is  advancing  apace,  the
boats  merely  float  along,  and  the  birds,  driven  from  place  to  place,  seek
in  vain  for  safety.  Here,  on  a floating  mass  of  tangled  weeds,  stand  a
small  group  side  by  side.  The  gunner  has  marked  them,  and  presently
nearly  the  whole  covey  is  prostrated.  Now,  onward  to  that  great  bunch
of  tall  grass  ^11  the  boats  are  seen  to  steer ; shot  after  shot  flies  in  rapid
succession ; dead  and  dying  lie  all  around  on  the  water ; the  terrified  sur-
vivors are  trying  to  save  their  lives  by  hurried  flight ; but  their  efforts  are
unavailing, — one  by  one  they  fall,  to  rise  no  more.  It  is  a sorrowful
sight,  after  all : see  that  poor  thing  gasping  hard  in  the  agonies  of  death,
its  legs  quivering  with  convulsive  twitches,  its  bright  eyes  fading  into
glazed  obscurity.  In  a few  hours,  hundreds  have  ceased  to  breathe  the
breath  of  life ; hundreds  that  erst  revelled  in  the  joys  of  careless  exist-
ence, but  which  can  never  behold  their  beloved  marshes  again.  The  cruel
sportsman,  covered  with  mud  and  mire,  drenched  to  the  skin  by  the
splashing  of  the  paddles,  his  face  and  hands  besmeared  with  powder,
stands  amid  the  wreck  which  he  has  made,  exultingly  surveys  his
slaughtered  heaps,  and  with  joyous  feelings  returns  home  with  a cargo  of
game  more  than  enough  for  a family  thrice  as  numerous  as  his  own.  How
joyful  must  be  the  congratulations  of  those  which  have  escaped,  without


38


CLAPPER  RAIL.


injury  to  themselves  or  their  relatives  ! With  what  pleasure,  perhaps,
have  some  of  them  observed  the  gun  of  one  of  their  murderers,  or  the  pow-
der-flask of  another,  fall  overboard  ! How  delighted  have  they  been  to  see  a
canoe  overturned  by  an  awkward  movement,  and  their  enemies  struggling
to  reach  the  shore,  or  sticking  fast  in  the  mud  ! Nor  have  the  minx  and
racoon  come  off  well,  for  notwithstanding  the  expertness  of  the  former
at  diving,  and  the  cunning  of  the  latter,  many  have  been  shot,  and  the
boatmen  intend  to  make  caps  of  their  fur.

In  the  Carolinas  there  are  some  most  expert  marksmen,  of  whom  I
know  two  who  probably  were  never  surpassed.  One  of  them  I have  seen
shoot  fifty  Marsh -Hens  at  fifty  successive  shots,  and  the  other,  I am  assu-
red, has  killed  a hundred  without  missing  one.  I have  heard  or  read  of
a French  king,  who,  on  starting  a partridge,  could  take  a pinch  of  snuff,
then  point  his  gun,  and  shoot  the  bird  ; but  whether  this  be  true  or  not
I cannot  say,  although  I have  witnessed  as  remarkable  a feat,  for  I have
seen  a Carolinian,  furnished  with  two  guns,  shoot  at  and  kill  four  Marsh-
Hens  as  they  flew  off  at  once  around  him  ! On  speaking  once  to  a friend
of  the  cruelty  of  destroying  so  many  of  these  birds,  he  answ'ered  me  as
follows : — “ It  gives  variety  to  life ; it  is  good  exercise,  and  in  all  cases
affords  a capital  dinner,  besides  the  pleasure  I feel  when  sending  a mess
of  Marsh-Hens  to  a friend  such  as  you.”


*

Rallus  crepitans,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  713 — Laih.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  756.

Clapper  Rail,  Rallus  crepitans,  fVUs.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  112,  but  not
the  figure,  which  is  that  of  the  preceding  species. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  201*

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  compressed,  slightly  curved,
rather  deep  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  almost
straight  until  towards  the  end,  where  it  is  slightly  curved,  the  ridge
slightly  flattened  for  a short  space  at  the  base,  and  extending  a little
on  the  forehead,  narrow  and  convex  to  the  end  ; a deep  groove  runs  on
either  side  parallel  to  the  ridge  for  two-thirds  of  the  whole  length ; the
edges  inflected,  with  a very  slight  notch  close  to  the  tip.  Nostrils  late-
ral, linear,  direct,  open  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
very  long,  extremely  narrow,  the  sides  erect,  slightly  convex,  the  edges
inflected,  the  tip  narrowed.


CLAPPER  RAIL.


39


Head  small,  oblong,  much  compressed.  Neck  long  and  slender.  Body
slender,  much  compressed.  Feet  long ; tibia  bare  a considerable  way
above  the  joint ; tarsus  of  moderate  length,  strong,  compressed,  and  an-
teriorly covered  with  broad  scutella,  posteriorly  with  smaller,  and  on  the
sides  reticulated.  Hind  toe  very  small  and  slender,  middle  toe  longest,
fourth  considerably  shorter,  and  but  little  longer  than  the  second ; toes
free,  scutellate  above,  compressed,  granulate  beneath.  Claws  of  mode-
rate length,  arched,  slender,  much  compressed,  acute,  flat  and  marginate
beneath.

Plumage  rather  stiff,  compact  and  glossed  on  the  upper  parts.  Fea-
thers of  the  head  and  neck  short  and  blended,  of  the  forehead  with  the
shaft  enlarged  and  extended  beyond  the  tip.  Wings  very  short  and
broad  ; alula  large;  primaries  curved,  broad,  tapering,  hut  obtuse,  third
longest,  second  scarcely  shorter,  first  and  seventh  about  equal ; secon-
daries weak,  broad,  rounded.  Tail  extremely  short,  much  rounded,  of
twelve  feeble,  rounded  feathers ; the  upper  and  lower  coverts  nearly  as
long  as  the  tail-feathers.

Lower  mandible  and  edges  of  upper  yellowish-brown  ; ridge  of  upper
and  tips  of  both  deep  brown.  Iris  pale  yellow.  Feet  pale  livid  grey,
tinged  with  orange  about  the  tibio-tarsal  joint;  claws  dusky.  Upper
part  of  the  head  and  hind  neck  dull  brown,  the  bristle-like  shafts  of  the
frontal  feathers  brownish-black ; a pale  brownish-orange  line  from  the
bill  over  the  eye ; loral  space  and  sides  of  the  head  dull  bluish-grey,  the
two  sides  of  each  feather  being  of  the  latter  colour.  Wing-coverts  dull
olive,  tinged  with  grey,  some  of  them  with  slight  irregular  whitish  mark-
ings ; alula  and  primaries  olive-brown  ; secondaries  and  tail  feathers  like
the  back.  Chin  yellowish- white,  edged  on  either  side  with  pale  yellowish-
brown  ; sides  and  fore  part  of  the  neck  bluish-grey,  tinged  more  especially
before  with  dull  pale  yellowish-brown  ; the  fore  part  of  the  breast  of  the
latter  colour.  Lower  wing-coverts,  sides,  hind  part  of  abdomen,  and
middle  lower  tail-coverts  undulated  with  deep  greyish-brown  and  greyish-
white,  lateral  tail-coverts  with  the  outer  webs  white ; tibial  feathers  simi-
larly barred,  but  paler,  middle  of  the  abdomen  greyish-white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15  inches,  to  end  of  claws  20,  extent  of  wings  20|;
bill  2f  ; tarsus  2,  middle-toe  and  claw  2/, ; wing  from  flexure  6j%  ; tail  2f .
Weight  11  oz.


40


CLAPPER  RAIL.


Adult  Female.  Plate  CCIV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female,  which  is  smaller  than  the  male,  is  similar  in  colouring,
but  has  the  tints  somewhat  duller.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14  inches,  to  end  of  claws  17J ; extent  of
wings  19^.  Weight  7f  oz.


( 41  )


THE  VIRGINIAN  RAIL.

Ballus  virginianus,  Linn.

PLATE  CCV.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

This  species,  which,  although  smaller,  bears  a great  resemblance  to
the  Great  Red-breasted  Rail  or  Fresh-water  Marsh-Hen,  is  met  with  in
most  parts  of  the  United  States  at  different  seasons.  Many  spend  the
winter  within  our  southern  limits,  and  I have  found  them  at  that  time
in  Lower  Louisiana,  the  Floridas,  Georgia,  and  the  Carolinas.  In  the
Western  country  some  have  been  known  to  remain  until  severe  frost  came
on,  and  there  they  usually  stay  to  a much  later  period  than  in  our  Middle
Districts,  from  which  they  generally  retire  southward  in  the  beginning  of
October.  During  spring  and  summer,  I observed  some  in  different  places
from  the  shores  of  the  Wabash  River  in  Illinois,  to  those  of  the  St  John’s
in  the  British  province  of  New  Brunswick.  In  the  latter  district,  they
were  considered  extremely  rare  birds  by  the  inhabitants,  some  of  whom
brought  me  a few  as  great  curiosities.  Farther  north,  I neither  saw  nor
heard  of  any;  but  on  the  borders  of  Lakes  Erie  and  Michigan,  they
breed  in  considerable  numbers,  as  well  as  near  our  maritime  districts.

In  its  habits  the  Rallus  virginianus  is  intermediate  between  the  R.
crepitans  and  R.  carolinus:  it  obtains  its  food  as  well  in  salt-water  marshes,
as  in  fresh  meadows,  watery  savannahs,  and  the  borders  of  ponds  and
rivers.  The  latter  situations,  however,  seem  to  suit  it  best  during  summer ;
but  whenever  both  kinds  of  places  are  combined,  or  near  each  other,  there
you  are  sure  to  meet  with  it.

The  time  of  breeding  varies  according  to  the  latitude  of  the  place.  I
have  found  the  female  sitting  on  her  eggs  in  the  beginning  of  March,  a
few  miles  from  New  Orleans ; in  that  of  April  in  Kentucky,  near  Hen-
derson ; about  a fortnight  later  near  Vincennes,  in  Illinois  ; and  from  the
10th  of  May  to  the  middle  of  June,  in  the  Middle  and  Eastern  States.
The  males  usually  arrive  at  the  breeding-places  a week  or  ten  days  be-
fore the  females.  They  travel  silently  and  by  night,  as  I have  ascer-
tained by  observing  them  proceed  singly  and  in  a direct  course,  at  a height
of  only  a few  feet,  over  our  broad  rivers,  or  over  level  land,  when  their
speed  is  such  as  is  never  manifested  by  them  under  ordinary  circum-


42


VIRGINIAN  RAIL.


stances.  Their  movements  can  be  easily  traced  for  fifty  yards  or  so  du-
ring nights  of  brilliant  moonshine,  when  you  see  them  passing  with  a con-
stant beat  of  the  wings,  in  the  manner  of  a Green-winged  Teal.  As  soon
as  they  arrive  at  their  destination,  they  may  be  heai’d  emitting  their  cries
about  sunset,  occasionally  through  the  night,  and  again  with  increased
vigour  at  the  dawn  of  day,  as  if  expressing  their  impatience  for  the  ar-
rival of  their  companions.  The  love-notes  of  this  species  have  some  re-
semblance to  those  of  the  Clapper  Rail,  but  now  and  then  are  changed
for  others  something  like  creh,  crelc,  creelc,  or  creek,  creek,  creek.  Being
expert  ventriloquists,  like  their  congeners,  they  sometimes  seem  to  be  far
oif,  when  in  fact  they  are  within  a few  yards  of  you.  One  morning  I had
the  good  fortune  to  witness  their  amatory  gestures,  which  I will  hei’e  try
to  describe,  that  you  may  in  some  degree  participate  in  the  amusement
which  the  scene  afforded  me.

The  sun  had  scarcely  begun  to  send  his  horizontal  rays  over  the  lake,
on  the  margin  of  which  I stood,  revolving  in  my  mind  the  many  enjoy-
ments which  the  Author  of  nature  has  benignantly  accorded  to  his  crea-
tures. The  air  was  clear  and  serene,  and  the  waters  spread  before  me
without  a ruffle  on  their  surface.  The  notes  of  the  Rail  came  loudly  on
my  ear,  and  on  moving  towards  the  spot  whence  they  proceeded,  I ob-
served the  bird  exhibiting  the  full  ardour  of  his  passion.  Now  with  open
wings  raised  over  its  body,  it  ran  around  its  beloved,  opening  and  flirting
its  tail  with  singular  speed.  Each  time  it  passed  before  her,  it  would  pause
for  a moment,  raise  itself  to  the  full  stretch  of  its  body  and  legs,  and  bow
to  her  with  all  the  grace  of  a well-bred  suitor  of  our  own  species.  The  fe-
male also  bowed  in  recognition,  and  at  last,  as  the  male  came  nearer  and
nearer  in  his  circuits,  yielded  to  his  wishes,  on  which  the  pair  flew  off  in
the  manner  of  house-pigeons,  sailing  and  balancing  their  bodies  on  open
wings  until  out  of  sight.  During  this  exhibition,  the  male  emitted  a mel-
low note,  resembling  the  syllables  cuckoe,  cuckoe,  to  Avhich  the  female  re-
sponded with  the  kind  of  lisping  sound  uttered  by  young  birds  of  the
species  when  newly  hatched.

Excepting  our  Little  Partridge,  I know  no  bird  so  swift  of  foot  as
the  Virginian  Rail.  In  fact,  I doubt  if  it  would  be  an  easy  matter  for  an
active  man  to  outstrip  one  of  them  on  plain  ground  ; and  to  trust  to  one’s
speed  for  raising  one  among  the  thick  herbage  to  which  they  usually
resort,  would  certainly  prove  fallacious.  There  they  run  to  a short  dis-
tance, then  tack  about,  and  again  scud  away  in  a lateral  direction,  so  as


VIRGINIAN  RAIL.


43


to  elude  the  best  dog,  or  if  likely  to  be  overtaken,  rise  on  wing,  fly  with
dangling  legs  eight  or  ten  yards,  drop  among  the  weeds,  and  run  off  as
swiftly  as  before.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  I managed  to  secure  a good
number  of  them  by  means  of  a partridge  net,  setting  the  wings  of  that
apparatus  at  very  obtuse  angles,  and  calling  them  by  imitating  the  lisp-
ing notes  of  the  female  from  some  distance  beyond  the  bag  of  the  net.
Now  and  then  I found  them  too  cunning  for  me,  as,  on  discovering  that
the  wings  of  the  net  were  in  their  way,  they  would  get  over  it  in  the
same  manner  as  that  in  which  a sailor  mounts  the  shrouds  of  a ship.  Our
Common  Coot  uses  the  same  artifice,  as  I shall  elsewhere  describe.

The  nest  of  the  Virginian  Rail  is  not  easily  found  after  incubation
has  commenced,  for  then  the  male,  contrary  to  the  habits  of  most  birds,
becomes  comparatively  silent,  and  the  female  quite  mute.  At  such  times
I have  once  or  twice  almost  trodden  on  one,  which  I should  never  have
discovered,  had  not  the  poor  bird  fluttered  off  in  despair,  employing  all
the  artifices  used  by  other  species  on  such  occasions.  It  is  placed  on  a
small  elevation  formed  by  the  accumulation  of  the  stalks  of  a large  bunch
of  grasses,  in  the  centre  of  which  some  dry  weeds  are  arranged  to  the
height  of  two  or  three  inches,  with  a very  shallow  cavity.  The  eggs  are
four  or  five,  seldom  more  than  six  or  seven,  and  resemble  in  colour  those
of  the  Rallus  crepitans,  although  smaller,  measuring  an  inch  and  a quarter
in  length,  by  eleven-twelfths  in  breadth,  and  being  rather  more  rounded.
The  young  are  covered  with  a jet  black  down,  and  run  after  their  mother
as  soon  as  they  make  their  escape  from  the  egg ; — at  least  I suppose  this
to  be  the  case,  on  account  of  my  having  caught  some  that  seemed  newly
hatched.  The  mother  leads  them  with  the  greatest  care  among  the
long  grass  of  the  damp  meadows,  or  the  weeds  growing  near  the  ponds,  to
which  they  resort  at  all  times,  and  particularly  near  the  margins  of  pools
or  muddy  streams,  into  which  they  run  and  disperse  on  the  least  appear-
ance of  danger.  When  no  water  is  near,  the  little  ones  squat  in  silence,
and  await  the  call  of  their  parent,  to  which  all  at  once  answer,  when  they
quickly  collect  once  more  around  her.

This  species  is  able  to  cling  to,  and  climb  along  the  blades  of  tall
grasses,  even  under  water,  when  in  danger,  and  is  equally  able  to  swim
gracefully  to  a considerable  distance,  as  to  alight  on  low  bushes,  in  which
situation  I have  shot  a few  of  them.  When  amid  the*  broad  leaves  of
water-lilies,  they  walk  and  run  on  them  with  as  much  ease  as  the  Galli-
nules ; and  I would  be  inclined  to  assign  them  au  intermediate  station


44


VIRGINIAN  RAIL.


between  the  genera  Rallus  and  Crex,  as  they  partake  of  the  habits  of
both.  When  pursued,  the  Virginian  Rail  is,  with  great  difficulty,  put
up,  as  I have  already  mentioned,  but  when  it  is  once  on  wing  it  may  be
shot  by  a very  ordinary  gunner.  It  rises  without  noise,  flies  off  with  its
legs  dangling  and  its  neck  stretched  out,  but  seldom  proceeds  farther
than  twenty  or  thirty  yards  at  a time,  unless  when  it  has  a stream  to
cross,  or  during  its  migrations.  Like  all  the  other  species  with  which  I
am  acquainted,  it  feeds  both  by  day  and  by  night.  Its  food  consists  of
small  slugs,  snails,  aquatic  insects,  worms,  Crustacea,  and  the  seeds,  of
those  grasses  which  grow  in  salt  or  fresh  water  marshes,  in  either  of  which
they  reside  and  even  breed.  I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whether
they  lay  more  than  once  in  the  season  ; but,  on  account  of  the  compa-
ratively small  number  of  this  species,  I am  inclined  to  suppose  that  they
seldom  raise  more  than  one  brood,  unless  their  eggs  have  been  destroyed,
whether  by  inundation  or  otherwise.

The  Virginian  Rail  is  not  without  enemies;  and,  although  it  mani-
fests a good  deal  of  courage,  and  at  times  acts  towards  the  Marsh  Hawk
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Rallus  crepitans,  it  seldom  succeeds  in  its  at-
tempts, and  on  several  occasions  I have  seen  that  bird  seize  them  as  they
attempted  to  strike  it  with  their  bill  and  claws  for  the  purpose  of  driving
it  away.  The  minx,  the  garfish,  the  snapping  turtle,  and  sometimes  eels,
destroy  them,  as  well  as  the  Sora  Rail.

Whilst  at  Charleston  in  South  Carolina,  I frequently  saw  little  strings
of  these  birds  exposed  in  the  market,  at  a very  low  price  ; and  they  are
excellent  eating  during  autumn  and  winter.  Their  comparative  scarcity,
however,  prevents  the  gunner  from  searching  after  them  with  the  same
eagerness  as  he  pursues  the  Rallus  crepitans,  and  to  shoot  a dozen  in  the
course  of  a day  may  be  considered  a remarkable  feat.  In  that  country,
during  the  latter  part  of  autumn,  and  in  winter,  they  are  usually  met  with
in  the  salt-marshes  bordering  the  estuaries  of  large  rivers.

Like  the  two  preceding  species,  the  Virginian  Rail  has  the  power  of
contracting  its  body  to  enable  it  to  pass  with  more  ease  between  the  stalks
of  strong  grasses  or  other  plants.  When  observed  unseen,  it  frequently
jej-ks  the  tail  upwards,  in  the  manner  of  Gallinules,  but  the  moment  it
notices  any  one  of  its  enemies,  it  droops  the  tail,  lowers  its  head,  and  runs
off  with  the  quickness  of  thought.

The  young  of  this  species  are  at  first  of  a black  colour,  like  that  of
Rallus  crepitans  and  R.  eleguns ; but,  like  those  of  the  latter,  attain  the


VIRGINIAN  RAIL.


45


rufous  hue  of  the  parent  birds  before  the  commencement  of  winter,  al-
though they  increase  in  size  and  improve  in  the  depth  of  their  tints  pro-
bably for  several  years.


Rallds  vihginianus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  263 — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  334.

I

Rallus  AauATicus,  var.  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  75o-

ViHGiNiAN  Rail,  Rallus  virginianus,  JViis.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  109.  pi.  62.
fig.  2.

Lesser  Clapper  Rail,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  205.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  compressed,  slightly  curved,  deep
at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  curved,  the
ridge  flattish  at  the  base,  and  extending  a little  on  the  forehead,  convex
and  narrow  towards  the  end  ; a deep  groove  runs  on  either  side  parallel
to  the  ridge  for  two-thirds  of  the  whole  length ; the  edges  inflected,  with
a very  slight  notch  close  to  the  tip.  Nostrils  lateral,  linear,  direct,  open
and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long,  extremely  nar-
row, the  sides  erect,  slightly  convex,  the  edges  inflected,  the  tip  narrowed,
the  dorsal  and  marginal  outlines  slightly  arched.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long.  Body
slender,  much  compressed.  Feet  rather  long ; tibia  bare  a considerable
Avay  above  the  joint ; tarsus  of  ordinary  length,  compressed,  anteriorly
covered  with  broad  scutella,  posteriorly  with  smaller,  and  on  the  sides  re-
ticulated. Hind  toe  very  small  and  slender,  middle  toe  longest,  fourth
considerably  shorter,  and  but  little  longer  than  the  second ; toes  free,  scu-
tellate  above,  compressed,  granulate  beneath.  Claws  of  moderate  length,
arched,  slender,  much  compressed,  acute,  flat  and  marginate  beneath.

Plumage  rather  stiff,  compact,  slightly  glossed  on  the  back.  Feathers
of  the  head  and  neck  shoi’t  and  blended  ; of  the  forehead  with  the  shaft
enlarged  and  extended  beyond  the  tip.  Wings  very  short  and  broad;
alula  large  ; primaries  curved,  broad,  tapering,  but  obtuse,  third  longest,
second  very  little  shorter,  first  and  sixth  about  equal  ; secondaries  broad
and  rounded.  Tail  extremely  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  feeble
rounded  feathers  ; the  upper  and  lower  tail- coverts  nearly  as  long  as  the
tail-feathers.

Bill  dark  brown,  the  lower  mandible  and  edges  of  upper  yellowisli-


VIRGINIAN  RAIL.


4f)

brown.  I ris  bright  red.  Feet  yellowish-brown,  tinged  with  olive ; claws
more  dusky.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  deep  brownish-
black,  with  streaks  of  light  olive-brown ; sides  of  the  head  dull  bluish-
grey,  loral  space  of  a deeper  tint ; a brownish-orange  line  over  the  eye.
Alula,  primary  quills,  and  tail  blackish-brown  ; secondary  quills  like  the
back,  but  edged  with  greenish-brown,  smaller  coverts  dark  chestnut.
Throat  reddish-white  ; fore  neck  and  breast  bright  orange-brown,  ap-
proaching to  yellowish-red  ; sides,  abdomen,  and  lower  wing-coverts  bar-
red with  brownish-black  and  white,  the  bands  of  the  latter  narrower ;
tibial  feathers  dusky  anteriorly,  light  reddish  behind.  Lower  tail-coverts
each  with  a central  brownish-black  spot,  the  edges  white,  the  tips  pale
reddish.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  13,  extent  of
wings  14|;  bill  ; tarsus  1/j,  middle  toe  and  claw  ; wing  from
flexure  4|,  tail  li^.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  considerably  smaller  than  the  male,  but  resembles  it  in
colouring,  only  the  dark  tints  of  the  upper  parts  are  lighter,  the  chestnut
of  the  wings  paler,  and  the  lower  parts  of  a less  bright  red.

Length  9j.

Young  bird  fledged.  Plate  CCV.  Fig.  3.

When  fully  fledged  the  young  does  not  differ  materially  in  colour
from  the  old,  the  tints  being  merely  somewhat  duller.

' In  colouring  this  species  is  so  nearly  allied  to  B.  elegans,  that  the  de-
scription of  the  one  might  pass  very  well  for  that  of  the  other  ; the  prin-
cipal difference  being  that  the  sides  of  the  head  are  grey  in  the  former,
and  dusky  in  the  latter.  Of  course,  the  difference  in  size  and  habits  is
sufficient  to  prevent  their  being  confounded  together.


( 47  )


THE  AMERICAN  SUN  PERCH.

Few  of  our  smaller  fresh-water  fishes  excel  either  in  beauty  or  in  deli-
cacy and  flavour  the  species  which  I have  chosen  as  the  subject  of  this
article,  and  few  afford  more  pleasure  to  young  fishers.  Although  it  occurs  in
all  our  streams,  whether  rapid  or  gentle,  small  or  large,  in  the  mill-dam  over-
shadowed by  tall  forest-trees,  or  in  the  open  lake  margined  with  reeds,
you  must  never  expect  to  find  it  in  impure  waters.  Let  the  place  be
deep  or  shallow,  broad  or  narrow,  the  water  must  be  clear  enough  to
allow  the  sun’s  rays  to  fall  unimpaired  on  the  rich  coat  of  mail  that  covers
the  body  of  the  Sun-fish.  Look  at  him  as  he  poises  himself  under  the
lee  of  the  protecting  rock  beneath  our  feet  ! See  how  steadily  he  main-
tains his  position,  and  yet  how  many  rapid  motions  of  his  fins  are  neces-
sary to  preserve  it ! Now  another  is  by  his  side,  glowing  with  equal
beauty,  and  poising  itself  by  equally  easy  and  graceful  movements.  The
sun  is  shining,  and  under  the  lee  of  every  stone  and  sunk  log,  some  of  the
little  creatures  are  rising  to  the  surface,  to  enjoy  the  bright  blaze,  which
enhances  all  their  beauty.  The  golden  hues  of  some  parts  of  the  body
blend  with  the  green  of  the  emerald,  while  the  coral  tints  of  the  lower
parts  and  the  red  of  its  sparkling  eye,  render  our  little  favourite  a perfect
gem  of  the  waters.

The  rushing  stream  boils  and  gurgles  as  it  forces  its  way  over  the
obstacles  presented  by  its  bed,  the  craggy  points,  large  stones,  and  logs
that  are  strewn  along  the  bottom.  Every  one  of  these  proves  a place
of  rest,  safety  and  observation  to  the  little  things,  whose  eyes  are  ever
anxiously  watching  their  favourite  prey  as  it  passes.  There  an  unfortu-
nate moth,  swept  along  by  the  current,  labours  in  vain  to  extricate  itself
from  the  treacherous  element ; its  body,  indeed,  at  intervals,  rises  a little
above  the  surface,  but  its  broad  wings,  now  wet  and  heavy,  bear  it  down
again  to  the  water.  The  Sun-fish  has  marked  it,  and  as  it  passes  his  re-
treat, he  darts  towards  it,  with  twenty  of  his  fellows,  all  eager  to  seize
the  prize.  The  swiftest  swallows  it  in  a moment,  and  all  immediately
return  to  their  lurking  places,  where  they  fancy  themselves  secure.  But,
alas,  the  Sun-fish  is  no  more  without  enemies  than  the  moth,  or  any  other
living  creature.  So  has  Nature  determined,  evidently  to  promote  pru-


48


AMERICAN  SUN  PERCH.


dence  and  industry,  without  which  none  can  reap  the  full  advantage  of
life.

On  the  top  of  yon  miller’s  dam  stands  boldly  erect  the  ardent  fisher.
Up  to  the  knees,  and  regardless  of  the  danger  of  his  situation,  he  prepares
his  apparatus  of  destruction,  A keen  hook  attached  to  his  grass-line  is
now  hid  within  the  body  of  a worm  or  grasshopper.  With  a knowing
eye  he  marks  one  after  another  every  surge  of  the  water  below.  Observ-
ing the  top  of  a rock  scarcely  covered,  he  sends  his  hook  towards  it  with
gentleness  and  certainty  ; the  bait  now  floats  and  anon  sinks ; his  reel
slowly  lengthens  the  line,  which  is  suddenly  tightened,  and  he  feels  that
a fish  is  secured.  Now  whirls  the  reel  again,  thrice  has  the  fish  tried  its
utmost  strength  and  speed,  but,  soon  panting  and  exhausted,  it  is  seen
floating  for  a moment  on  the  surface.  Nothing  now  is  required  but  to
bring  it  to  hand,  which  done,  the  angler  baits  anew,  and  sends  forth  the
treacherous  morsel.  For  an  hour  or  more  he  continues  the  agreeable  oc-
cupation, drawing  from  the  stream  a fish  at  every  short  interval.  To  the
willow-twig  fastened  to  his  waist,  a hundred  “ sunnies”  are  already  at-
tached. Suddenly  the  sky  is  overcast,  and  the  crafty  fisher,  although
aware  that,  with  a different  hook  and  bait,  he  might  soon  procure  a fine
eel  or  two,  carefully  wades  to  the  shore,  and  homeward  leisurely  plods
his  way.

In  this  manner  are  the  sun-fishes  caught  by  the  regular  or  “ scientific”
anglers,  and  a beautiful  sight  it  is  to  see  the  ease  and  grace  with  which
they  allure  the  objects  of  their  desire,  whether  in  the  open  turbulence  of
the  waters,  or  under  the  low  boughs  of  the  overhanging  trees,  where,  in
some  deep  hole,  a swarm  of  the  little  creatures  may  be  playing  in  fancied
security.  Rarely  does  his  tackle  become  entangled,  whilst,  with  incom-
parable dexterity,  he  draws  one  after  another  from  the  waters.

Thousands  of  individuals,  however,  there  are,  who,  less  curious  in
their  mode  of  fishing,  often  procure  as  many  sunnies  without  allowing
them  to  play  for  a moment.  Look  at  these  boys ! One  stands  on  the
shore,  while  the  others  are  on  fallen  trees  that  project  over  the  stream.
Their  rods,  as  you  perceive,  are  merely  shoots  of  the  hazel  or  hickory,
their  lines  are  simply  twine,  and  their  hooks  none  of  the  finest.  One  has
a calabash  filled  with  worms  and  grubs  of  many  sorts,  kept  alive  in  damp
earth,  and  another  is  supplied  with  a bottle  containing  half  a gross  of  live
“ hoppers the  third  has  no  bait  at  all,  but  borrows  from  his  nearest
neighbour.  Well,  there  they  are,  “ three  merry  boys,”  whirling  their


AMERICAN  SUN  PERCH.


49


rods  in  the  air  to  unrol  their  lines,  on  one  of  which,  you  observe,  a cork
is  fastened,  while  on  another  is  a bit  of  light  wood,  and  on  the  third  a
grain  or  two  of  large  shot,  to  draw  it  at  once  to  a certain  depth.  Now
their  hooks  are  baited,  and  all  are  ready.  Each  casts  his  line  as  he  thinks
best,  after  he  has  probed  the  depth  of  the  stream  with  his  rod,  to  enable
him  to  place  his  buoy  at  the  proper  point.  Bob,  bob,  goes  the  cork ;
down  it  moves  ; the  bit  of  wood  disappears ; the  leaded  line  tightens  ; in
a moment  up  swing  the  sunnies,  which,  getting  unhooked,  are  projected
far  among  the  grass,  where  they  struggle  in  vain,  until  death  ends  their
efforts.  The  hooks  are  now  baited  anew,  and  dropped  into  the  water.
The  fish  is  abundant,  the  weather  propitious  and  delightful,  for  it  is  now
October,  and  so  greedy  have  the  sunnies  become  of  grasshoppers  and  grubs,
that  dozens  at  once  dash  at  the  same  bait.  The  lads,  believe  me,  have
now  rare  sport,  and  in  an  hour  scarcely  a fish  remains  in  the  hole.  The
happy  children  have  caught  perhaps  some  hundreds  of  delicious  “ pan-
fish,” to  feed  their  parents,  and  delight  their  little  sisters.  Surely  their
pleasure  is  fully  as  great  as  that  experienced  by  the  scientific  angler.

I have  known  instances  when  the  waters  of  a dam  having  been  let  out,
for  some  reason  better  known  to  the  miller  than  to  myself,  all  the  sun-fish
have  betaken  themselves  to  one  or  two  deep  holes,  as  if  to  avoid  being
carried  away  from  their  favourite  abode.  There  I have  seen  them  in
such  multitudes  that  one  could  catch  as  many  as  he  pleased  with  a pin-
hook,  fastened  to  any  sort  of  line,  and  baited  with  any  sort  of  worm  or
insect,  or  even  with  a piece  of  a newly  caught  fish.  Yet,  and  I am  not
able  to  account  for  it,  all  of  a sudden,  without  apparent  cause,  they  would
cease  to  take,  and  no  allurement  whatever  could  entice  them  or  the  other
fishes  in  the  pool  to  seize  the  hook.

During  high  freshets,  this  species  of  perch  seldom  bites  at  any  thing,
but  you  may  procure  them  with  a cast-net  or  a seine,  provided  you  are
well  acquainted  with  the  localities.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  waters
are  low  and  clear,  every  secluded  hole,  every  eddy  under  the  lee  of  a
rock,  every  place  sheltered  by  a raft  of  timber,  will  afford  you  amuse-
ment. In  some  parts  of  the  Southern  States,  the  Negroes  procure  these
fishes  late  in  the  autumn  in  shallow  ponds  or  bayous,  by  wading  through
the  water  with  caution,  and  placing  at  every  few  steps  a wicker  appara-
tus, not  unlike  a small  barrel,  open  at  both  ends.  The  moment  the  fishes
find  themselves  confined  within  the  lower  part  of  this,  which  is  pressed  to
the  bottom  of  the  stream,  their  skippings  announce  their  capture,  and  the
fisher  secures  his  booty.


VOL.  III.


D


50


AMERICAN  SUN  PERCH.


This  species,  the  Labrus  auritus  of  Linnaeus,  the  Pomotis  vulgaris
of  Cuvier,  seldom  exceeds  five  or  six  inches  in  length,  but  is  rather
deep  in  proportion.  The  usual  size  is  from  four  to  five  inches,  with  a
depth  of  from  two  to  two  and  a half.  They  are  not  bony,  and  at  all  sea-
sons afford  delicate  eating.  Having  observed  a considerable  change  in
their  colour  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States,  and  in  different
streams,  ponds,  or  lakes,  I was  led  to  think  that  this  curious  effect  might
be  produced  by  the  difference  of  colour  in  the  water.  Thus,  the  Sun-fish
caught  in  the  deep  waters  of  Green  River,  in  Kentucky,  exhibit  a depth
of  olive-brown  quite  different  from  the  general  tint  of  those  caught  in  the
colourless  waters  of  the  Ohio  or  Schuylkill ; those  of  the  reddish-coloured
waters  of  the  Bayous  of  the  Louisiana  swamps,  look  as  if  covered  with  a
coppery  tarnish  ; and,  lastly,  those  met  with  in  streams  that  glide  beneath
cedars  or  other  firs,  have  a pale  and  sallow  complexion.

The  Sun  Perch,  wherever  found,  seems  to  give  a decided  preference  to
sandy,  gravelly,  or  rocky  beds  of  streams,  avoiding  those  of  which  the
bottom  is  muddy.  At  the  period  of  depositing  their  eggs,  this  preference
is  still  more  apparent.  The  little  creature  is  then  seen  swimming  rapidly
over  shallows,  the  bed  of  which  is  mostly  formed  of  fine  gravel,  when  after
a while  it  is  observed  to  poise  itself  and  gradually  sink  to  the  bottom,
where  with  its  fin  it  pushes  aside  the  sand  to  the  extent  of  eight  or  ten
inches,  thus  forming  a circular  cavity.  In  a few  days  a little  ridge  is
thus  raised  around,  and  in  the  cleared  area  the  roe  is  deposited.  By  wad-
ing carefully  over  the  extent  of  the  place,  a person  may  count  forty,  fifty,
or  more  of  these  beds,  some  within  a few  feet  of  each  other,  and  some  se-
veral yards  apart.  Instead  of  abandoning  its  spawn,  as  others  of  the  fa-
mily are  wont  to  do,  this  little  fish  keeps  guard  over  it  with  all  the  care
of  a sitting  bird.  You  observe  it  poised  over  the  bed,  watching  the  ob-
jects around.  Should  the  rotten  leaf  of  a tree,  a piece  of  wood,  or  any
other  substance,  happen  to  be  rolled  over  the  border  of  the  bed,  the  Sun-
fish  carefully  removes  it,  holding  the  obnoxious  matter  in  its  mouth,  and
dropping  it  over  the  margin.  Having  many  times  witnessed  this  act  of
prudence  and  cleanliness  in  the  little  sunny,  and  observed  that  at  this  pe-
riod it  will  not  seize  on  any  kind  of  bait,  I took  it  into  my  head  one  fair
afternoon  to  make  a few  experiments  for  the  purpose  of  judging  how  far
its  instinct  or  reason  might  induce  it  to  act  when  disturbed  or  harassed.

Provided  with  a fine  fishing-line,  and  such  insects  as  I knew  were  re-
lished by  this  fish,  I reached  a sand-bar  covered  by  about  one  foot  of


AMERICAN  SUN  PERCH.


51


water,  where  I had  previously  seen  many  deposits.  Approaching  the
nearest  to  the  shore  with  great  care,  I baited  my  hook  with  a living
ground-worm,  the  greater  part  of  which  was  left  at  liberty  to  writhe  as  it
pleased,  and  throwing  the  line  up  the  stream,  managed  it  so  that  at  last
it  passed  over  the  border  of  the  nest,  when  I allowed  it  to  remain  on  the
bottom.  The  fish,  I perceived,  had  marked  me,  and  as  the  worm  in-
truded on  its  premises,  he  swam  to  the  farther  side,  there  poised  himself
for  a few  moments,  then  approached  the  worm,  and  carried  it  in  his  mouth
over  the  side  next  to  me,  with  a care  and  gentleness  so  very  remarkable
as  to  afford  me  much  surprise.  I repeated  the  experiment  six  or  seven
times,  and  always  with  the  same  result.  Then  changing  the  bait,  I em-
ployed a young  grasshopper,  which  I floated  into  the  egg-bed.  The  in-
sect was  removed,  as  the  worm  had  been,  and  two  attempts  to  hook  the
fish  proved  unsuccessful.  I now  threw  my  line  with  the  hook  bare,  and
managed  as  before.  The  sunny  appeared  quite  alarmed.  It  swam  to  one
side,  then  to  another,  in  rapid  succession,  and  seemed  to  entertain  a fear
that  the  removal  of  the  suspicious  object  might  prove  extremely  danger-
ous to  it.  Y et  it  gradually  approached  the  hook,  took  it  delicately  up,
and  the  next  instant  dropped  it  over  the  edge  of  the  bed  !

Reader,  if  you  are  one  who,  like  me,  have  studied  Nature  with  a desire
to  improve  your  mental  faculties,  and  contemplate  the  wonderful  pheno-
mena that  present  themselves  to  the  view  at  every  step  we  take  in  her  wide
domain,  you  would  have  been  struck,  had  you  witnessed  the  actions  of
this  little  fish,  as  I was,  with  admiration  of  the  Being  who  gave  such  in-
stincts to  so  humble  an  object.  I gazed  in  amazement  on  the  little  crea-
ture, and  wondered  that  nature  had  endowed  it  with  such  feelings  and
powers.  The  irrepressible  desire  of  acquiring  knowledge  prompted  me  to
continue  the  experiment ; but  with  whatever  dexterity  I could  in  those
days  hook  a fish,  all  my  efforts  proved  abortive,  not  with  this  individual
only,  but  with  many  others,  which  I subjected  to  the  same  trials.

Satisfied  that  at  this  period  the  Sun-fish  was  more  than  a match  for
me,  I rolled  up  my  line,  and  with  the  rod  gave  a rap  on  the  water  as
nearly  over  the  fish  as  I could.  The  sunny  darted  off  to  a distance  of
several  yards,  poised  itself  steadily,  and  as  soon  as  my  rod  was  raised
from  the  water,  returned  to  its  station.  T he  effect  of  the  blow  on  the
water  was  now  apparent,  for  I perceived  that  the  fish  was  busily  em-
ployed in  smoothing  the  bed  ; but  here  ended  my  experiments  on  the
Sun-fish.


( 52  )


THE  WOOD  DUCK.

An'as  sponsa,  Linn.

PLATE  CCVI.  Males,  Females,  and  Nest.

I HAVE  always  experienced  a peculiar  pleasure  while  endeavouring  to
study  the  habits  of  this  most  beautiful  bird  in  its  favourite  places  of  re-
sort. Never  on  such  occasions  have  I been  without  numberless  compa-
nions, who,  although  most  of  them  were  insensible  of  my  presence,  have
afforded  me  hours  of  the  never-failing  delight  resulting  from  the  contem-
plation of  their  character.  Methinks  I am  now  seated  by  the  trunk  of  a
gigantic  sycamore,  whose  bleached  branches  stretch  up  towards  the  hea-
vens, as  if  with  a desire  to  overlook  the  dense  woods  spread  all  around.
A dark-watered  bayou  winds  tortuously  beneath  the  maples  that  margin
its  muddy  shores,  a deep  thicket  of  canes  spreading  along  its  side.  The
mysterious  silence  is  scarcely  broken  by  the  hum  of  myriads  of  insects.
The  blood-sucking  musquito  essays  to  alight  on  my  hand,  and  I willing-
ly allow  him  to  draw  his  fill,  that  I may  observe  how  dexterously  he
pierces  my  skin  with  his  delicate  proboscis,  and  pumps  the  red  fluid  into
his  body,  which  is  quickly  filled,  when  with  difficulty  he  extends  his  tiny
wings  and  flies  off,  never  to  return.  Over  the  withered  leaves  many  a
tick  is  seen  scrambling,  as  if  anxious  to  elude  the  searching  eye  of  that
beautiful  lizard.  A squirrel  spread  flat  against  a tree,  with  its  head  di-
rected downwards,  is  watching  me ; the  warblers,  too,  are  peeping  from
among  the  twigs.  On  the  water,  the  large  bull-frogs  are  endeavouring
to  obtain  a peep  of  the  sun ; suddenly  there  emerges  the  head  of  an  otter,
with  a fish  in  its  jaws,  and  in  an  instant  my  faithful  dog  plunges  after
him,  but  is  speedily  recalled.  At  this  moment,  when  my  heart  is  filled
with  delight,  the  rustling  of  wings  comes  sweeping  through  the  woods,
and  anon  there  shoots  overhead  a flock  of  Wood  Ducks.  Once,  twice,
three  times,  have  they  rapidly  swept  over  the  stream,  and  now,  having
failed  to  discover  any  object  of  alarm,  they  all  alight  on  its  bosom,  and
sound  a note  of  invitation  to  others  yet  distant.

Scenes  like  the.se  I have  enjoyed  a thousand  times,  yet  regret  that
I have  not  enjoyed  them  oftener,  and  made  better  use  of  the  oppor-


WOOD  DUCK.


53


tunities  which  I have  had  of  examining  the  many  interesting  objects
that  attracted  my  notice.  And  now,  let  me  endeavour  to  describe  the
habits  of  the  Wood  Duck,  in  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to  apprehend
them.

This  beautiful  species  ranges  over  the  whole  extent  of  the  United
States,  and  I have  seen  it  in  all  parts  from  Louisiana  to  the  confines  of
Maine,  and  from  the  vicinity  of  our  Atlantic  coasts  as  far  inland  as  my
travels  have  extended.  It  also  occurs  sparingly  during  the  breed-
ing-season in  Nova  Scotia ; but  farther  north  I did  not  observe  it.
Everywhere  in  this  immense  tract  I have  found  it  an  almost  constant  re-
sident, for  some  spend  the  winter  even  in  Massachusetts,  and  far  up  the
warm  spring  waters  of  brooks  on  the  Missouri.  It  confines  itself,  how-
ever, entirely  to  fresh  water,  preferring  at  all  times  the  secluded  retreats
of  the  ponds,  bayous,  or  creeks,  that  occur  so  profusely  in  our  woods.
Well  acquainted  with  man,  they  carefully  avoid  him,  unless  now  and  then
during  the  breeding- season,  when,  if  a convenient  spot  is  found  by  them
in  which  to  deposit  their  eggs  and  raise  their  young,  they  will  even  locate
themselves  about  the  miller’s  dam.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  remarkable  for  its  speed,  and  the  ease  and
elegance  with  which  it  is  performed.  The  Wood  Duck  passes  through
the  woods  and  even  amongst  the  branches  of  trees,  with  as  much  facility
as  the  Passenger  Pigeon  ; and  while  removing  from  some  secluded  haunt
to  its  breeding-grounds,  at  the  approach  of  night,  it  shoots  over  the  trees
like  a meteor,  scarcely  emitting  any  sound  from  its  wings.  In  the  h^wer
parts  of  Louisiana  and  Kentucky,  where  they  abound,  these  regular  ex-
cursions are  performed  by  flocks  of  from  thirty  to  fifty  or  more  indivi-
duals. In  several  instances  I have  taken  perhaps  undue  advantage  of
their  movements  to  shoot  them  on  the  wing,  by  placing  myself  between
their  two  different  spots  of  resort,  and  keeping  myself  concealed.  In  this
manner  I have  obtained  a number  in  the  course  of  an  hour  of  twilight ;
and  I have  known  some  keen  sportsmen  kill  as  many  as  thirty  or  forty  in
a single  evening.  This  sport  is  best  in  the  latter  part  of  autumn,  after
the  old  males  have  joined  the  flocks  of  young  led  by  the  females.  Se-
veral gunners  may  then  obtain  equal  success  by  placing  themselves  at  re-
gular distances  in  the  line  of  flight,  when  the  birds  having  in  a manner
to  run  the  gauntlet,  more  than  half  of  a flock  have  been  brought  down  in
the  course  of  their  transit.  While  passing  through  the  air  on  such  occa-
sions, the  birds  are  never  heard  to  emit  a single  note.


34


WOOD  DUCK.


The  Wood  Duck  breeds  in  the  Middle  States  about  the  beginning  of
April,  in  Massachusetts  a month  later,  and  in  Nova  Scotia  or  on  our
northern  lakes,  seldom  before  the  first  days  of  June.  In  Louisiana  and
Kentucky,  where  I have  had  better  opportunities  of  studying  their  habits
in  this  respect,  they  generally  pair  about  the  1st  of  March,  sometimes  a
fortnight  earlier.  I never  knew  one  of  these  birds  to  form  a nest  on  the
ground,  or  on  the  branches  of  a tree.  They  appear  at  all  times  to  pre-
fer the  hollow  broken  portion  of  some  large  branch,  the  hole  of  our
largest  Woodpecker  (Picus  principalis)^  or  the  deserted  retreat  of  the
fox-squirrel ; and  I have  frequently  been  surprised  to  see  them  go  in
and  out  of  a hole  of  any  one  of  these,  when  their  bodies  while  on  wing
seemed  to  be  nearly  half  as  large  again  as  the  aperture  within  which  they
had  deposited  their  eggs.  Once  only  I found  a nest  (with  ten  eggs)  in
the  fissure  of  a rock  on  the  Kentucky  River  a few  miles  below  Frankfort.
Generally,  however,  the  holes  to  which  they  betake  themselves  are  either
over  deep  swamps,  above  cane  brakes,  or  broken  branches  of  high  syca-
mores, seldom  more  than  forty  or  fifty  feet  from  the  water.  They  are
much  attached  to  their  breeding-places,  and  for  three  successive  years  I
found  a pair  near  Henderson,  in  Kentucky,  with  eggs  in  the  beginning
of  April,  in  the  abandoned  nest  of  an  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker.  The
eggs,  which  are  from  six  to  fifteen,  according  to  the  age  of  the  bird,  are
placed  on  dry  plants,  feathers,  and  a scanty  portion  of  down,  which  I be-
lieve is  mostly  plucked  from  the  breast  of  the  female.  They  are  perfectly
smooth,  nearly  elliptical,  of  a light  colour  between  buff  and  pale  green,
two  inches  in  length  by  one  and  a half  in  diameter ; the  shell  is  about
equal  in  firmness  to  that  of  the  Mallard’s  egg,  and  quite  smooth.

No  sooner  has  the  female  completed  her  set  of  eggs  than  she  is  aban-
doned by  her  mate,  who  now  joins  others,  which  form  themselves  into
considerable  flocks,  and  thus  remain  apart  until  the  young  are  able  to  fly,
when  old  and  young  of  both  sexes  come  together,  and  so  remain  until  the
commencement  of  the  next  breeding  season.  In  all  the  nests  which  I
have  examined,  I have  been  rather  surprised  to  find  a quantity  of  feathers
belonging  to  birds  of  other  species,  even  those  of  the  domestic  fowl,  and
particularly  of  the  wild  goose  and  wild  turkey.  On  coming  upon  a nest
with  eggs  when  the  bird  was  absent  in  search  of  food,  I have  always  found
the  eggs  covered  over  with  feathers  and  down,  although  quite  out  of
sight,  in  the  depth  of  a woodpecker’s  or  squirrel’s  hole.  On  the  contrary,
when  the  nest  was  placed  in  the  broken  branch  of  a tree,  it  could  easily


WOOD  DUCK.


55


be  observed  from  the  ground,  on  account  of  the  feathers,  dead  sticks,  and
withered  grasses  about  it.  If  the  nest  is  placed  immediately  over  the
water,  the  young,  the  moment  they  are  hatched,  scramble  to  the  mouth
of  the  hole,  launch  into  the  air  with  their  little  wings  and  feet  spread  out,
and  drop  into  their  favourite  element ; but  whenever  their  birth-place  is
at  some  distance  from  it,  the  mother  carries  them  to  it  one  by  one  in  her
bill,  holding  them  so  as  not  to  injure  their  yet  tender  frame.  On  several
occasions,  however,  when  the  hole  was  thirty,  forty,  or  more  yards  from  a
bayou  or  other  piece  of  water,  I observed  that  the  mother  suffered  the
young  to  fall  on  the  grasses  and  dried  leaves  beneath  the  tree,  and  after-
wards led  them  directly  to  the  nearest  edge  of  the  next  pool  or  creek.  At
this  early  age,  the  young  answer  to  their  parents’  call  with  a mellow  pee,
pee,  pee,  often  and  rapidly  repeated.  The  call  of  the  mother  at  such  times
is  low,  soft,  and  prolonged,  resembling  the  syllables  pe-H,  pe-ee.  The
watch-note  of  the  male,  which  resembles  hoe-eek,  is  never  uttei’ed  by  the
female ; indeed,  the  male  himself  seldom  uses  it  unless  alarmed  by  some
uncommon  sound  or  the  sight  of  a distant  enemy,  or  when  intent  on  call-
ing passing  birds  of  his  own  species.

The  young  are  carefully  led  along  the  shallow  and  grassy  shores,  and
taught  to  obtain  their  food,  which  at  this  early  period  consists  of  small
aquatic  insects,  flies,  musquitoes,  and  seeds.  As  they  grow  up,  you  now
and  then  see  the  whole  flock  run  as  it  were  along  the  surface  of  the  slug-
gish stream  in  chase  of  a dragon-fly,  or  to  pick  up  a grasshopper  or  locust
that  has  accidentally  dropped  upon  it.  They  are  excellent  divers,  and
when  frightened  instantly  disappear,  disperse  below  the  surface,  and  make
for  the  nearest  shore,  on  attaining  which  they  run  for  the  woods,  squat  in
any  convenient  place,  and  thus  elude  pursuit.  I used  two  modes  of  pro-
curing them  alive  on  such  occasions.  One  was  with  a bag  net,  such  as  is
employed  in  catching  our  little  partridge,  and  which  I placed  half  sunk  in
the  water,  driving  the  birds  slowly,  first  within  the  wings,  and  finally
into  the  bag.  In  this  manner  I have  caught  young  and  old  birds  of  this
species  in  considerable  numbers.  The  other  method  I accidentally  dis-
covered while  on  a shooting  excursion,  accompanied  by  an  excellent
pointer  dog.  I observed  that  the  sight  of  this  faithful  animal  always
immediately  frightened  the  young  ducks  to  the  shores,  the  old  one  taking
to  her  wings  as  soon  as  she  conceived  her  brood  to  be  safe.  But  the  next
instant  Juno  would  dash  across  the  bayou  or  pond,  reach  the  opposite
bank,  and  immediately  follow  on  their  track.  In  a few  moments  she


56


WOOD  DUCK,


would  return  with  a duckling  held  between  her  lips,  when  I would  take
it  from  her  unhurt.

While  residing  at  Henderson,  I thought  of  taming  a number  of  Wood
Ducks.  In  the  course  of  a few  days  J uno  procured  for  me,  in  the  man-
ner above  described,  as  many  as  I had  a mind  for,  and  they  were  convey-
ed home  in  a bag.  A dozen  or  more  were  placed  in  empty  flour  barrels,
and  covered  over  for  some  hours,  with  the  view  of  taming  them  the  sooner.
Several  of  these  barrels  were  placed  in  the  yard,  but  whenever  I went
and  raised  their  lids,  I found  all  the  little  ones  hooked  by  their  sharp
claws  to  the  very  edge  of  their  prisons,  and,  the  instant  that  room  was
granted,  they  would  tumble  over  and  run  off"  in  all  directions.  I after-
wards frequently  saw  these  young  birds  rise  from  the  bottom  to  the  brim
of  a cask,  by  moving  a few  inches  at  a time  up  the  side,  and  fixing  foot
after  foot  by  means  of  their  diminutive  hooked  claws,  which,  in  passing
over  my  hand,  I found  to  have  points  almost  as  fine  as  those  of  a needle.
They  fed  freely  on  corn  meal  soaked  in  water,  and  as  they  grew,  collect-
ed flies  with  great  expertness.  When  they  were  half-grown  I gave  them
great  numbers  of  our  common  locusts  yet  unable  to  fly,  which  were  ga-
thered by  boys  from  the  trunks  of  trees  and  the  “ iron  weeds,”  a species  of
wild  hemp  very  abundant  in  that  portion  of  the  country.  These  I would
throw  to  them  on  the  water  of  the  artificial  pond  which  I had  in  my  gar-
den, when  the  eagerness  with  which  they  would  scramble  and  fight  for
them  always  afforded  me  great  amusement.  They  grew  up  apace,  when
I pinioned  them  all,  and  they  subsequently  bred  in  my  grounds  in  boxes
which  I had  placed  conveniently  over  the  water,  with  a board  or  sticks
leading  to  them,  and  an  abundant  supply  of  proper  materials  for  a nest
placed  in  them.

Few  birds  are  more  interesting  to  observe  during  the  love  season  than
Wood  Ducks.  The  great  beauty  and  neatness  of  their  apparel,  and  the
grace  of  their  motions,  always  afford  pleasure  to  the  observer ; and,  as  I
have  had  abundant  opportunities  of  studying  their  habits  at  that  period,
I am  enabled  to  present  you  with  a full  account  of  their  proceedings.

When  March  has  again  returned,  and  the  Dogwood  expands  its  pure
blossoms  to  the  sun,  the  Cranes  soar  away  on  their  broad  wings,  bidding
our  country  adieu  for  a season,  flocks  of  water-fowls  are  pursuing  their
early  migi'ations,  the  frogs  issue  from  their  muddy  beds  to  pipe  a few  notes
of  languid  joy,  the  Swallow  has  just  arrived,  and  the  Bluebird  has  re-
turned to  his  box.  The  Wood  Duck  almost  alone  remains  on  the  pool.


WOOD  DUCK.


57


as  if  to  afford  us  an  opportunity  of  studying  the  habits  of  its  tribe.  Here
they  are,  a whole  flock  of  beautiful  birds,  the  males  chasing  their  rivals,
the  females  coquetting  with  their  chosen  beaux.  Observe  that  fine  drake  !
how  gracefully  he  raises  his  head  and  curves  his  neck  ! As  he  bows  before
the  object  of  his  love,  he  raises  for  a moment  his  silken  crest.  His
throat  is  swelled,  and  from  it  there  issues  a guttural  sound,  which  to  his
beloved  is  as  sweet  as  the  song  of  the  Wood  Thrush  to  its  gentle  mate.
The  female,  as  if  not  unwilling  to  manifest  the  desire  to  please  which  she
really  feels,  swims  close  by  his  side,  now  and  then  caresses  him  by  touch-
ing his  feathers  with  her  bill,  and  shews  displeasure  towards  any  other  of
her  sex  that  may  come  near.  Soon  the  happy  pair  separate  from  the  rest,
repeat  every  now  and  then  their  caresses,  and  at  length,  having  sealed  the
conjugal  compact,  fly  off  to  the  woods  to  search  for  a large  woodpecker’s
hole.  Occasionally  the  males  fight  with  each  other,  but  their  combats  are
not  of  long  duration,  nor  is  the  field  ever  stained  with  blood,  the  loss  of  a
few  feathers  or  a sharp  tug  of  the  head  being  generally  enough  to  decide
the  contest.  Although  the  Wood  Ducks  always  form  their  nests  in  the
hollow  of  a tree,  their  caresses  are  performed  exclusively  on  the  water,  to
which  they  resort  for  the  purpose,  even  when  their  loves  have  been  first
proved  far  above  the  ground  on  a branch  of  some  tall  sycamore.  While
the  female  is  depositing  her  eggs,  the  male  is  seen  to  fly  swiftly  past  the
hole  in  which  she  is  hidden,  erecting  his  crest,  and  sending  forth  his  love-
notes,  to  which  she  never  fails  to  respond.

On  the  ground  the  Wood  Duck  runs  nimbly  and  with  more  grace
than  most  other  birds  of  its  tribe.  On  reaching  the  shore  of  a pond  or
stream,  it  immediately  shakes  its  tail  sidewise,  looks  around,  and  proceeds
in  search  of  food.  It  moves  on  the  larger  branches  of  trees  with  the  same
apparent  ease  ; and,  while  looking  at  thirty  or  forty  of  these  birds  perch-
ed on  a single  sycamore  on  the  bank  of  a secluded  bayou,  I have  conceived
the  sight  as  pleasing  as  any  that  I have  ever  enjoyed.  They  always  re-
minded me  of  the  Muscovy  Duck,  of  which  they  look  as  if  a highly
finished  and  flattering  miniature.  They  frequently  prefer  walking  on  an
inclined  log  or  the  fallen  trunk  of  a tree,  one  end  of  which  lies  in  the
water,  while  the  other  rests  on  the  steep  bank,  to  betaking  themselves  to
flight  at  the  sight  of  an  approaching  enemy.  In  this  manner  I have  seen
a whole  flock  walk  from  the  water  into  the  woods,  as  a steamer  was  ap-
proaching them  in  the  eddies  of  the  Ohio  or  Mississippi.  They  swim
and  dive  well,  when  wounded  and  closely  pursued,  often  stopping  at  the


58


WOOD  DUCK.


edge  of  the  water  with  nothing  above  it  but  the  bill,  but  at  other  times
running  to  a considerable  distance  into  the  woods,  or  hiding  in  a cane-
brake  beside  a log.  In  such  places  I have  often  found  them,  having  been
led  to  their  place  of  concealment  by  my  dog.  When  frightened,  they  rise
by  a single  spring  from  the  water,  and  are  as  apt  to  make  directly  for  the
woods  as  to  follow  the  stream.  When  they  discover  an  enemy  while
under  the  covert  of  shrubs  or  other  plants  on  a pond,  instead  of  taking  to
wing,  they  swim  off  in  silence  among  the  thickest  weeds,  so  as  generally  to
elude  your  search,  by  landing  and  running  over  a narrow  piece  of  ground
to  another  pond.  In  autumn,  a whole  covey  may  often  be  seen  standing
or  sitting  on  a floating  log,  pluming  and  cleaning  themselves  for  hours.
On  such  occasions  the  knowing  sportsman  commits  great  havock  among
them,  killing  half  a dozen  or  more  at  a shot.

The  food  of  the  Wood  Duck,  or  as  it  is  called  in  the  Western  and
Southern  States,  the  Summer  Duck,  consists  of  acorns,  beech-nuts,  grapes,
and  berries  of  various  sorts,  for  which  they  half- dive,  in  the  manner  of
the  Mallard  for  example,  or  search  under  the  trees  on  the  shores  and  in
the  woods,  turning  over  the  fallen  leaves  with  dexterity.  In  the  Caro-
linas,  they  resort  under  night  to  the  rice  fields,  as  soon  as  the  grain  be-
comes milky.  They  also  devour  insects,  snails,  tadpoles,  and  small  water
lizards,  swallowing  at  the  same  time  a quantity  of  sand  or  gravel  to  aid
the  trituration  of  their  food.

The  best  season  in  which  to  procure  these  birds  for  the  table  is  from
the  beginning  of  September  until  the  first  frost,  their  flesh  being  then
tender,  juicy,  and  in  my  opinion  excellent.  They  are  easily  caught  in
figure-of-four  traps.  I know  a person  now  residing  in  South  Carolina,
who  has  caught  several  hundreds  in  the  course  of  a week,  bringing  them
home  in  bags  across  his  horse’s  saddle,  and  afterwards  feeding  them  in
coops  on  Indian  corn.  In  that  State,  they  are  bought  in  the  markets  for
thirty  or  forty  cents  the  pair.  At  Boston,  where  I found  them  rather
abundant  during  winter,  they  bring  nearly  double  that  price;  but  in
Ohio  or  Kentucky  twenty-five  cents  are  considered  an  equivalent.  Their
feathers  are  as  good  as  those  of  any  other  species ; and  I feel  well  assured
that,  with  a few  years  of  care,  the  Wood  Duck  might  be  perfectly  domes-
ticated, when  it  could  not  fail  to  be  as  valuable  as  it  is  beautiful.

Their  sense  of  hearing  is  exceedingly  acute,  and  by  means  of  it  they
often  save  themselves  from  their  wily  enemies  the  minx,  the  polecat,  and
the  racoon.  The  vile  snake  that  creeps  into  their  nest  and  destroys  their


WOOD  DUCK.


59


eggs,  is  their  most  pernicious  enemy  on  land.  The  young,  when  on  the
water,  have  to  guard  against  the  snapping  turtle,  the  gar-fish,  and  the
eel,  and  in  the  Southern  Districts,  against  the  lashing  tail  and  the  tre-
mendous jaws  of  the  alligator.

Those  which  breed  in  Maine,  New  Brunswick,  and  Nova  Scotia,  move
southward  as  soon  as  the  frosts  commence,  and  none  are  kno\Vn  to  spend
the  winter  so  far  north.  I have  been  much  surprised  to  find  Wilson
speaking  of  the  Wood  Ducks  as  a species  of  which  more  than  five  or  six
individuals  are  seldom  seen  together.  A would-be  naturalist  in  America,
who  has  had  better  opportunities  of  knowing  its  habits  than  the  admired
author  of  the  “ American  Ornithology,”  repeats  the  same  error,  and,  I
am  told,  believes  that  all  his  statements  are  considered  true.  For  my  own
part,  I assure  you,  I have  seen  hundreds  in  a single  flock,  and  have  known
fifteen  to  be  killed  by  a single  shot.  They,  however,  raise  only  one  brood
in  the  season,  unless  their  eggs  or  young  have  been  destroyed.  Should
this  happen,  the  female  soon  finds  means  of  recalling  her  mate  from  the
flock  which  he  has  joined.

On  having  recourse  to  a journal  written  by  me  at  Henderson  nearly
twenty  years  ago,  I find  it  stated  that  the  attachment  of  a male  to  a female
lasts  only  during  one  breeding  season;  and  that  the  males  provide  them-
selves with  mates  in  succession,  the  strongest  taking  the  first  choice,  and
the  weakest  being  content  with  what  remains.  The  young  birds  which
I raised,  never  failed  to  make  directly  for  the  Ohio,  whenever  they  escaped
from  the  grounds,  although  they  never  had  been  there  before.  The  only
other  circumstances  which  I have  to  mention  are,  that  when  entering  the
hole  in  which  its  nest  is,  the  bird  dives  as  it  were  into  it  at  once,  and  does
not  alight  first  against  the  tree ; that  I have  never  witnessed  an  instance
of  its  taking  possession,  by  force,  of  a woodpecker’s  hole ; and  lastly,
that  during  winter  they  allow  ducks  of  different  species  to  associate  with
them.


fiO


WOOD  DUCK.


Anas  sponsa,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  207 — Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  871 Ch.

Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  385.

Summer  Duck,  or  Wood  Duck,  Anas  sponsa,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  97.
pi.  78.  fig.  3. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  394.

Dendronessa  sponsa,  Richards  and  Swains.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  446.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCVI.  Fig.  1,  3.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  depressed
towards  the  end,  slightly  narrowed  towards  the  middle  of  the  unguis,  the
frontal  angles  prolonged  and  pointed.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal
line  at  first  sloping,  then  concave,  along  the  unguis  convex,  the  ridge
broad  and  flat  at  the  base,  then  broadly  convex,  the  sides  concave  and
perpendicular  at  the  base,  convex  and  sloping  towards  the  end,  edges  soft,
with  about  twenty-two  internal  lamellae,  unguis  broadly  elliptical,  curved,
rounded.  Nostrils  subbasal,  lateral,  rather  small,  oval,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  flattish,  with  the  angle  very  long  and  rather  narrow,  the  dorsal
line  very  short,  convex,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  soft  and  rounded,  la-
mellate above.

Head  of  moderate  size,  neck  rather  long  and  slender,  body  full  and
depressed,  wings  rather  small.  Feet  very  short,  strong,  placed  rather  far
back  ; tarsus  very  short,  considerably  compressed,  at  its  lower  part  ante-
riorly with  two  series  of  scutella,  the  rest  covered  with  reticulated  angu-
lar scales.  Toes  scutellate  above ; first  very  small,  free,  with  a nariow
membrane  beneath,  third  longest,  fourth  a little  shorter ; claws  small,
curved,  compressed,  acute,  the  hind  one  smaller  and  more  curved,  that
of  the  third  toe  with  an  inner  sharp  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended,  generally  glossed.  Feathers' of  the
middle  of  the  head  and  upper  part  of  hind  neck,  very  narrow,  elongated,
and  incurved,  of  the  rest  of  the  head  and  upper  part  of  neck  very  short,
of  the  back  and  lower  parts  in  general  ^broad  and  rounded,  excepting  on
the  shoulders  before  the  wings,  where  they  are  enlarged,  very  broad  and
abrupt.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  narrow,  acute ; primaries  curved,
strong,  tapering,  first  and  second  longest ; secondaries  broad,  rounded.
Tail  of  moderate  length,  rather  broad,  much  rounded,  of  sixteen  rounded
feathers.

Upper  mandible  bright  red  at  the  base,  pale  yellow  on  the  sides,  the
intermediate  space  along  the  ridge,  and  the  unguis,  black,  as  in  the  lower
mandible  and  its  membrane.  Iris  and  edges  of  eyelids  bright  red.  Feet


WOOD  DUCK.


61


dull  orange,  claws  black.  Upper  part  of  head,  and  space  between  the
bill  and  eye  deep  green,  and  highly  glossed  ; below  the  latter  space  a patch
of  dark  purple,  and  a larger  one  of  the  same  colour,  but  lighter,  behind
the  eye ; sides  of  the  neck,  its  hind  part  under  the  crest,  and  the  middle
all  round  very  dark  purple.  A narrow  line  along  the  base  of  the  upper
mandible  and  over  the  eye,  meeting  on  the  occiput,  pure  white,  as  are
some  of  the  feathers  of  the  crest ; another  from  behind  the  eye,  meeting
below  the  occiput,  and  including  several  of  the  lower  elongated  feathers.
Throat,  for  more  than  three  inches,  pure  white,  with  a process  on  each
side  a little  beyond  the  eye,  and  another  nearly  halfway  down  the  neck.
Sides  of  the  neck,  and  its  lower  part  anteriorly  reddish-purple,  each  feather
on  the  latter  with  a triangular  white  tip.  Middle  of  the  neck  behind,  back
and  rump,  very  dark  reddish-brown,  the  latter  deeper,  and  tinged  with
green;  upper  tail-coverts  and  tail  greenish-black  ; some  of  the  lateral  tail-
coverts  dull  reddish-purple,  a few  on  either  side  with  their  central  filaments
light  red.  Smaller  wing-coverts,  alula  and  primaries  dull  greyish-brown ;
most  of  the  latter  with  part  of  their  outer  web  greyish-white,  and  their
inner  towards  the  end  darker  and  glossed  with  green.  Secondary  quills
tipped  with  white,  the  outer  webs  green,  with  purple  reflections,  those  of
the  inner  secondaries  and  scapulars  velvet-black,  their  inner  webs  partially
glossed  and  changing  to  green.  The  broad  feathers  anterior  to  the  wings
are  white,  terminated  with  black ; breast  and  abdomen  greyish-white ;
feathers  under  the  wings  yellowish-grey,  minutely  undulated  with  black
and  white  bars;  lower  wing-coverts  and  axillar  feathers  white,  barred
with  greyish-brown  ; lower  tail-coverts  dull  greyish-brown.

Length  20^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  17^,  extent  of  wings  28 ; bill  1 ;

tarsus  1 middle  toe  and  claw  2/j  ; wing  from  flexure  9,  tail  41.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCVI.  Figs.  2,  4.

The  female  is  considerably  smaller,  and  differs  greatly  from  the  male
in  colouring.  The  feathers  of  the  head  are  not  elongated,  but  those  of
the  upper  part  of  the  neck  behind  are  slightly  so.  In  other  respects  the
plumage  presents  nothing  very  remarkable,  and  is  similar  to  that  of  the
male,  only  the  feathers  anterior  to  the  wing,  the  upper  hypochondrial,
the  inner  secondaries  and  the  rump-feathers  are  not  enlarged,  as  in  him.
Bill  blackish-brown ; feet  dusky,  tinged  with  yellow.  Upper  part  of
head  dusky,  glossed  with  green,  sides  of  the  head  and  neck,  with  the  hind


62


WOOD  DUCK.


part  of  the  latter,  light  brownish-grey ; throat  white,  but  without  the
lateral  processes  of  the  male.  Fore  part  of  neck  below  and  sides  light
yellowish-brown,  mottled  with  dark  greyish-brown,  as  are  the  sides  under
the  wings ; breast  and  abdomen  white,  the  former  spotted  with  brown.
Hind  neck,  back,  and  rump,  dark  brown,  glossed  with  green  and  purple.
Wings  as  in  the  male,  but  the  speculum  less,  and  the  secondaries  exter-
nally faint  reddish-purple,  the  velvet  black  of  the  male  diminished  to  a
few  narrow  markings.  Tail  dark  brown,  glossed  with  green ; lower  tail-
coverts  pale  greyish-brown,  mottled  with  white ; lower  wing-coverts  as  in
the  male.

Length  19^  inches.


The  tree  represented  in  the  plate  is  the  Platanus  occidentalis,  which
in  different  parts  of  the  United  States  is  known  by  the  names  of  Button-
wood,  Sycamore,  Plane-tree,  and  Water  Beech,  and  in  Canada  by  that
of  Cotton-tree.  It  is  one  of  our  largest  trees,  and  on  the  banks  of  our
great  western  and  southern  rivers,  often  attains  a diameter  of  eight  or  ten
feet.  Although  naturally  inclined  to  prefer  the  vicinity  of  water,  it  grows
in  almost  every  kind  of  situation,  and  thrives  even  in  the  sti’eets  of  several
of  our  eastern  cities,  such  as  Philadelphia  and  New  York.


( 63  )


THE  BOOBY  GANNET.

SULA  Fuse  A,  BrISS.

PLATE  CCVII.  Male.

As  the  Marion  was  nearing  the  curious  islets  of  the  Tortugas,  one  of
the  birds  that  more  particularly  attracted  my  notice  was  of  this  species.
The  nearer  we  approached  the  land,  the  more  numerous  did  they  become,
and  I felt  delighted  with  the  hope  that  ere  many  days  should  elapse,  I
should  have  an  opportunity  of  studying  their  habits.  As  night  drew  her
sombre  curtain  over  the  face  of  nature,  some  of  these  birds  alighted  on
the  top-yard  of  our  bark,  and  I observed  ever  afterwards  that  they  mani-
fested a propensity  to  roost  at  as  great  a height  as  possible  above  the  sur-
rounding objects,  making  choice  of  the  tops  of  bushes,  or  even  upright
poles,  and  disputing  with  each  other  the  privilege.  The  first  that  was
shot  at,  was  approached  with  considerable  difficulty  : it  had  alighted  on
the  prong  of  a tree  which  had  floated  and  been  fastened  to  the  bottom  of
a rocky  shallow  at  some  distance  from  shore ; the  water  was  about  four
feet  deep  and  quite  rough  ; sharks  we  well  knew  were  abundant  around
us ; but  the  desire  to  procure  the  bird  was  too  strong  to  be  overcome  by
such  obstacles.  In  an  instant,  the  pilot  and  myself  were  over  the  sides
of  the  boat,  and  onward  we  proceeded  with  our  guns  cocked  and  ready.
The  yawl  was  well  manned,  and  its  crew  awaiting  the  result.  After  we
had  struggled  through  the  turbulent  waters  about  a hundred  yards,  my
companion  raised  his  gun  and  fired  ; but  away  flew  the  bird  with  a broken
leg,  and  we  saw  no  more  of  it  that  day.  Next  day,  however,  at  the  same
hour,  the  Booby  was  seen  perched  on  the  same  prong,  where,  after  rest-
ing about  three  hours,  it  made  off  to  the  open  sea,  doubtless  in  search  of
food.

About  eight  miles  to  the  north-east  of  the  Tortugas  Lighthouse,  lies
a small  sand-bar  a few  acres  in  extent,  called  Booby  Island,  on  account
of  the  number  of  birds  of  this  species  that  resort  to  it  during  the  breed-
ing-season, and  to  it  we  accordingly  went.  We  found  it  not  more  than
a few  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  water,  but  covered  with  Boobies,  which
lay  basking  in  the  sunshine,  and  pluming  themselves.  Our  attempt  to
land  on  the  island  before  the  birds  should  fly  off,  proved  futile,  for  before


64


BOOBY  GANNET.


we  were  within  fifty  yards  of  it,  they  had  all  betaken  themselves  to  flight,
and  were  dispersing  in  various  directions.  We  landed,  however,  disti’i-
buted  ourselves  in  different  parts,  and  sent  the  boat  to  some  distance,  the
pilot  assuring  us  that  the  birds  would  return.  And  so  it  happened.  As
they  approached,  we  laid  ourselves  as  ffat  as  possible  in  the  sand,  and  al-
though none  of  them  alighted,  we  attained  our  object,  for  in  a couple  of
hours  we  procured  thirty  individuals  of  both  sexes  and  of  different  ages,
finding  little  difficulty  in  bringing  them  down  as  they  flew  over  us  at  a
moderate  height.  The  wounded  birds  that  fell  on  the  ground  made  im-
mediately for  the  water,  moving  with  more  ease  than  I had  expected  from
the  accounts  usually  given  of  the  awkward  motions  of  these  birds  on  the
land.  Those  which  reached  the  water  swam  off  with  great  buoyancy,  and
with  such  rapidity,  that  it  took  much  rowing  to  secure  some  of  them,
while  most  of  those  that  fell  directly  into  the  sea  with  only  a wing
broken,  escaped.  The  island  was  covered  with  their  dung,  the  odour  of
which  extended  to  a considerable  distance  leeward.  In  the  evening  of  the
same  day  we  landed  on  another  island,  named  after  the  Noddy,  and  thick-
ly covered  with  bushes  and  low  trees,  to  which  thousands  of  that  species
of  Tern  resort  for  the  purpose  of  breeding.  There  also  we  found  a great
number  of  Boobies.  They  were  perched  on  the  top-branches  of  the  trees,
on  which  they  had  nests,  and  here  again  we  obtained  as  many  as  we  de-
sired. They  flew  close  over  our  heads,  eyeing  us  with  dismay  but  in  si-
lence ; indeed,  not  one  of  these  birds  ever  emitted  a cry,  except  at  the  mo-
ment when  they  rose  from  their  perches  or  from  the  sand.  Their  note  is
harsh  and  guttural,  somewhat  like  that  of  a strangled  pig,  and  resembling
the  syllables  kork,  hork.

The  nest  of  the  Booby  is  placed  on  the  top  of  a bush  at  a height  of
from  four  to  ten  feet.  It  is  large  and  flat,  formed  of  a few  dry  sticks,
covered  and  matted  with  sea-weeds  in  great  quantity.  I have  no  doubt
that  they  return  to  the  same  nest  many  years  in  succession,  and  repair  it
as  occasion  requires.  In  all  the  nests  which  I examined,  only  one  egg
was  found,  and  as  most  of  the  birds  were  sitting,  and  some  of  the  eggs
had  the  chick  nearly  ready  for  exclusion,  it  is  probable  that  these  birds
raise  only  a single  young  one,  like  the  Common  Gannet  or  Solan  Goose.
The  egg  is  of  a dull  white  colour,  without  spots,  and  about  the  size  of
that  of  a common  hen,  but  more  elongated,  being  2f  inches  in  length,
with  a diameter  of  1|.  In  some  nests  they  were  covered  with  filth
from  the  parent  bird,  in  the  manner  of  the  Florida  Cormorant.  The


BOOBY  GANNET.


65


young,  which  had  an  uncouth  appearance,  were  covered  with  down ; the
bill  and  feet  of  a deep  livid  blue  or  indigo  colour.  On  being  touched,
they  emitted  no  cry,  but  turned  away  their  heads  at  every  trial.  A great
quantity  of  fish  lay  beneath  the  trees  in  a state  of  putrefaction,  proving
how  abundantly  the  young  birds  were  supplied  by  their  parents.  Indeed,
while  we  were  on  Noddy  Island,  there  was  a constant  succession  of  birds
coming  in  from  the  sea  with  food  for  their  young,  consisting  chiefly  of
flying-fish  and  small  mullets,  which  they  disgorged  in  a half  macerated
state  into  the  open  throats  of  their  offspring.  Unfortunately  the  time
afforded  me  on  that  coast  was  not  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  trace  the  pro-
gress of  their  growth.  I observed,  however,  that  none  of  the  birds  which
were  still  brown  had  nests,  and  that  they  roosted  apart,  particularly  on
Booby  Island,  where  also  many  barren  ones  usually  resorted,  to  lie  on  the
sand  and  bask  in  the  sun.

The  flight  of  the  Booby  is  graceful  and  extremely  protracted.  They
pass  swiftly  at  a height  of  from  twenty  yards  to  a foot  or  two  from  the
surface,  often  following  the  troughs  of  the  waves  to  a considerable  distance,
their  wings  extended  at  right  angles  to  the  body ; then,  without  any  ap-
parent effort,  raising  themselves  and  allowing  the  rolling  waters  to  break
beneath  them,  when  they  tack  about,  and  sweep  along  in  a contrary
direction  in  search  of  food,  much  in  the  manner  of  the  true  Petrels.
Now,  if  you  follow  an  individual,  you  see  that  it  suddenly  stops  short,
plunges  headlong  into  the  water,  pierces  with  its  powerful  beak  and  se-
cures a fish,  emerges  again  with  inconceivable  ease,  after  a short  interval
rises  on  wing,  performs  a few  wide  circlings,  and  makes  ofp  toward  some
shore.  At  this  time  its  flight  is  different,  being  performed  by  flappings
for  twenty  or  thirty  paces,  with  alternate  sailings  of  more  than  double
that  space.  When  overloaded  with  food,  they  alight  on  the  water,  where,
if  undisturbed,  they  appear  to  remain  for  hours  at  a time,  probably  until
digestion  has  afforded  them  relief.

The  range  to  which  this  species  confines  itself  along  our  coast,  seldom
extends  beyond  Cape  Hatteras  to  the  eastward,  but  they  become  more  and
more  numerous  the  farther  south  we  proceed.  They  breed  abundantly
on  all  such  islands  or  keys  as  are  adapted  for  the  purpose,  on  the  southern
and  western  coasts  of  the  Floridas  and  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  where  I
was  told  they  breed  on  the  sand-bars.  Their  power  of  wing  seems  suffi-
cient to  enable  them  to  brave  the  tempest,  while  during  a continuance  of


VOL.  III.


E


G(j


BOOBY  GANNET.


fair  weather  they  venture  to  a great  distance  seaward,  and  I have  seen
them  fully  200  miles  from  land.

The  expansibility  of  the  gullet  of  this  species  enables  it  to  swallow
fishes  of  considerable  size,  and  on  such  occasions  their  mouth  seems  to
spread  to  an  unusual  width.  In  the  throats  of  several  individuals  that
were  shot  as  they  were  returning  to  their  nests,  I found  mullets  measur-
ing seven  or  eight  inches,  that  must  have  weighed  fully  half  a pound.
Their  body  beneath  the  skin,  is  covered  with  numerous  air-cells,  which
probably  assist  them  in  raising  or  lowering  themselves  while  on  wing,  and
perhaps  still  more  so  when  on  the  point  of  performing  the  rapid  plunge
by  which  they  secure  their  prey.

Their  principal  enemies  during  the  breeding-season  are  the  American
Crow  and  the  Fish  Crow,  both  of  which  destroy  their  eggs,  and  the  Tur-
key Buzzard,  which  devours  their  young  while  yet  unfledged.  They
breed  during  the  month  of  May,  but  I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  if
they  raise  more  than  one  brood  in  the  season.  The  adult  birds  chase
away  those  which  are  yet  immature  during  the  period  of  incubation.  It
would  seem  that  they  take  several  years  in  attaining  their  perfect  state.

When  procured  alive,  they  feed  freely,  and  may  be  kept  any  length
of  time,  provided  they  are  supplied  with  fish.  No  other  food,  however,
could  I tempt  them  to  swallow,  excepting  slices  of  turtle,  which  after  all
they  did  not  seem  to  relish.  In  no  instance  did  I observe  one  drinking.
Some  authors  have  stated  that  the  Frigate  Pelican  and  the  Lestris  force
the  Booby  to  disgorge  its  food  that  they  may  obtain  it ; but  this  I have
never  witnessed.  Like  the  Common  Gannet,  they  may  be  secured  by
fastening  a fish  to  a soft  plank,  and  sinking  it  a few  feet  beneath  the  sur-
face of  the  water,  for  if  they  perceive  the  bait,  which  they  are  likely  to
do  if  they  pass  over  it,  they  plunge  headlong  upon  it,  and  drive  their  bill
into  the  wood.;

When  a Booby  has  alighted  on  the  spar  of  a vessel,  it  is  no  easy  mat-
ter to  catch  it,  unless  it  is  much  fatigued ; but  if  exhausted  and  asleep,
an  expert  seaman  may  occasionally  secure  one.  I was  informed  that  af-
ter the  breeding-season,  these  birds  roost  on  trees  in  company  with  the
Brown  Pelican  and  a species  of  Tern,  Sterna  stolida,  and  spend  their
hours  of  daily  rest  on  the  sand-ba.nks.  Our  pilot,  who,  as  I have  men-
tioned in  my  second  volume,  was  a man  of  great  observation,  assured  me
that  while  at  Vera  Cruz,  he  saw  the  fishermen  there  go  to  sea,  and  re-


BOOBY  GANNET.


67


turn  from  considerable  distances,  simply  by  following  the  course  of  the
Boobies.

The  bills  and  legs  of  those  which  I procured  in  the  brown  plumage,
and  which  were  from  one  to  two  years  of  age,  were  dusky  blue.  These  were
undergoing  moult  on  the  14th  of  May.  At  a more  advanced  age,  the
parts  mentioned  become  paler,  and  when  the  bird  has  arrived  at  maturity,
are  as  represented  in  my  plate.  I observed  no  external  difference  between
the  sexes  in  the  adult  birds.  The  stomach  is  a long  dilatable  pouch,  thin,
and  of  a yellow  colour.  The  body  is  muscular,  and  the  flesh,  which  is  of
a dark  colour,  tough,  and  having  a disagreeable  smell,  is  scarcely  fit  for
food.

I am  unable  to  find  a good  reason  for  those  who  have  chosen  to  call
these  birds  boobies.  Authors,  it  is  true,  generally  represent  them  as  ex-
tremely stupid ; but  to  me  the  word  is  utterly  inapplicable  to  any  bird
with  which  I am  acquainted.  The  Woodcock,  too,  is  said  to  be  stupid,
as  are  many  other  birds ; but  my  opinion,  founded  on  pretty  extensive
observation,  is,  that  it  is  only  when  birds  of  any  species  are  unacquainted
with  man,  that  they  manifest  that  kind  of  ignorance  or  innocence  which
he  calls  stupidity,  and.  by  which  they  suffer  themselves  to  be  imposed  up-
on. A little  acquaintance  with  him  soon  enables  them  to  perceive  enough
of  his  character  to  induce  them  to  keep  aloof.  This  I observed  in  the
Booby  Gannet,  as  well  as  in  the  Noddy  Tern,  and  in  certain  species  of
land  birds  of  which  I have  already  spoken.  After  my  first  visit  to  Booby
Island  in  the  Tortugas,  the  Gannets  had  already  become  very  shy  and
wary,  and  before  the  Marion  sailed  away  from  those  peaceful  retreats  of
the  wandering  sea-birds,  the  Boobies  had  become  so  knowing,  that  the  most
expert  of  our  party  could  not  get  within  shot  of  them.


Pei.ecanus  Sula,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  218. — Lath.  Index  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  892.
SuLA  FUSCA,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  408.

Booby,  Sula  fusca,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  500.


Adult  Male.  Plate  CCVII.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  opening  beyond  the  eyes,  straight,  elongated-
conical,  broader  above  than  beneath  at  the  base,  compressed.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  convex  at  the  base,  then  a little  concave,
and  towards  the  tip  slightly  arched,  ridge  very  broad,  convex,  separated

E 2


68


BOOBY  GANNET.


by  a seam  on  each  side,  from  the  sides,  which  are  nearly  perpendicular,
edges  sharp,  inflected,  serrated,  tip  acute.  No  external  nostrils.  Lower
mandible  prolonged  at  the  base  behind  the  upper,  its  angle  very  long,
wide  at  the  base,  with  a bare  membrane,  very  narrow  towards  the  end,
dorsal  line  straight,  ascending,  sides  convex,  tip  very  acute,  edges  serrat-
ed towards  the  end.

Head  rather  large ; neck  rather  long  and  thick ; body  of  moderate
bulk,  rather  elongated ; wings  long.  Feet  short,  strong,  placed  rather
far  behind  ; tibiae  concealed ; tarsus  very  short,  rounded  before,  sharp
behind,  covered  all  round  with  reticular  scales ; toes  all  united  by  mem-
branes ; first  very  short,  being  about  half  the  length  of  the  second,  third
and  fourth  longest  and  nearly  equal,  but  the  claw  of  the  third  is  much
longer  than  that  of  the  fourth  ; claws  small,  compressed,  acute,  curved,
that  of  the  third  toe  largest,  depressed,  curved  outwards,  with  a thin  pec-
tinated inner  edge.

Plumage  generally  short,  close,  rather  compact,  the  feathers  small  and
rounded  ; those  on  the  head  very  small ; loral  and  orbital  spaces  bare,  as
is  that  in  the  angle  of  the  lower  mandible,  and  a short  space  above  the
tibio-tarsal  joint ; wings  long,  acute,  narrow ; primaries  strong,  narrow,
tapering  rapidly  to  a rounded  point,  first  and  second  longest  and  about
equal,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  short,  rather  broad,  nar-
rowed towards  the  rounded  point.  Tail  rather  long,  cuneate,  of  twelve
narrow,  tapering  feathers.

Bill  and  naked  parts  at  its  base  bright  yellow,  pale  flesh-coloured  to-
wards the  end  ; a dusky  spot  before  the  eye.  Iris  white.  Tarsi,  toes,
and  their  connecting  webs,  pale  yellow,  claws  white.  Head,  neck  all
round,  upper  parts  in  general,  and  lower  surface  of  wings,  dusky  brown,
tinged  with  grey  ; the  breast,  abdomen,  and  lower  tail-coverts,  pure
white.

Length  31  inches,  to  end  of  claws  27,  extent  of  wings  29^ ; bill  along
the  back  3j|,  along  the  edge  5;  tarsus  I middle  toe  and  claw  3L
Wing  from  flexure  16|,  tail  8J.  Weight  3 lb.  4<^  oz.

The  Female  resembles  the  male,  but  is  smaller.

The  Young,  when  fledged,  are  of  a greyish-brown  colour  all  over,  the
breast  and  abdomen  being  merely  a little  lighter  than  the  rest.  The  bill
and  claws  are  dusky,  the  tarsi  and  toes  with  their  membranes  dull  yellow.


( 69  )


ESQUIMAUX  CURLEW.

Numunius  borealis.  Lath.

PLATE  CCVIII.  Male  and  Female.

I REGRET  that  I am  unable  to  present  a complete  history  of  the  Es-
quimaux Curlew.  It  is  true  I might  somewhat  enlarge  my  account  of
its  habits,  were  I to  borrow  from  others,  but  as  I have  resolved  to  confine
myself  to  the  results  of  my  own  observation,  unless  in  certain  cases,  in
which  I always  take  care  to  give  my  authorities,  I hope  you  will  be
pleased  with  the  little  which  I have  to  offer.

Previous  to  my  voyage  to  Labrador,  I had  seen  only  a single  bird  of
this  species,  which  was  kindly  given  me  by  my  learned  friend  William
Oakes,  Esq.  of  Ipswich,  Massachusetts,  who  had  procured  it  in  his  imme-
diate neighbourhood,  where,  as  I have  since  ascertained,  the  Esquimaux
Curlew  spends  a few  days  in  early  autumn,  while  on  its  way  southward.
During  their  short  stay  in  that  State,  they  are  met  with  on  the  high
sandy  hills  near  the  sea-shore,  where  they  feed  on  the  grasshoppers  and  on
several  kinds  of  berries.  On  this  food  they  become  fat,  so  as  to  afford
excellent  eating,  in  consequence  of  which  they  have  probably  acquired
the  name  of  “ Dough  Bird,”  which  they  bear  in  that  district,  but  which
is  also  applied  to  several  other  birds.  How  this  species  manages  to  cross
the  whole  extent  of  the  United  States  without  being  seen  after  leaving
Massachusetts,  is  to  me  very  wonderful.  On  one  occasion  only  have  I
ever  had  a glimpse  of  it.  I was  in  company  with  my  learned  and  gene-
rous friend  John  Bachman  of  Charleston,  on  one  of  the  islands  on  the
coast  of  South  Carolina,  whither  we  had  gone  with  the  view  of  watching
the  Long-billed  Curlews  ( Numetiius  longirostris ) . It  was  at  the  dawn
of  a fine  day,  when  a dense  flock  of  the  northern  Curlews  passed  to  the
southward,  near  enough  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  species,  but  so  swift-
ly, that  in  a few  minutes  they  were  quite  out  of  sight.

On  the  29th  of  July  1833,  during  a thick  fog,  the  Esquimaux  Cur-
lews made  their  first  appearance  in  Labrador,  near  the  harbour  of  Bras
d’Or.  They  evidently  came  from  the  north,  and  arrived  in  such  dense
flocks  as  to  remind  me  of  the  Passenger  Pigeons.  The  weather  was  ex-
tremely cold^is  well  as  foggy.  For  more  than  a week  we  had  been  look-


70


ESQUIMAUX  CURLEW.


ing  for  them,  as  was  every  fisherman  in  the  harbour,  these  birds  being
considered  there,  as  indeed  they  are,  great  delicacies.  The  birds  at  length
came,  flock  after  flock,  passed  close  round  our  vessel,  and  directed  their
course  toward  the  sterile  mountainous  tracts  in  the  neighbourhood  ; and
as  soon  as  the  sun’s  rays  had  dispersed  the  fogs  that  hung  over  the  land,
our  whole  party  went  off*  in  search  of  them.

I was  not  long  in  discovering  that  their  stay  on  this  coast  was  occa-
sioned solely  by  the  density  of  the  mists  and  the  heavy  gales  that  already
gave  intimation  of  the  approaching  close  of  the  summer ; for  whenever
the  weather  cleared  up  a little,  thousands  of  them  set  off  and  steered  in
a straight  course  across  the  broad  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence.  On  the  con-
trary, when  the  wind  was  high,  and  the  fogs  thick,  they  flew  swiftly  and
low  over  the  rocky  surface  of  the  country,  as  if  bewildered.  Wherever
there  was  a spot  that  seemed  likely  to  afford  a supply  of  food,  there  the
Curlews  abounded,  and  were  easily  approached.  By  the  12th  of  August,
however,  they  had  all  left  the  country.

In  Labrador  they  feed  on  what  the  fishermen  call  the  Curlew  berry,
a small  black  fruit  growing  on  a creeping  shrub,  not  more  than  an  inch
or  two  in  height,  and  so  abundant,  that  patches  of  several  acres  covered
the  rocks  here  and  there.  When  the  birds  were  in  search  of  these  feed-
ing-grounds, they  flew  in  close  masses,  sometimes  high,  at  other  times
low,  but  always  with  remarkable  speed,  and  performing  beautiful  evolu-
tions in  the  air.  The  appearance  of  man  did  not  seem  to  intimidate  them,
for  they  would  alight  so  near  us,  or  pass  over  our  heads  at  so  short  a dis-
tance, that  we  easily  shot  them.  While  on  wing,  they  emitted  an  oft  re-
peated soft  whistling  note,  but  the  moment  they  alighted  they  became  si-
lent. They  ran  swiftly  along,  all  in  the  same  direction,  picking  up  the
berries  in  their  way,  and  when  pursued,  would  immediately  squat  in  the
manner  of  a snipe  or  partridge,  sometimes  even  laying  their  neck  and  head
quite  flat  on  the  ground,  until  you  came  within  a short  distance,  when,
at  the  single  whistle  of  any  one  of  the  flock,  they  would  all  immediately
scream  and  fly  off*,  rambling  about  for  a while,  and  not  unfrequently  re-
alighting on  the  same  spot.  Now  and  then,  however,  their  excursion
would  last  a long  time,  they  would  rise  high  in  the  air,  make  towards  the
sea,  and,  as  if  aware  of  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  weather  for  pursuing
their  southward  course,  would  return.

They  continued  to  arrive  at  Bras  d’Or  for  several  days,  in  flocks  which
seemed  to  me  to  increase  in  number.  I saw  no  Hawks  in  their  rear,  and


ESQUIMAUX  CURLEW.


71


I was  the  more  astonished  at  this,  that  at  that  period  the  Pigeon  Hawk
and  Petit  Caporal  Hawk  were  pretty  abundant.

They  rose  from  the  ground  by  a single  quick  spring,  in  the  manner
of  a snipe,  when  they  would  cut  backward,  forward,  and  all  around,  in  a
very  curious  manner,  and  would  now  and  then  pause  in  the  air,  like  a
Hawk,  remaining  stationary  for  a few  moments  with  their  head  meeting
the  wind,  when  immediately  afterwards  they  would  all  suddenly  alight.
In  calm  and  fair  weather,  they  were  more  shy  than  at  other  times.
While  on  their  passage  across  the  Gulf,  they  flew  high  in  close  bodies,
and  with  their  usual  speed,  by  no  means  in  regular  lines,  nor  in  any  or-
der, but  much  in  the  manner  of  the  Migratory  Pigeon,  now  and  then
presenting  a broad  front,  and  again  coming  together  so  as  to  form  a close
body.

Those  which  we  procured  were  extremely  fat  and  juicy,  especially  the
young  birds,  of  which  we  ate  a good  many.  Mr  Jones,  an  old  set-
tler of  Bras  d’Or,  and  his  son,  shoot  a great  number  every  season,  which
they  salt  for  winter  food.  They  informed  us  that  these  birds  pass  over
the  same  tract  about  the  middle  of  May,  on  their  way  northward,  and
that  they  never  found  them  breeding  in  their  neighbourhood.  Little  dif-
ference could  be  observed  at  that  season  between  the  males  and  females,
or  between  the  old  and  young  birds.


Numenius  borealis,  Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  712 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.

Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  26.  fig.  3 — Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  314.

Richardson  and  Swainson,  Fauna  Boreali  Americana,  part  ii.  p.  378.

Esquimaux  Curlew,  Numenius  borealis,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  101.

Plate  CCVIII.  Adult  Male.  Fig.  1.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  very  slender,  subcylindrical,  com-
pressed, slightly  arched.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly
arched,  the  sides,  excepting  at  the  base,  nearly  perpendicular,  and  marked
with  a narrow  groove  extending  more  than  two-thirds  of  its  length,  edges
rather  obtuse.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  longitudinal,  elliptical.  Lower
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  arched,  the  angle  extremely  narrow  and
extended  to  near  the  end,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  rather  obtuse,  the
tips  obtuse,  that  of  the  upper  mandible  longer.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long,  slender.
Body  slender.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  slender.  Toes  small ; first  very


72


ESQUIMAUX  CURLEW.


small,  second  and  fourth  about  equal,  third  considerably  longer.  Claws
small,  compressed,  blunt,  that  of  middle  toe  much  longer,  curved  out-
wards, with  a sharp  dilated  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short.
Wings  rather  long,  very  acute,  narrow,  the  first  quill  longest,  the  second
a little  shorter,  the  rest  regularly  and  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries
short,  incurved,  rounded,  excepting  some  of  the  inner,  which  are  greatly
elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  neaidy  even,  of  twelve  rounded
feathers.

Bill  brownish-black,  the  lower  mandible  flesh-coloured  at  the  base.
Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  greyish-blue,  claws  black.  The  upper  part  of
the  head  is  brownish-black,  streaked  with  pale  yellowish -brown,  and  ha-
ving an  indistinct  central  line  of  the  latter.  The  back  is  also  brownish-
black,  marked  with  numerous  spots  of  light  brownish-yellow,  there  being
several  along  the  margin  of  each  feather.  Wing-coverts  and  secondaries
of  a lighter  brown,  similarly  spotted ; alula,  primary  coverts  and  quills
unspotted,  the  shafts  of  most  of  the  latter  pale  brown,  but  of  the  outer
white.  Tail  pale  greyish-brown,  with  light  deep  brown  bars,  and  tipped
with  brownish-white.  Sides  of  the  head,  and  the  neck  all  round,  pale
yellowish-brown,  striped  with  dark  brown ; breast  and  sides  of  the  same
tint,  with  longitudinal  and  transverse  dark  markings.  Lower  wing-coverts
and  lower  tail-coverts  similarly  barred  ; axillar  feathers  regularly  banded,
and  of  a deeper  tint.  Abdomen  without  markings.  Throat  and  a line
over  the  eye  nearly  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14^,  to  end  of  wings  14|,  to  end  of  claws  16| ;
wing  from  flexure  8^,  tail  3^ ; extent  of  wings  27|  ; bill  along  the
back  along  the  edge  ; tarsus  l/g,  middle  toe  its  claw
Weight  ^ lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  male,  and  is  scarcely  inferior  in  size.


( 73  )


WILSON’S  PLOVER.

Charadrius  Wilsonius,  Ord.

PLATE  CCIX.  Male  and  Female.

Reader,  imagine  yourself  standing  motionless  on  some  of  the  sandy
shores  between  South  Carolina  and  the  extremity  of  Florida,  waiting  with
impatience  for  the  return  of  day ; — or,  if  you  dislike  the  idea,  imagine
me  there.  The  air  is  warm  and  pleasant,  the  smooth  sea  reflects  the
feeble  glimmerings  of  the  fading  stars,  the  sound  of  living  thing  is  not
heard ; nature,  universal  nature,  is  at  rest.  And  here  am  I,  inhaling
the  grateful  sea-air,  with  eyes  intent  on  the  dim  distance.  See  the  bright
blaze  that  issues  from  the  verge  of  the  waters  ! and  now  the  sun  himself
appears,  and  all  is  life,  or  seems  to  be  ; for  as  the  influence  of  the  Divi-
nity is  to  the  universe,  so  is  that  of  the  sun  to  the  things  of  this  world.
Far  away  beyond  that  treacherous  reef,  floats  a gallant  bark,  that  seems
slumbering  on  the  bosom  of  the  waters  like  a silvery  sea-bird.  Gentle
breezes  now  creep  over  the  ocean,  and  ruffle  its  surface  into  tiny  wavelets.
The  ship  glides  along,  the  fishes  leap  with  joy,  and  on  my  ear  comes  the
well  known  note  of  the  bird  which  bears  the  name  of  one  whom  every  or-
nithologist must  honour.  Long  have  I known  the  bird  myself,  and  yet
desirous  of  knowing  it  better,  I have  returned  to  this  beach  many  suc-
cessive seasons  for  the  purpose  of  observing  its  ways,  examining  its  nest,
marking  the  care  with  which  it  rears  its  young,  and  the  attachment  which
it  manifests  to  its  mate.  Well,  let  the  scene  vanish  ! and  let  me  present
you  with  the  results  of  my  observations.

Wilson’s  Plover  ! I love  the  name  because  of  the  respect  I bear  to-
wards him  to  whose  memory  the  bird  has  been  dedicated.  How  pleasing,
I have  thought,  it  woidd  have  been  to  me,  to  have  met  with  him  on  such
an  excursion,  and,  after  having  procured  a few  of  his  own  birds,  to  have
listened  to  him  as  he  would  speak  of  a thousand  interesting  facts  connected
with  his  favourite  science  and  my  ever-pleasing  jiursuits.  How  delightful
to  have  talked,  among  other  things,  of  the  probable  use  of  the  double  claws
which  I have  found  attached  to  the  toes  of  the  species  which  goes  by  his
name,  and  which  are  also  seen  in  other  groups  of  shore  and  sea  birds.  Per-
haps he  might  have  informed  me  why  tlie  claws  of  some  birds  are  pectinated


74


WILSON’S  PLOVER.


on ’one  toe  and  not  on  the  rest,  and  why  that  toe  itself  is  so  cut.  But  alas  !
Wilson  was  with  me  only  a few  times,  and  then  nothing  worthy  of  his
attention  was  procured.

This  interesting  species,  which  always  looks  to  me  as  if  in  form  a
miniature  copy  of  the  Black-bellied  Plover,  is  a constant  resident  in
the  southern  districts  of  the  Union.  There  it  breeds,  and  there  too
it  spends  the  winter.  Many  individuals,  no  doubt,  move  farther  south,
but  great  numbers  are  at  all  times  to  be  met  with  from  Carolina  to
the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi,  and  in  all  these  places  I have  found  it
the  whole  year  round.  Some  go  as  far  to  the  eastward  as  Long  Island
in  the  State  of  New  York,  where,  however,  they  are  considered  as  rarities;
but  beyond  this,  none,  I believe,  are  seen  along  our  eastern  shores.
This  circumstance  has  seemed  the  more  surprising  to  me,  that  its  relative
the  Piping  Plover  proceeds  as  far  as  the  Magdeleine  Islands ; and  that
the  latter  bird  should  also  breed  in  the  Carolinas  a month  earber  than
Wilson’s  Plover  ever  does,  seems  to  me  not  less  astonishing.

Wilson’s  Plover  begins  to  lay  its  eggs  about  the  time  when  the  young
of  the  Piping  Plover  are  running  after  their  parents.  Twenty  or  thirty
yards  from  the  uppermost  beat  of  the  waves,  on  the  first  of  June,  or
some  day  not  distant  from  it,  the  female  may  be  seen  scratching  a small
cavity  in  the  shelly  sand,  in  which  she  deposits  four  eggs,  placing  them
carefully  with  the  broad  end  outermost.  The  eggs,  which  measure  an
inch  and  a quarter  by  seven  and  a half  eighths,  are  of  a dull  cream  co-
lour, sparingly  sprinkled  all  over  with  dots  of  pale  purple  and  spots  of
dark  brown.  The  eggs  vary  somewhat  in  size,  and  in  their  ground  co-
lour, but  less  than  those  of  many  other  species  of  the  genus.  The  young
follow  their  parents  as  soon  as  they  are  hatched,  and  the  latter  employ
every  artifice  common  to  birds  of  this  family,  to  entice  their  enemies  to
follow  them  and  thus  save  their  offspring.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  rapid,  elegant,  and  protracted.  While
travelling  from  one  sand-beach  or  island  to  another,  they  fly  low  over  the
land  or  water,  emitting  a fine  clear  soft  note.  Now  and  then,  when  after
the  breeding  season  they  form  into  flocks  of  twenty  or  thirty,  they  per-
form various  evolutions  in  the  air,  cutting  backwards  and  forwards,  as  if
inspecting  the  spot  on  which  they  wish  to  alight,  and  then  suddenly
descend,  sometimes  on  the  sea-beach,  and  sometimes  on  the  more  elevated
sands  at  a little  distance  from  it.  They  do  not  run  so  nimbly  as  the  Pip-
ing Plovers,  nor  are  they  nearly  so  shy.  I have  in  fact  frequently  walked


WILSON’S  PLOVER.


75


up  so  as  to  be  within  ten  yards  or  so  of  them.  They  seldom  mix  with
other  species,  and  they  shew  a decided  preference  to  solitary  uninhabited
spots.

Their  food  consists  principally  of  small  marine  insects,  minute  shell-
fish, and  sandworms,  with  which  they  mix  particles  of  sand.  Towards
autumn  they  become  almost  silent,  and  being  then  very  plump,  afford  de-
licious eating.  They  feed  fully  as  much  by  night  as  by  day,  and  the
large  eyes  of  this  as  of  other  species  of  the  genus,  seem  to  fit  them  for
nocturnal  searchings.

The  young  birds  assemble  together,  and  spend  the  winter  months
apart  from  the  old  ones,  which  are  easily  recognised  by  their  lighter
tints.  While  in  the  Floridas,  near  St  Augustine,  in  the  months  of  De-
cember and  January,  I found  this  species  much  more  abundant  than  any
other ; and  there  were  few  of  the  Keys  that  had  a sandy  beach,  or  a rocky
shore,  on  which  one  or  more  pairs  were  not  observed.

Wilson’s  Plover,  Chahaduius  Wilsonius,  IVils,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ix.  p.
pi.  73.  fig.  5. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  21.

Charadrius  Wilsonius,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  theUnited  States,  p.  296.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCIX.  Fig.  2.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  stout,  straight,  cylindrical,  obtuse,  and  some-
what turgid  at  the  tip.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight
until  towards  the  end,  when  it  is  slightly  arched  and  declinate,  the  sides
convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  slightly  inflected.  Nasal  groove  extending
to  about  half  the  length  of  the  bill ; nostrils  lateral,  linear,  direct,  in  the
lower  part  of  the  bare  membrane.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
rounded,  the  dorsal  line  convex  and  ascending,  the  back  broad,  the  sides
convex,  the  edges  inflected.

Head  large,  a little  compressed,  the  forehead  prominent ; eyes  large.
Neck  short.  Body  rather  full.  Wings  long.  Legs  rather  long,  slender;
tibia  bare  a little  above  the  joint ; tarsus  of  ordinary  length,  somewhat
compressed,  covered  with  angular  scales ; toes  small  and  slender,  covered
above  with  numerous  small  scutella,  first  toe  wanting,  fourth  longer  than
second,  third  longest,  the  two  outer  connected  at  the  base  by  a pretty
large  web ; claws  small,  slightly  arched,  much  compressed,  obtuse.

Plumage  soft  and  rather  blended.  Wings  long,  narrow,  primaries
nearly  straight,  narrow  and  tapering,  the  first  longest,  second  a little


76


WILSON’S  PLOVER.


shortei-,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; outer  secondaries  very  short,  inner
elongated  so  as  to  extend  as  far  as  the  second  primary.  Tail  of  mode-
rate length,  straight,  I'ounded,  of  twelve  feathers.

Bill  black.  Edges  of  eyelids  grey  ; iris  reddish-brown.  Feet  light
flesh-coloured;  claws  dusky.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  above
is  light  brownish-grey.  Lower  part  of  forehead  and  a broad  streak  over
the  eyes  white  ; throat  white,  that  colour  extending  narrow  behind  so  as
to  form  a collar,  below  which  is  another  of  the  general  tint  of  the  back
across  the  fore  neck.  The  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white.  Quills  -and
tail  of  a deeper  greyish-brown,  the  shafts  white,  the  two  lateral  tail-fea-
thers whitish.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7^*2  inches,  to  end  of  wings  j,  to  end  of  claws
8/2 ; extent  of  wings  14<^;  wing  from  flexure  5 ; tail  bill  along  the
back  ^|,  along  the  edges  1 ; tarsus  I/2  '>  middle  toe  its  claw

Young  Male  in  winter  plumage.  Plate  CCIX.  Fig.  1.

The  Adult  Male  which  is  represented  in  Plate  284,  is  similar  in
colouring  to  the  female  as  described  above,  but  the  lore  is  dusky,  the
white  band  on  the  forehead  is  surmounted  by  one  of  brownish  black,  and
there  is  a half  collar  of  the  same  colour  across  the  neck  in  front.


( 77  )


THE  LEAST  BITTERN.

Ardea  exilis,  Gmel.

PLATE  CCX.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

One  morning  while  I was  at  the  Cincinnati  Museum  in  the  State  of
Ohio,  a woman  came  in  holding  in  her  apron  one  of  this  delicate  species
alive,  which  she  said  had  fallen  down  the  chimney  of  her  house  under
night,  and  which,  when  she  awoke  at  daybreak,  was  the  first  object  she
saw,  it  having  perched  on  one  of  the  bed  posts.  It  was  a young  bird.
I placed  it  on  the  table  before  me,  and  drew  from  it  the  figure  on  the
left  of  my  plate.  It  stood  perfectly  still  for  two  hours,  but  on  my  touch-
ing it  with  a pencil,  after  my  drawing  was  done,  it  flew  off  and  alighted
on  the  cornice  of  a window.  Replacing  it  on  the  table,  I took  two  books
and  laid  them  so  as  to  leave  before  it  a passage  of  an  inch  and  a half,
through  which  it  walked  with  ease.  Bringing  the  books  nearer  each
other,  so  as  to  reduce  the  passage  to  one  inch,  I tried  the  Bittern  again,
and  again  it  made  its  way  between  them  without  moving  either.  When
dead,  its  body  measured  two  inches  and  a quarter  across,  from  which  it
is  apparent  that  this  species,  as  well  as  the  Gallinules  and  Rails,  is  en-
abled to  contract  its  breadth  in  an  extraordinary  degree.

While  I was  in  Philadelphia,  in  September  1832,  a gentleman  pre-
sented me  with  a pair  of  adult  birds  of  this  species,  alive  and  in  perfect
plumage.  They  had  been  caught  in  a meadow  a few  miles  below  the
city,  and  I kept  them  alive  several  days,  feeding  them  on  small  fish  and
thin  stripes  of  pork.  They  were  expert  at  seizing  flies,  and  swallowed
caterpillars,  and  other  insects.  My  wife  admired  them  much  on  account
of  their  gentle  deportment,  for  although  on  being  tormented,  they  would
spread  their  wings,  ruffle  their  feathers,  and  draw  back  their  head  as  if
to  strike,  yet  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  touched  by  any  one  without
pecking  at  his  hand.  It  was  amusing  to  see  them  continually  attempt-
ing to  escape  through  the  windows,  climbing  with  ease  from  the  floor  to
the  top  of  the  curtain  by  means  of  their  feet  and  claws.  This  feat  they
would  repeat  whenever  they  were  taken  down.  The  experiment  of  the
books  was  tried  with  them,  and  succeeded  as  at  Cincinnati.  At  the  ap-
proach of  night  they  became  much  more  lively,  walked  about  the  room.


78


LEAST  BITTERN.


in  a graceful  manner  with  much  agility,  and  generally  kept  close  toge-
ther. I had  ample  opportunities  of  studying  their  natural  positions,
and  drew  both  of  them  in  the  attitudes  exhibited  in  the  plate.  I would
gladly  have  kept  them  longer ; but  as  I was  bound  for  the  south,  I had
them  killed  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  their  skins.

This  bird  ranges  over  most  part  of  the  United  States,  but  is  nowhere
to  be  found  in  tolerable  abundance  excepting  about  the  mouths  of  the
Mississippi  and  the  Southern  portions  of  the  Floridas,  especially  the
“ Ever-glades.”  I have  met  with  them  to  the  eastward  as  far  as  New
Brunswick,  on  our  large  lakes,  and  in  the  intermediate  portions  of  the
country,  although  I have  seldom  found  more  than  one  or  two  at  a time.
In  the  Floridas  and  Carolinas  they  have  been  known  to  breed  in  small  com-
munities of  four  or  five  pairs.  One  instance  of  this  was  observed  by  my
friend  Dr  Horlbeck  of.  Charleston,  and  Dr  Leitner,  another  friend  of
mine,  found  them  quite  abundant  in  certain  portions  of  the  Florida
marshes.

Although  the  Least  Bittern  is  not  unfrequently  started  in  salt  marshes,
it  gives  a decided  preference  to  the  borders  of  ponds,  lakes  or  bayous  of
fresh  water,  and  it  is  in  secluded  situations  of  this  kind  that  it  usually
forms  its  nest.  This  is  sometimes  placed  on  the  ground,  amid  the  rankest
grasses,  but  more  frequently  it  is  attached  to  the  stems  several  inches
above  it.  It  is  flat,  composed  of  dried  or  rotten  weeds,  and  in  shape  re-
sembles that  of  the  Louisiana  Heron,  although  this  latter  employs  no-
thing but  sticks.  The  eggs  are  three  or  four,  seldom  more,  of  a dull
yellowish-green,  without  spots,  an  inch  and  a quarter  in  length,  almost
equal  at  both  ends.

When  the  young  are  yet  quite  small,  their  heads  are  covered  with  large
tufts  of  reddish  down,  their  bill  is  very  short,  and  they  sit  on  their  rump
with  their  legs  extended  on  each  side  before  their  body,  in  the  manner  of
young  Herons.  If  disturbed  when  about  two  weeks  old,  they  leave  the  nest
and  scramble  through  the  grass  with  celerity,  clinging  to  the  blades  with
their  sharp  claws  whenever  this  is  necessary.  At  a later  period  they
seem  to  await  the  coming  of  their  parents  with  impatience ; and  if  no
noise  is  made,  you  may  hear  them  calling  continually  in  a low  croaking
voice  for  half  an  hour  at  a time.  As  soon  as  they  are  able  to  fly,  they
not  unfrequently  alight  on  the  branches  of  trees  to  escape  from  their  va-
rious enemies,  such  as  minxes  and  water  snakes,  the  latter  of  which  de-
stroy a good  number  of  them.


LEAST  BITTERN.


79


In  two  instances,  I found  the  nests  of  the  Least  Bittern  about  three
feet  above  the  ground,  in  a thick  cluster  of  smilax  and  other  briary  plants.
In  the  first,  two  nests  were  placed  in  the  same  bush,  within  a few  yards  of
each  other.  In  the  other  instance  there  was  only  one  nest  of  this  bird,
but  several  of  the  Boat-tailed  Grakle,  and  one  of  the  Green  Heron,  the
occupants  of  all  of  which  seemed  to  be  on  friendly  terms.  When  startled
from  the  nest,  the  old  birds  emit  a few  notes  resembling  the  syllable  qua,
alight  a few  yards  off,  and  watch  all  your  movements.  If  you  go  towards
them,  you  may  sometimes  take  the  female  with  the  hand,  but  rarely  the
male,  who  generally  flies  off,  or  makes  his  way  through  the  woods.  Its
ordinary  cry,  however,  is  a rough  croak  resembling  that^of  the  Great  Blue
Heron,  but  much  weaker.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  apparently  weak  by  day,  for  then  it  seldom
removes  to  a greater  distance  than  a hundred  yards  at  a time,  and  this,
too,  only  when  frightened  in  a moderate  degree,  for,  if  much  alarmed,  it
falls  again  among  the  grass  in  the  manner  of  the  Rail ; but  in  the  dusk
of  the  evening  and  morning  I have  seen  it  passing  steadily  along,  at  the
height  of  fifty  years  or  more,  with  the  neck  retracted,  and  the  legs
stretched  out  behind,  in  the  manner  of  the  larger  Herons.  On  such  occa-
sions it  uttered,  at  short  intervals,  its  peculiar  cry,  and  continued  its
flight  until  out  of  sight.  Several  individuals  were  together,  and  I ima-
gined them  to  be  proceeding  in  search  of  breeding-grounds,  or  on  a mi-
gratory expedition.  When  disturbed  by  day,  they  fly  with  extended
neck  and  dangling  legs,  and  are  easily  shot,  as  their  course  is  generally
direct  and  their  flight  slow.  When  walking,  it  shoots  its  head  forward
at  every  step,  as  if  about  to  thrust  its  bill  into  some  substance  ; and,  if
you  attempt  to  lay  hold  of  it  when  disabled,  it  is  apt  to  inflict  a painful
wound.

The  food  of  this  bird  consists  of  snails,  slugs,  tadpoles,  or  young
frogs  and  water-lizards.  -In  several  instances,  however,  I have  found
small  shrews  and  field-mice  in  their  stomach.  Although  more  nocturnal
than  diurnal,  it  moves  a good  deal  about  by  day  in  search  of  food.  About
noon,  being  doubtless  much  fatigued,  they  are  not  unfrequently  observed
standing  erpct  on  one  foot,  and  so  soundly  asleep  as  to  be  easily  knocked
down  or  eVen  caught  by  the  hand,  if  cautiously  approached.  This  very
remarkal^le  habit  of  both  our  species  of  Bittern  has  brought  upon  them
the  charge  of  extreme  stupidity,  whence  the  name  of  Butor  given  to  them
by  the  Creoles  of  Louisiana.  Whether  or  not  this  term  be  appropriate


80


LEAST  BITTERN.


to  the  case,  I leave  for  you  to  determine ; but,  my  opinion  is,  that  the
animal  truly  deserving  to  be  called  stupid,  yet  remains  to  be  discovered,
and  that  the  quality  designated  by  that  epithet  occurs  nowhere  else  than
among  the  individuals  of  that  species  which  so  thoughtlessly  applies  the
opprobrium.


Ardea  exilis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  308.

Least  Bittern,  Ardea  exilis,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  viii.  p.  37.  pi.  65.  fig.  4. —
NuttaM,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  66.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  straight,  tapering  to  a point,  deeper
than  broad  at  the  base,  compressed  towards  the  end.  Upper  mandible  with
its  dorsal  line  almost  straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  rather  rounded  at  the
base,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  very  sharp,
the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  long;  nostrils  basal.  Unear,  longitudinal.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line
sloping  upwards,  the  sides  nearly  flat,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the
tip  very  acute.

Head  oblong,  much  compressed.  Neck  long.  Body  very  slender,
much  compressed.  Feet  long,  rather  robust ; tibia  nearly  entirely  fea-
thered ; tarsi  covered  anteriorly  with  broad  oblique  scuteila ; toes  scutel-
late  above ; hind  toe  stout,  second  and  fourth  nearly  equal,  third  much
longer  ; claws  long,  slender,  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  middle  toe
serrated  on  the  inner  edge.

Eyelids  and  a large  space  before  and  beneath  the  eye,  bare.  Plumage
soft,  blended ; feathers  of  the  hind  head  elongated,  as  are  those  of  the
neck  generally,  but  especially  of  its  lower  part  anteriorly.  Wings  short,
broad,  rounded,  the  second  quiU  longest.  Tail  very  short,  rounded,  of
twelve  feathers.

Bill  dark  oUve-brown  above,  edges  of  upper  mandible  and  bare  fron-
tal space  yellow ; lower  mandible  pale  yellow,  incUning  to  flesh  colour.
Iris  yellow.  Feet  dull  greenish-yellow,  claws  brown.  Upper  part  of  the
head,  and  the  back,  greenish-black  and  glossy ; sides  of  the  head  and
hind  part  of  neck,  brownish-red  or  Ught  chestnut ; wing-coverts  pale
greyish-brown,  quiUs  purpUsh-grey,  tipped  with  yeUowish-brown,  the  in-
ner secondaries  broadly  margined  with  light  chestnut,  of  which  colour
also  are  the  secondary  coverts  and  the  edge  of  the  wing  at  the  flexure ;


LEAST  BITTERN.


81


the  tail  greenish-black.  The  throat  and  fore  neck  are  reddish-white ; the
rest  of  the  lower  parts  are  of  the  same  colour,  excepting  the  fore  part  of
the  breast,  which  is  blackish-brown,  the  feathers  tipped  with  reddish-yel-
low, and  the  outer  tibial  feathers,  which  are  reddish.  In  younger  indi-
viduals the  fore  neck  is  more  or  less  spotted  with  light  brown,  as  was  the
case  with  that  represented ; but  in  old  birds  that  part  is  unspotted.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13|  inches,  to  end  of  claws  16 ; to  end  of  wings
; extent  of  wings  17| ; wing  from  flexure  5^  ; tail  ; bill  along
the  ridge  If,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  tarsus  ; middle
toe  1^,  its  claw  Weight  4f  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCX.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  smaller,  and  differs  considerably  from  the  male
colour.  The  bare  parts  and  iris  are  the  same.  The  upper  part  of  the
head  is  reddish-brown,  with  a tinge  of  green ; the  back  and  scapulars  are
dark  chestnut,  and  there  is  a line  of  yellowish-white  along  each  side  of
the  back,  formed  by  the  outer  edges  of  the  feathers.  The  rump  is  darker,
the  tail  bluish-black  as  in  the  male.  In  other  respects  the  colouring  is
similar,  but  the  feathers  of  the  fore  neck  and  sides  have  each  a narrow
central  line  of  dark  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  12  inches ; wing  from  flexure  4|  ; tail  ]| ; bill
along  the  ridge  1|,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2/5,*  tarsus  1|;
middle  toe  ly®^,  its  claw  Weight  3^  oz.

Young  in  first  plumage.  Plate  CCX.  Fig.  3.

The  young  has  the  bill,  eyes  and  feet,  nearly  of  the  same  tints  as  the
old ; but  the  upper  parts  of  the  plumage  are  generally  of  a light  brownish-
red,  variegated  with  brownish-yellow  ; the  primary  quills  and  tail  black.

I have  lately  received  a letter  from  my  friend  John  Bachman,  stat-
ing that  he  had  found  this  species  breeding  in  considerable  numbers  on
the  plantation  of  James  H.  Smith,  Esq.  six  miles  east  of  Charleston,
where  he  procured  specimens  both  of  the  birds  and  of  their  eggs.  Mr
Smith’s  sons  had  killed,  in  the  course  of  a couple  of  weeks,  not  less  than
fourteen  of  these  diminutive  Herons.  He  describes  the  nest  as  flat,  com-
posed of  pieces  of  dry  rushes  about  a foot  in  length,  and  placed  in  a bunch
of  Juncus  effusus.  The  eggs  were  nearly  white  with  a very  light  tinge
of  blue.


VOL.  III.


F


( 82  )


THE  EGGERS  OF  LABRADOR.

The  distinctive  appellation  of  Eggers  is  given  to  certain  persons  who
follow,  principally  or  exclusively,  the  avocation  of  procuring  the  eggs  of
wild  birds,  with  the  view  of  disposing  of  them  at  some  distant  port.  Their
great  object  is  to  plunder  every  nest,  whenever  they  can  find  it,  no  mat-
!^er  where,  and  at  whatever  risk.  They  are  the  pest  of  the  feathered
ribes,  and  their  brutal  propensity  to  destroy  the  poor  creatures  after  they
have  robbed  them,  is  abundantly  gratified  whenever  an  opportunity  pre-
sents itself.

Much  had  been  said  to  me  respecting  these  destructive  pirates  before
I visited  the  coast  of  Labrador,  but  I could  not  entirely  credit  all  their
cruelties  until  I had  actually  witnessed  their  proceedings,  which  were
such  as  to  inspire  no  small  degree  of  horror.  But  you  shall  judge  for
yourself.

See  yon  shallop  shyly  sailing  along ; — she  sneaks  like  a thief,  wishing
as  it  were  to  shun  the  very  light  of  heaven.  Under  the  lea  of  every  rocky
isle  some  one  at  the  tiller  steers  her  course.  Were  his  trade  an  honest
one,  he  would  not  think  of  hiding  his  back  behind  the  terrific  rocks  that
seem  to  have  been  placed  there  as  a resort  to  the  myriads  of  birds  that
annually  visit  this  desolate  region  of  the  earth,  for  the  purpose  of  rearing
their  young,  at  a distance  from  all  disturbers  of  their  peace.  How  unlike
the  open,  the  bold,  tbe  honest  mariner,  whose  face  needs  no  mask,  who
scorns  to  skulk  under  any  circumstances  ! The  vessel  herself  is  a shabby
thing; — her  sails  are  patched  with  stolen  pieces  of  better  canvass,  the
owners  of  which  have  probably  been  stranded  on  some  inhospitable  coast,
and  have  been  plundered,  perhaps  murdered,  by  the  wretches  before  us.
Look  at  her  again  !-<-Her  sides  are  neither  painted,  nor  even  pitched ; no

they  are  daubed  over,  plastered  and  patched  with  stripes  of  seal-skins,

laid  along  the  seams.  Her  deck  has  never  been  washed  or  sanded,  her
hold — for  no  cabin  bas  she, — though  at  present  empty,  sends  forth  an
odour  pestilential  as  that  of  a charnel-house.  The  crew,  eight  in  number,
lie  sleeping  at  the  foot  of  their  tottering  mast,  regardless  of  the  repairs
needed  in  every  part  of  her  rigging.  But  see  ! she  scuds  along,  and  as  I


EGGERS  OF  LABRADOR.


83


suspect  her  crew  to  be  bent  on  the  commission  of  some  evil  deed,  let  us
follow  her  to  the  first  harbour.

There  rides  the  filthy  thing  ! The  afternoon  is  half  over.  Her  crew
have  thrown  their  boat  overboard  ; they  enter  and  seat  themselves,  each
with  a rusty  gun.  One  of  them  skulls  the  skiff  towards  an  island  for  a
century  past  the  breeding  place  of  myriads  of  Guillemots,  which  are  now
to  be  laid  under  contribution.  At  the  approach  of  the  vile  thieves,  clouds
of  birds  rise  from  the  rock  and  fill  the  air  around,  wheehng  and  scream-
ing over  their  enemies.  Yet  thousands  remain  in  an  erect  posture,  each
covering  its  single  egg,  the  hope  of  both  parents.  The  reports  of  several
muskets  loaded  with  heavy  shot  are  now  heard,  while  several  dead  and
wounded  birds  fall  heavily  on  the  rock  or  into  the  water.  Instantly  all
the  sitting  birds  rise  and  fly  off  affrighted  to  their  companions  above,  and
hover  in  dismay  over  their  assassins,  who  walk  forward  exultingly,  and
with  their  shouts  mingling  oaths  and  execrations.  Look  at  them  ! See
how  they  crush  the  chick  within  its  shell,  how  they  trample  on  every  egg
in  their  way  with  their  huge  and  clumsy  boots.  Onward  they  go,  and
when  they  leave  the  isle,  not  an  egg  that  they  can  find  is  left  entire.  The
dead  birds  they  collect  and  carry  to  their  boat.  Now  they  have  regained
their  filthy  shallop  ; they  strip  the  birds  by  a single  jerk  of  their  feathery
apparel,  while  the  flesh  is  yet  warm,  and  throw  them  on  some  coals,  where
in  a short  time  they  are  broiled.  The  rum  is  produced  when  the  guille-
mots are  fit  for  eating,  and  after  stuffing  themselves  with  this  oily  fare,
and  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  beastly  intoxication,  over  they  tumble  on  the
deck  of  their  crazed  craft,  where  they  pass  the  short  hours  of  night  in
turbid  slumber.

The  sun  now  rises  above  the  snow-clad  summit  of  the  eastern  mount.
“ Sweet  is  the  breath  of  morn”  even  in  this  desolate  land.  The  gay  Bunt-
ing erects  his  white  crest,  and  gives  utterance  to  the  joy  he  feels  in  the
presence  of  his  brooding  mate.  The  Willow  Grous  on  the  rock  crows
his  challenge  aloud.  Each  floweret,  chilled  by  the  night  air,  expands  its
pure  petals  ; the  gentle  breeze  shakes  from  the  blades  of  grass  the  heavy
dewdrops.  On  the  Guillemot  Isle  the  birds  have  again  settled,  and  now  re-
new their  loves.  Startled  by  the  light  of  day,  one  of  the  Eggers  springs
on  his  feet  and  rouses  his  companions,  who  stare  around  them  for  a while,
endeavouring  to  recoUect  their  senses.  Mark  them,  as  with  clumsy  fin-
gers they  clear  their  drowsy  eyes  ! Slowly  they  rise  on  their  feet.  See
. F 2


84


EGGERS  OF  LABRADOR.


how  the  filthy  lubbers  stretch  out  their  arms  and  yawn  ; you  shrink  back,
for  verily  “ that  throat  might  frighten  a shark.”

But  the  master,  soon  recollecting  that  so  many  eggs  are  worth  a dol-
lar or  a crown,  casts  his  eye  towards  the  rock,  marks  the  day  in  his  memory,
and  gives  orders  to  depart.  The  light  breeze  enables  them  to  reach  ano-
ther harbour  a few  miles  distant,  one  which,  like  the  last,  lies  concealed
from  the  ocean  by  some  other  rocky  isle.  Arrived  there,  they  re-act  the
scene  of  yesterday,  crushing  every  egg  they  can  find.  For  a week  each
night  is  passed  in  drunkenness  and  brawls,  until,  having  reached  the  last
breeding  place  on  the  coast,  they  return,  touch  at  every  isle  in  succession,
shoot  as  many  birds  as  they  need,  collect  the  fresh  eggs,  and  lay  in  a
cargo.  At  every  step  each  ruffian  picks  up  an  egg  so  beautiful  that  any
man  \vdth  a feeling  heart  would  pause  to  consider  the  motive  which  could
induce  him  to  carry  it  off.  But  nothing  of  this  sort  occurs  to  the  Egger,
who  gathers  and  gathers,  until  he  has  swept  the  rock  bare.  The  dollars
alone  chink  in  his  sordid  mind,  and  he  assiduously  plies  the  trade  which
no  man  would  ply  who  had  the  talents  and  industry  to  procure  subsist-
ence by  honourable  means

With  a bark  nearly  half  filled  with  fresh  eggs  they  proceed  to  the
principal  rock,  that  on  which  they  first  landed.  But  what  is  their  sur-
prise when  they  find  others  there  helping  themselves  as  industriously  as
they  can  ! In  boiling  rage  they  charge  their  guns,  and  ply  their  oars.
Landing  on  the  rock,  they  run  up  to  the  Eggers,  who,  like  themselves,  are
desperadoe.s.  The  first  question  is  a discharge  of  musketry,  the  answer
another.  Now,  man  to  man,  they  fight  like  tigers.  One  is  carried  to  his
boat  with  a fractured  skull,  another  limps  with  a shot  in  his  leg,  and  a
third  feels  how  many  of  his  teeth  have  been  driven  through  the  hole  in
his  cheek.  At  last,  however,  the  quarrel  is  settled;  the  booty  is  to  be
equally  divided ; and  now  see  them  all  drinking  together.  Oaths  and
curses  and  filthy  jokes  are  all  that  you  hear ; but  see,  stuffed  with  food,
and  reeling  with  drink,  down  they  drop  one  by  one ; groans  and  execra-
tions from  the  wounded  mingle  with  the  snorings  of  the  heavy  sleepers.
There  let  the  brutes  lie.

Again  it  is  dawn,  but  no  one  stirs.  The  sun  is  high  ; one  by  one
they  open  their  heavy  eyes,  stretch  their  limbs,  yawn,  and  raise  themselves
from  the  deck.  But  see,  here  comes  a goodly  company.  A hundred
honest  fishermen,  who  for  months  past  have  fed  on  salt  meat,  have  felt  a


EGGERS  OF  LABRADOR.


85


desire  to  procure  some  eggs.  Gallantly  their  boats  advance,  impelled  by
the  regular  pull  of  their  long  oars.  Each  buoyant  bark  displays  the  flag
of  its  nation.  No  weapons  do  they  bring,  nor  any  thing  that  can  be  used
as  such  save  their  oars  and  fists.  Cleanly  clad  in  Sunday  attire,  they  ar-
rive at  the  desired  spot,  and  at  once  prepare  to  ascend  the  rock.  The
Eggers,  now  numbering  a dozen,  all  armed  with  guns  and  bludgeons,  bid
defiance  to  the  fishermen.  A few  angry  words  pass  between  the  parties.
One  of  the  Eggers,  still  under  the  influence  of  drink,  pulls  his  trigger,  and
an  unfortunate  sailor  is  seen  to  reel  in  agony.  Three  loud  cheers  fill  the
air.  All  at  once  rush  on  the  malefactors  ; a horrid  fight  ensues,  the  re-
sult of  which  is,  that  every  Egger  is  left  on  the  rock  beaten  and  bruised.
Too  frequently  the  fishermen  man  their  boats,  row  to  the  shallops,  and
break  every  egg  in  the  hold.

The  Eggers  of  Labrador  not  only  rob  the  birds  in  this  cruel  manner,
but  also  the  fishermen,  whenever  they  can  find  an  opportunity  ; and  the
quarrels  they  excite  are  numberless.  While  we  were  on  the  coast,  none
of  our  party  ever  ventured  on  any  of  the  islands  which  these  wretches
call  their  own,  without  being  well  provided  with  means  of  defence.  On
one  occasion,  when  I Avas  present,  we  found  two  Eggers  at  their  work  of
destruction.  I spoke  to  them  respecting  my  visit,  and  offered  them  pre-
miums for  rare  birds  and  some  of  their  eggs ; but  although  they  made
fair  promises,  not,  one  of  the  gang  ever  came  near  the  Ripley.

These  people  gather  all  the  eider  down  they  can  find ; yet  so  incon-
siderate are  they,  that  they  kill  every  bird  that  comes  in  their  Avay.  The
eggs  of  Gulls,  Guillemots,  and  Ducks  are  searched  for  with  care  ; and  the
Puffins  and  some  other  birds  they  massacre  in  vast  numbers  for  the  sake
of  their  feathers.  So  constant  and  persevering  are  their  depredations,
that  these  species,  which,  according  to  the  accounts  of  the  feAv  settlers  I
saw  in  the  country,  Avere  exceedingly  abundant  twenty  years  ago,  have
abandoned  their  ancient  breeding  places,  and  removed  much  farther  north
in  search  of  peaceful  security.  Scarcely,  in  fact,  could  I procure  a young
Guillemot  before  the  Eggers  had  left  the  coast,  nor  was  it  until  late  in  July
that  I succeeded,  after  the  birds  had  laid  three  or  four  eggs  each,  instead
of  one,  and  when  nature  having  been  exhausted,  and  the  season  nearly
spent,  thousands  of  these  birds  left  the  country  Avithout  having  accom-
plished the  purpose  for  which  they  had  visited  it.  This  Avar  of  exter-
mination cannot  last  many  years  more.  The  Eggers  themselves  will  be
the  first  to  repent  the  entire  disappearance  of  the  myriads  of  birds  that


86


EGGERS  OF  LABRADOR.


made  the  coast  of  Labrador  their  summer  residence,  and  unless  they
follow  the  persecuted  tribes  to  the  northward,  they  must  renounce  their
trade.

Had  not  the  British  Government  long  since  passed  strict  laws  against
these  ruthless  and  worthless  vagabonds,  and  laid  a heavy  penalty  on  all
of  them  that  might  be  caught  in  the  act  of  landing  their  cargoes  in  New-
foundland or  Nova  Scotia,  1 might


( 87  )


THE  GREAT  BLUE  HERON.

Ardea  Hero  DIAS,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXI.  Male.

The  State  of  Louisiana  has  always  been  my  favourite  portion  of  the
Union,  although  Kentucky  and  some  other  States  have  divided  my  affec-
tions ; but  as  we  are  on  the  banks  of  the  fair  Ohio,  let  us  pause  a while,
good  Reader,  and  watch  the  Heron.  In  my  estimation,  few  of  our  waders
are  more  interesting  than  the  birds  of  this  family.  Their  contours  and
movements  are  always  graceful,  if  not  elegant.  Look  on  the  one  that
stands  near  the  margin  of  the  pure  stream  : — see  his  reflection  dipping
as  it  were  into  the  smooth  water,  the  bottom  of  which  it  might  reach
had  it  not  to  contend  with  the  numerous  boughs  of  those  magnificent
trees.  How  calm,  how  silent,  how  grand  is  the  scene  ! The  tread  of  the
tall  bird  himself  no  one  hears,  so  carefully  does  he  place  his  foot  on  the
moist  ground,  cautiously  suspending  it  for  a while  at  each  step  of  his  pro-
gress. Now  his  golden  eye  glances  over  the  surrounding  objects,  in  sur-
veying which  he  takes  advantage  of  the  full  stretch  of  his  graceful  neck.
Satisfied  that  no  danger  is  near,  he  lays  his  head  on  his  shoulders,  allows
the  feathers  of  his  breast  to  droop,  and  patiently  awaits  the  approach  of
his  finned  prey.  You  might  imagine  what  you  see  to  be  the  statue  of  a
bird,  so  motionless  is  it.  But  now,  he  moves ; he  has  taken  a silent  step,
and  with  great  care  he  advances  ; slowly  does  he  raise  his  head  from  his
shoulders,  and  now,  what  a sudden  start ! his  formidable  bill  has  trans-
fixed a perch,  which  he  beats  to  death  on  the  ground.  See  with  what
difficulty  he  gulps  it  down  his  capacious  throat ! and  now  his  broad  wings
open,  and  away  he  slowly  flies  to  another  station,  or  perhaps  to  avoid  his
unwelcome  observers.

The  “ Blue  Crane”  (by  which  name  this  species  is  generally  known
in  the  United  States)  is  met  with  in  every  part  of  the  Union.  Although
more  abundant  in  the  low  lands  of  our  Atlantic  coast,  it  is  not  uncom-
mon in  the  countries  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains.  I have  found  it
in  every  State  in  which  I have  travelled,  as  well  as  in  all  our  “ Terri-
tories.” It  is  well  known  from  Louisiana  to  Maine,  but  seldom  occurs
farther  east  than  Prince  Edward’s  Island  in  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,


88


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


and  not  a Heron  of  any  kind  did  I see  or  hear  of  in  Newfoundland  or
Labrador.  Westward,  I believe,  it  reaches  to  the  very  bases  of  the  Rocky
Mountains.  It  is  a hardy  bird,  and  bears  the  extremes  of  temperature
surprisingly,  being  in  its  tribe  what  the  Passenger  Pigeon  is  in- the  family
of  Doves.  During  the  coldest  part  of  winter  the  Blue  Heron  is  observed
in  the  State  of  Massachusetts  and  in  Maine,  spending  its  time  in  search
of  prey  about  the  warm  springs  and  ponds  which  occur  there  in  certain
districts.  They  are  not  rare  in  the  Middle  States,  but  more  plentiful  to
the  west  and  south  of  Pennsylvania,  which  perhaps  arises  from  the  inces-
sant war  waged  against  them.

Extremely  suspicious  and  shy,  this  bird  is  ever  on  the  look-out.  Its
sight  is  as  acute  as  that  of  any  falcon,  and  it  can  hear  at  a considerable
distance,  so  that  it  is  enabled  to  mark  with  precision  the  different  objects
it  sees,  and  to  judge  with  accuracy  of  the  sounds  which  it  hears.  Unless
under  very  favourable  circumstances,  it  is  almost  hopeless  to  attempt  to
approach  it.  You  may  now  and  then  surprise  one  feeding  under  the
bank  of  a deep  creek  or  bayou,  or  obtain  a shot  as  he  passes  unawares
over  you  on  wing ; but  to  walk  up  towards  one  would  be  a fruitless  ad-
venture. I have  seen  many  so  wary,  that,  on  seeing  a man  at  any  distance
within  half  a mile,  they  would  take  to  wing ; and  the  report  of  a gun
forces  one  off  his  grounds  from  a distance  at  which  you  would  think  he
could  not  be  alarmed.  When  in  close  woods,  however,  and  perched  on
a tree,  they  can  be  approached  with  a good  chance  of  success.

The  Blue  Heron  feeds  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  as  well  as  in  the  dark
and  dawn,  and  even  under  night,  when  the  weather  is  clear,  his  appetite
alone  determining  his  actions  in  this  respect ; but  I am  certain  that  when
disturbed  during  dark  nights  it  feels  bewildered,  and  alights  as  soon  as
possible.  When  passing  from  one  part  of  the  country  to  another  at  a dis-
tance, the  case  is  different,  and  on  such  occasions  they  fly  under  night  at
a considerable  height  above  the  trees,  continuing  their  movements  in  a
regular  manner.

The  commencement  of  the  breeding  season  varies,  according  to  the
latitude,  from  the  beginning  of  March  to  the  middle  of  June.  In  the  Flo-
ridas  it  takes  place  about  the  first  of  these  periods,  in  the  Middle  Dis-
tricts about  the  15th  of  May,  and  in  Maine  a month  later.  It  is  at  the
approach  of  this  period  only  that  these  birds  associate  in  pairs,  they  being
generally  quite  solitary  at  all  other  times;  nay,  excepting  during  the
breeding  season,  each  individual  seems  to  secure  for  itself  a certain  dis-


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


S9

trict  as  a feeding  ground,  giving  chase  to  every  intruder  of  its  own  spe-
cies. At  such  times  they  also  repose  singly,  for  the  most  part  roosting
on  trees,  although  sometimes  taking  their  station  on  the  ground,  in  the
midst  of  a wide  marsh,  so  that  they  may  be  secure  from  the  approach  of
man.  This  unsocial  temper  probably  arises  from  the  desire  of  securing
a certain  abundance  of  food,  of  which  each  individual  in  fact  requires  a
large  quantity.

The  manners  of  this  Heron  are  exceedingly  interesting  at  the  approach
of  the  breeding  season,  when  the  males  begin  to  look  for  partners.  About
sunrise  you  see  a number  arrive  and  alight  either  on  the  margin  of  a broad
sand-bar  or  on  a savannah.  They  come  from  different  quarters,  one  after
another,  for  several  hours ; and  when  you  see  forty  or  fifty  before  you,  it
is  difficult  for  you  to  imagine  that  half  the  number  could  have  resided
in  the  same  district.  Yet  in  the  Floridas  I have  seen  hundreds  thus  col-
lected in  the  course  of  a morning.  They  are  now  in  their  full  beauty,
and  no  young  birds  seem  to  be  among  them.  The  males  walk  about  with
an  air  of  great  dignity,  bidding  defiance  to  their  rivals,  and  the  females
croak  to  invite  the  males  to  pay  their  addresses  to  them.  The  females
utter  their  coaxing  notes  all  at  once,  and  as  each  male  evinces  an  equal
desire  to  please  the  object  of  his  affection,  he  has  to  encounter  the  enmity
of  many  an  adversary,  who,  with  little  attention  to  politeness,  opens  his
powerful  bill,  throws  out  his  wings,  and  rushes  with  fury  on  his  foe.
Each  attack  is  carefully  guarded  against,  blows  are  exchanged  for  blows ;
one  would  think  that  a single  well-aimed  thrust  might  suffice  to  inflict
death,  but  the  strokes  are  parried  with  as  much  art  as  an  expert  swords-
man would  employ ; and,  although  I have  watched  these  birds  for  half
an  hour  at  a time  as  they  fought  on  the  ground,  I never  saw  one  killed
on  such  an  occasion  ; but  I have  often  seen  one  felled  and  trampled  upon,
even  after  incubation  had  commenced.  These  combats  over,  the  males
and  females  leave  the  place  in  pairs.  They  are  now  mated  for  the  sea-
son, at  least  I am  inclined  to  think  so,  as  I never  saw  them  assemble
twice  on  the  same  ground,  and  they  become  comparatively  peaceable  after
pairing.

It  is  by  no  means  a constant  practice  with  this  species  to  breed  in
communities,  whether  large  or  small ; for  although  I have  seen  many
such  associations,  I have  also  found  many  pairs  breeding  apart.  Nor  do
they  at  all  times  make  choice  of  the  trees  placed  in  the  interior  of  a swamp,
for  I have  found  heronries  in  the  pine-barrens  of  the  Floridas,  more  than


90


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


ten  miles  from  any  marsh,  pond,  or  river.  I have  also  observed  nests  on
the  tops  of  the  tallest  trees,  while  others  were  only  a few  feet  above  the
ground : some  also  I have  seen  on  the  ground  itself,  and  many  on  cac-
tuses. In  the  Carolinas,  where  Herons  of  all  sorts  are  extremely  abun-
dant, perhaps  as  much  so  as  in  the  lower  parts  of  Louisiana  or  the  Flori-
das,  on  account  of  the  numerous  reservoirs  connected  with  the  rice  plan-
tations, and  the  still  more  numerous  ditches  which  intersect  the  rice-fields,
all  of  which  contain  fish  of  various  sorts,  these  birds  find  it  easy  to  pro-
cure food  in  great  abundance.  There  the  Blue  Herons  breed  in  con-
siderable numbers,  and  if  the  place  they  have  chosen  be  over  a swamp,
few  situations  can  be  conceived  more  likely  to  ensure  their  safety,  for  one
seldom  ventures  into  those  dismal  retreats  at  the  time  when  these  birds
breed,  the  effluvia  being  extremely  injurious  to  health,  besides  the  diffi-
culties to  be  overcome  in  making  one’s  way  to  them.

Imagine,  if  you  can,  an  area  of  some  hundred  acres,  overgrown  with
huge  cypress  trees,  the  trunks  of  which,  rising  to  a height  of  perhaps  fifty
feet  before  they  send  off  a branch,  spring  from  the  midst  of  the  dark
muddy  waters.  Their  broad  tops,  placed  close  together  with  interlaced
branches,  seem  intent  on  separating  the  heavens  from  the  earth.  Beneath
their  dark  canopy  scarcely  a single  sunbeam  ever  makes  its  way  ; the
mire  is  covered  with  fallen  logs,  on  which  grow  matted  grasses  and  lichens,
and  the  deeper  parts  with  nympheae  and  other  aquatic  plants.  The
Congo  snake  and  water-moccasin  glide  before  you  as  they  seek  to  elude
your  sight,  hundreds  of  turtles  drop,  as  if  shot,  from  the  floating  trunks
of  the  fallen  trees,  from  which  also  the  sullen  alligator  plunges  into  the
dismal  pool.  The  air  is  pregnant  with  pestilence,  but  alive  with  musqui-
toes  and  other  insects.  The  croaking  of  the  frogs,  joined  with  the  hoarse
cries  of  the  Anhingas  and  the  screams  of  the  Herons,  forms  fit  music  for
such  a scene.  Standing  knee-deep  in  the  mire,  you  discharge  your  gun
at  one  of  the  numerous  birds  that  are  breeding  high  over  head,  when  im-
mediately such  a deafening  noise  arises,  that,  if  you  have  a companion
with  you,  it  were  quite  useless  to  speak  to  him.  The  frightened  birds
cross  each  other  confusedly  in  their  flight ; the  young  attempting  to  se-
cure themselves,  some  of  them  lose  their  hold,  and  fall  into  the  water  with
a splash  ; a shower  of  leaflets  whirls  downwards  from  the  tree-tops,  and
you  are  glad  to  make  your  retreat  from  such  a place.  Should  you  wish
to  shoot  Herons,  you  may  stand,  fire,  and  pick  up  your  game  as  long  as
you  please ; you  may  obtain  several  species,  too,  for  not  only  does  the


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


91


Great  Blue  Heron  breed  there,  but  the  White,  and  sometimes  the  Night
Heron,  as  well  as  the  Anhinga,  and  to  such  places  they  return  year  after
year,  unless  they  have  been  cruelly  disturbed.

The  nest  of  the  Blue  Heron,  in  whatever  situation  it  may  be  placed,
is  large  and  flat,  externally  composed  of  dry  sticks,  and  matted  with
weeds  and  mosses  to  a considerable  thickness.  When  the  trees  are  large
and  convenient,  you  may  see  sevei’al  nests  on  the  same  tree.  The  full
complement  of  eggs  which  these  birds  lay  is  three,  and  in  no  instance
have  I found  more.  Indeed,  this  is  constantly  the  case  with  all  the  large
species  with  which  I am  acquainted,  from  Ardea  coertilea  to  Ardea  occi-
dentalis ; but  the  smaller  species  lay  more  as  they  diminish  in  size,  the
Louisiana  Heron  having  frequently  four,  and  the  Green  Heron  five,  and
even  sometimes  six.  Those  of  the  Great  Blue  Heron  are  very  small
compared  with  the  size  of  the  bird,  measuring  only  two  and  a half  inches
by  one  and  seven-twelfths ; they  are  of  a dull  bluish-white,  without  spots,
rather  rough,  and  of  a regular  oval  form.

The  male  and  the  female  sit  alternately,  receiving  food  from  each
other,  their  mutual  affection  being  as  great  as  it  is  towards  their  young,
which  they  provide  for  so  abundantly,  that  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find
the  nest  containing  a quantity  of  fish  and  other  food,  some  fresh,  and
some  in  various  stages  of  putrefaction.  As  the  young  advance  they  are  less
frequently  fed,  although  still  as  copiously  supplied  whenever  opportunity
offers  ; but  now  and  then  I have  observed  them,  when  the  nests  were  low,
standing  on  their  haunches,  with  their  legs  spread  widely  before  them,
and  calling  for  food  in  vain.  The  quantity  which  they  require  is  now  so
great  that  all  the  exertions  of  the  old  birds  appear  at  times  to  be  insuffi-
cient to  satisfy  their  voracious  appetite ; and  they  do  not  provide  for
themselves  until  fully  able  to  fly,  when  their  parents  chase  them  off,  and
force  them  to  shift  as  they  can.  They  are  generally  in  good  condition
when  they  leave  the  nest ; but  from  want  of  experience  they  find  it  dif-
ficult to  procure  as  much  food  as  they  have  been  accustomed  to,  and  soon
become  poor.  Young  birds  from  the  nest  afford  tolerable  eating ; but  the
flesh  of  the  old  birds  is  by  no  means  to  my  taste,  nor  so  good  as  some  epi-
cures would  have  us  to  believe,  and  I would  at  any  time  prefer  that  of  a
Crow  or  young  Eagle.

The  principal  food  of  the  Great  Blue  Heron  is  fish  of  all  kinds ; but
it  also  devours  frogs,  lizards,  snakes,  and  birds,  as  well  as  small  quadru-
peds, such  as  shrews,  meadow-mice,  and  young  rats,  all  of  which  I have


92


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


found  in  its  stomach.  Aquatic  insects  are  equally  welcome  to  it,  and  it
is  an  expert  flycatcher,  striking  at  moths,  butterflies,  and  libellulae,  whe-
ther on  the  wing  or  when  alighted.  It  destroys  a great  number  of  young
Marsh-Hens,  Rails,  and  other  birds  ; but  I never  saw  one  catch  a fiddler  or
a crab ; and  the  only  seeds  that  I have  found  in  its  stomach  were  those
of  the  great  water-lily  of  the  Southern  States.  It  always  strikes  its  prey
through  the  body,  and  as  near  the  head  as  possible.  When  the  animal  is
strong  and  active,  it  kills  it  by  beating  it  against  the  ground  or  a rock,
after  which  it  swallows  it  entire.  While  on  the  St  John’s  River  in  East
Florida,  I shot  one  of  these  birds,  and  on  opening  it  on  board,  found
in  its  stomach  a fine  perch  quite  fresh,  but  of  which  the  head  had  been
cut  off.  The  fish,  when  cooked,  I found  excellent,  as  did  Lieutenant
PiEiiCY  and  my  assistant  Mr  Ward,  but  Mr  Leehman  would  not  so
much  as  taste  it.  When  on  a visit  to  my  friend  John  Bulow,  I was  in-
formed jby  him,  that  although  he  had  several  times  imported  gold  fishes
from  New  York,  with  the  view  of  breeding  them  in  a pond,  through
which  ran  a fine  streamlet,  and  which  was  surrounded  by  a wall,  they
all  disappeared  in  a few  days  after  they  were  let  loose.  Suspecting  the
Heron  to  be  the  depredator,  I desired  him  to  watch  the  place  carefully
with  a gun ; which  was  done,  and  the  result  was,  that  he  shot  a superb
specimen  of  the  present  species,  in  which  was  found  the  last  gold  fish  that
remained.

In  the  wild  state  it  never,  I believe,  eats  dead  fish  of  any  sort,  or  in-
deed any  other  food  than  that  killed  by  itself.  Now  and  then  it  strikes
at  a fish  sp  large  and  strong  as  to  endanger  its  own  life  ; and  I once  saw
one  on  the  Florida  coast,  that,  after  striking  a fish,  when  standing  in  the
water  to  the  full  length  of  its  legs,  was  dragged  along  for  several  yards,
now  on  the  surface,  and  again  beneath.  When,  after  a severe  struggle,
the  Heron  disengaged  itself,  it  appeared  quite  overcome,  and  stood  still
near  the  shore,  his  head  turned  from  the  sea,  as  if  afraid  to  try  another
such  experiment.  The  number  of  fishes,  measuring  five  or  six  inches,
which  one  of  these  birds  devours  in  a day,  is  surprising : Some  which  I
kept  on  board  the  Marion  would  swallow,  in  the  space  of  half  an  hour,
a bucketful  of  young  mullets ; and  when  fed  on  the  flesh  of  green  turtles,
they  would  eat  several  pounds  at  a meal.  I have  no  doubt  that,  in  fa-
vourable circumstances,  one  of  them  could  devour  several  hundreds  of
small  fishes  in  a day.  A Heron  that  was  caught  alive  on  one  of  the  Flo-
rida keys,  near  Key  West,  looked  so  emaciated  when  it  came  on  board.


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


93


that  I had  it  killed  to  discover  the  cause  of  its  miserable  condition.  It
was  an  adult  female  that  had  bred  that  spring ; her  belly  was  in  a state  of
mortification,  and  on  opening  her,  we  found  the  head  of  a fish  measuring
several  inches,  which,  in  an  undigested  state,  had  lodged  among  the  en-
trails of  the  poor  bird.  How  long  it  had  suffered  could  only  be  guessed,
but  this  undoubtedly  was  the  cause  of  the  miserable  state  in  which  it  was
found.

I took  a pair  of  young  Herons  of  this  species  to  Charleston.  They
were  nearly  able  to  fly  when  caught,  and  were  standing  erect  a few  yards
from  the  nest,  in  which  lay  a putrid  one  that  seemed  to  have  been  tram-
pled to  death  by  the  rest.  They  offered  little  resistance,  but  grunted
with  a rough  uncouth  voice.  I had  them  placed  in  a large  coop,  contain-
ing four  individuals  of  the  Ardea  occidentalis,  who  immediately  attacked
the  new-comers  in  the  most  violent  manner,  so  that  I was  obliged  to  turn
them  loose  on  the  deck.  I had  frequently  observed  the  great  antipathy
evinced  by  the  majestic  white  species  towards  the  blue  in  the  wild  state,
but  was  surprised  to  find  it  equally  strong  in  young  birds  which  had
never  seen  one,  and  were  at  that  period  smaller  than  the  others.  All
my  endeavours  to  remove  their  dislike  were  unavailing,  for  when  placed
in  a large  yard,  the  White  Herons  attacked  the  Blue,  and  kept  them  com-
pletely under.  The  latter  became  much  tamer,  and  were  more  attach-
ed to  each  other.  Whenever  a piece  of  turtle  was  thrown  to  them,  it  was
dexterously  caught  in  the  air  and  gobbled  up  in  an  instant,  and  as  they
became  more  familiar,  they  ate  bits  of  biscuit,  cheese,  and  even  rhinds  of
bacon.

When  wounded,  the  Great  Blue  Heron  immediately  prepares  for  de-
fence, and  woe  to  the  man  or  dog  who  incautiously  comes  within  reach
of  its  powerful  bill,  for  that  instant  he  is  sure  to  receive  a severe  wound,
and  the  risk  is  so  much  the  greater  that  birds  of  this  species  commonly
aim  at  the  eye.  If  beaten  with  a pole  or  long  stick,  they  throw  themselves
on  their  back,  cry  aloud,  and  strike  with  their  bill  and  claws  with  great
force.  I have  shot  some  on  trees,  which,  although  quite  dead,  clung  by
their  claws  for  a considerable  time  before  they  fell.  I have  also  seen  the
Blue  Heron  giving  chase  to  a Fish  Hawk,  whilst  the  latter  was  pursuing
its  way  through  the  air  towards  a place  where  it  could  feed  on  the  fish
which  it  bore  in  its  talons.  The  Heron  soon  overtook  the  Hawk,  and  at
the  very  first  lounge  made  by  it,  the  latter  dropped  its  quarry,  when  the


94


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


Heron  sailed  slowly  towards  the  ground,  where  it  no  doubt  found  the
fish.  On  one  occasion  of  this  kind,  the  Hawk  dropped  the  fish  in  the
water,  when  the  Heron,  as  if  vexed  that  it  was  lost  to  him,  continued  to
harass  the  Hawk,  and  forced  it  into  the  woods.

The  flight  of  the  Great  Blue  Heron  is  even,  powerful,  and  capable  of
being  protracted  to  a great  distance.  On  rising  from  the  ground  or  on
leaving  its  perch,  it  goes  off  in  silence  with  extended  neck  and  danghng
legs,  for  eight  or  ten  yards,  after  which  it  draws  back  its  neck,  extends
its  feet  in  a straight  line  behind,  and  with  easy  and  measured  flappings
continues  its  course,  at  times  flying  low  over  the  marshes,  and  again,  as  if
suspecting  danger,  at  a considerable  height  over  the  land  or  the  forest.
It  removes  from  one  pond  or  creek,  or  even  from  one  marsh  to  another,
in  a direct  manner,  deviating  only  on  apprehending  danger.  When  about
to  alight,  it  now  and  then  sails  in  a circular  direction,  and  when  near  the
spot  it  extends  its  legs,  and  keeps  its  wings  stretched  out  until  it  has  ef-
fected a footing.  The  same  method  is  employed  when  it  alights  on  a
tree,  where,  however,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  as  much  at  its  ease  as  on  the
ground.  When  suddenly  surprised  by  an  enemy,  it  utters  several  loud
discordant  notes,  and  mutes  the  moment  it  flies  off.

This  species  takes  three  years  in  attaining  maturity,  and  even  after
that  period  it  still  increases  in  size  and  weight.  When  just  hatched  they
have  a very  uncouth  appearance,  the  legs  and  neck  being  very  long,  as
well  as  the  bill.  By  the  end  of  a-week  the  head  and  neck  are  sparingly
covered  with  long  tufts  of  silky  down,  of  a dark  grey  colour,  and  the
body  exhibits  young  feathers,  the  quills  large  with  soft  blue  sheaths.
The  tibio-tarsal  joints  appear  monstrous,  and  at  this  period  the  bones  of
the  leg  are  so  soft,  that  one  may  bend  them  to  a considerable  extent  with-
out breaking  them.  At  the  end  of  four  weeks,  the  body  and  wings  are
well  covered  with  feathers  of  a dark  slate  colour,  broadly  margined  with
ferruginous,  the  latter  colour  shewing  plainly  on  the  thighs  and  the  flexure
of  the  wing  ; the  bill  has  grown  wonderfully,  the  legs  would  not  now  easily
break,  and  the  birds  are  able  to  stand  erect  on  the  nest  or  on  the  objects
near  it.  They  are  now  seldom  fed  oftener  than  once  a-day,  as  if  their
parents  were  intent  on  teaching  them  that  abstinence  without  which  it
would  often  be  difficult  for  them  to  subsist  in  their  after  life.  At  the
age  of  six  or  seven  weeks  they  fly  off,  and  at  once  go  in  search  of  food,
each  by  itself.


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


95


In  the  following  spring,  at  which  time  they  have  grown  much,  the
elongated  feathers  of  the  breast  and  shoulders  are  seen,  the  males  shew
the  commencement  of  the  pendent  crest,  and  the  top  of  the  head  has  be-
come white.  None  breed  at  this  age,  in  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to  ob-
serve. The  second  spring,  they  have  a handsome  appearance,  the  up-
per parts  have  ^become  light,  the  black  and  white  marks  are  much  purer,
and  some  have  the  crest  three  or  four  inches  in  length.  Some  breed
at  this  age.  The  third  spring,  the  Great  Blue  Heron  is  as  represented
in  the  plate.

The  males  are  somewhat  larger  than  the  females,  but  there  is  very
little  difference  between  the  sexes  in  external  appearance.  This  species
moults  in  the  Southern  States  about  the  beginning  of  May,  or  as  soon  as
the  young  are  hatched,  and  one  month  after  the  pendent  crest  is  dropped,
and  much  of  the  beauty  of  the  bird  is  gone  for  the  season.  The  weight
of  a full  grown  Heron  of  this  kind,  when  it  is  in  good  condition,  is  about
eight  pounds  ; but  this  varies  very  much  according  to  circumstances,  and
I have  found  some  having  all  the  appearance  of  old  birds  that  did  not
exceed  six  pounds.  The  stomach  consists  of  a long  bag,  thinly  covered
by  a muscular  coat,  and  is  capable  of  containing  several  fishes  at  a time.
The  intestine  is  not  thicker  than  the  quiU  of  a swan,  and  measures  from
eight  and  a half  to  nine  feet  in  length.

Ardea  Herodias,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  i.  p.  237. — Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  692.

— Ch.  BoTMparte,  Synops.  p.  304.

Great  Heron,  Ardea  Herodias,  TFils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  vii.  p.  106.  pi.  61.

Fig.  1. — NuUall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  42.

Adult  Male  in  spring.  Plate  CCXI.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering  to  a
point,  the  mandibles  nearly  equal ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line
nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broadly  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards
the  end,  a groove  from  the  base  to  near  the  tip,  beneath  which  the  sides
are  convex,  the  edges  extremely  thin  and  sharp,  towards  the  end  broken
into  irregular  serratures,  the  tip  acute.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
extremely  narrow  and  elongated,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  it  ascending,  and
slightly  curved,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  flattish  and  ascending,  the
edges  as  in  the  upper,  the  tip  acuminate.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,  lon-
gitudinal, with  a membrane  above  and  behind.


96


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  very  long  and
slender.  Body  slender  and  compressed ; wings  large.  Feet  very  long  ;
tibia  elongated,  its  lower  half  bare,  very  slender,  covered  all  round  with
hexagonal  scales;  tarsus  elongated,  thicker  than  the  lower  part  of  the
tibia,  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  large  scutella,  excepting  at  the
two  extremities,  where  it  is  scaly,  the  sides  and  hind  part  with  angular
scales.  Toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  reti-
cularly  granulate  beneath,  third  toe  much  longer  than  second  and  fourth,
which  are  nearly  equal,  first  shorter,  but  strong ; claws  of  moderate  size,
strong,  compressed,  arched,  rather  acute,  the  thin  inner  edge  of  that  of
the  third  toe  finely  serrated.

Sj)ace  between  the  bill  and  eye,  and  around  the  latter,  bare,  as  is
the  lower  half  of  the  tibia.  Plumage  soft,  generally  loose.  Feathers  of
the  upper  part  of  the  head  long,  tapering,  decurved,  two  of  them  ex-
tremely elongated ; of  the  back  long  and  loose,  of  the  rump  soft  and
downy ; scapulars  with  extremely  long  slender  rather  compact  points.
Feathers  of  the.  fore  neck  much  elongated  and  extremely  slender,  of  the
sides  of  the  breast  anteriorly  very  large,  curved  and  loose  ; of  the  fore-
part of  the  breast  narrower  and  elongated,  as  they  are  generally  on  the
rest  of  the  lower  surface ; on  the  tibia  short.  Wings,  large,  rounded ;
primaries  curved,  strong,  broad,  tapering  towards  the  end,  the  outer  cut
out  on  both  margins,  second  and  third  longest ; secondaries  very  large,
broad  and  rounded,  extending  beyond  the  primaries  when  the  wing  is
closed.  Tail  of  moderate  length,  rounded,  of  twelve  rather  broad,  rounded
feathers.

Bill  yellow,  dusky  green  above,  loral  and  orbital  spaces  light  green.
Iris  bright  yellow.  Feet  olivaceous,  paler  above  the  tibio-tarsal  joints ;
claws  black.  Forehead  pure  white ; the  rest  of  the  elongated  feathers
bluish- black  ; throat  white,  neck  pale  purplish-brown,  the  elongated  fea-
thers beneath  greyish-white,  part  of  their  inner  webs  purplish-blue.  Up-
per parts  in  general  light  greyish-blue,  the  elongated  tips  of  the  scapulars
greyish-white,  the  edge  of  the  wing,  some  feathers  at  the  base  of  the
fore  neck,  and  the  tibial  feathers,  brownish-orange.  The  two  tufts  of
large  curved  feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the  breast  bluish-black,  some  of
them  with  a central  stripe  of  white.  Lower  surface  of  the  wings  and  the
sides  light  greyish-blue ; elongated  feathers  of  the  breast  white,  their  in-
ner edge  black,  of  the  abdomen  chiefly  black ; lower  tail-coverts  white,
some  of  them  with  an  oblique  mark  of  black  near  the  tip.


GREAT  BLUE  HERON.


97


Length  to  end  of  tail  48  inches,  to  end  of  claws  63  inches,  extent  of
wings  72 ; bill  5j,  gape  7i%  ; tarsus  6|,  middle  toe  and  claw  5,  hind  toe
and  claw  naked  part  of  tibia  4 ; wings  from  flexure  20  ; tail  7.

The  Female,  when  in  full  plumage,  is  precisely  similar  to  the  Male.

On  Prince  Edward’s  Island,  in  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  there  is
a fine  breeding-place  of  the  Great  Blue  Heron,  which  is  probably  the
most  northern  on  the  Atlantic  coast  of  North  America.  The  birds  there
are  more  shy  than  they  usually  are  at  the  period  of  breeding,  and  in  the
most  cowardly  manner  abandon  their  young  to  the  mercy  of  every  in-
truder. A friend  of  mine  who  visited  this  place  for  the  purpose  of  pro-
curing adult  birds  in  their  best  plumage,  to  add  to  his  already  extensive
collection,  found  it  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  his  object,  until  he  at
length  thought  of  covering  himself  with  the  hide  of  an  ox,  under  the  dis-
guise of  which  he  readily  got  within  shot  of  the  birds,  which  were  com-
pletely deceived  by  the  stratagem.


VOL.  III.


G


( 98  )


THE  COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.

Larus  zonorhynchus,  Richardson.

PLATE  CCXII.  Adult  Male,  and  Young  in  winter.

No  country  can  afford  greater  facilities  for  the  migration  of  water-
birds  than  the  United  States  of  America.  Even  the  Gulls  are  enabled  to
traverse  their  whole  extent  from  north  to  south,  and  in  the  contrary  di-
rection, without  suffering  from  want  of  food  or  of  proper  resting  places.
The  Gull  that  has  been  bred  in  Labrador,  or  still  farther  north,  can  reach
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  without  being  seriously  incommoded  by  the  storms  that
now  and  then  rage  along  the  Atlantic  coast.  The  broad  Avaters  of  the  St
Lawrence  leads  it  to  our  great  lakes,  from  which  hundreds  of  streams
conduct  it  to  the  head  waters  of  the  Ohio  or  the  Mississippi,  by  follow-
ing the  windings  of  which  it  at  length  arrives  in  the  warm  regions  of  the
Mexican  Gulf,  on  whose  waters  the  traveller  can  spend  the  winter.  That
these  advantages  are  embraced  by  many  species  of  Gull,  there  can  be  no
doubt ; and  should  you,  as  I have  done,  repeatedly  visit  our  broad  lakes,
or  the  great  rivers  just  mentioned,  you  would  find  there,  at  particular
seasons,  not  only  this  species,  but  several  others,  as  well  as  various  kinds
of  Terns,  but  none  of  the  genus  Lestris.  Lake  Erie  supplies  with  food
the  Lams  marinus,  L.  argentatus,  L.  atricilla,  and  some  others,  as
well  as  the  Great,  the  Arctic,  the  Roseate,  and  the  Black  Terns,  all  of
which  pass  at  times  over  to  the  Ohio,  and  from  thence  to  the  ocean.
During  these  inland  movements,  the  birds  seem  to  be  peculiarly  attract-
ed by  certain  places,  at  which  they  remain  for  a while.  Thus,  at  the
Falls  of  the  Ohio,  some  species  remain  for  weeks,  and  wherever  much
shipping  occurs  on  that  river  or  the  Mississippi,  Gulls  are  sure  to  be  seen
gleaning  the  garbage  that  has  been  thrown  overboard,  or  seizing  such
fishes  as  rise  incautiously  to  the  surface  of  the  water.  In  the  months  of
September  and  October,  Gulls  and  Terns  might  almost  be  said  to  abound
on  our  great  streams,  and  many  return  thither  during  the  spring  months
on  their  way  northward.  Nay,  to  some  species  of  Tern,  the  beautiful
sand-bars  and  rocky  beaches  that  occur  here  and  there,  are  so  attractive  as
to  induce  a few  to  remain  and  breed  there.  This  is  especially  the  case
with  the  Black  Terns,  some  of  which  rear  their  young  by  the  rapids  of


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


99


the  Ohio  below  Louisville,  amidst  the  roaring  sounds  of  which  may  be
heard  their  shrill  and  continued  cries.

You  must  not  suppose,  however,  that  all  the  Gulls  which  migrate  in
that  country  take  the  same  route ; for  thousands  follow  the  sinuosities  of
our  Atlantic  coast,  some  of  them  perhaps  proceeding  as  far  south  in  that
direction  as  those  which  follow  our  rivers.  My  opinion  is,  that  the  feebler
individuals  of  the  different  species  follow  the  inland  route,  while  the  older
and  more  hardy  birds  keep  along  the  shores  of  the  ocean.  The  examina-
tion of  numerous  specimens  on  both  of  these  extensive  tracks  has  almost
rendered  this  a matter  of  certainty,  yet  I should  be  much  pleased  to  find
this  opinion  corroborated  by  the  observations  of  any  other  student  of
nature.

While  on  the  coast  of  Florida,  in  the  winter  of  1832-33,  I every  day
saw  Gulls  of  many  species,  but  among  them  all  were  no  adult  birds,  with
the  exception  of  the  Black-headed  Gull  of  Wilson,  which  was  very
abundant.  This  greatly  tended  to  strengthen  my  opinion,  that  the  young
gulls  are  of  more  delicate  constitution  than  their  parents,  which  are  better
enabled  to  stand  the  rigours  of  the  winter  in  the  Middle  States,  where
they  are  found  equally  abundant  at  that  season.  For  similar  reasons,  I
also  feel  assured  that  the  oldest  birds  are  those  which  go  farthest  north  to
breed,  and  that  the  older  and  stronger  individuals  are  larger,  with  more
purely  tinted  plumage,  and  with  the  colours  of  their  legs,  feet  and  bills,
as  well  as  of  the  circle  around  the  eye,  more  vivid,  than  those  which,  al-
though found  breeding,  yet  have  not  acquired  their  full  maturity.  In
consequence  of  these  circumstances,  some  species  have  been  described  as
forming  several,  and  the  great  difference  between  the  plumage  of  the  young
and  the  old  birds  has  led  to  similar  errors.

Our  Common  Gull  is  seldom  seen  in  the  adult  plumage  of  winter  be-
yond the  shores  of  Maryland  southward,  or  in  full  summer  plumage  be-
yond the  Bay  of  New  York,  and  this  rarely  after  the  middle  of  April,
as  at  that  period  they  gather  into  flocks,  and  remove  farther  north  to
breed.  The  places  to  which  this  species  resorts  for  that  purpose,  and
which  I have  visited,  are  several  islands  between  Boston  and  Eastport,
another  close  to  Grand  Manan  at  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  the
great  Gannet  Rock  of  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  and  certain  rocky  isles
in  the  deep  bays  on  the  coast  of  Labrador.

This  species,  although  one  of  those  most  abundant  on  our  coast,  is  so
well  acquainted  with  the  artifices  of  man,  that  it  keeps  more  than  others

G 2


100


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


beyond  the  reach  of  the  gun.  While  in  our  harbours  or  rivers  it  sails  at
a moderate  height,  sometimes  mingling  with  the  Silvery  Gull,  or  even
with  the  Great  Black-backed.  Its  movements  are  graceful  and  easy,  and
it  floats  as  it  were  in  the  air,  whether  proceeding  in  a direct  line,  or  in
irregular  curves,  when,  suddenly  checking  its  speed,  it  partially  closes  its
wings,  and  descends  with  rapidity  in  a spiral  manner.  As  it  approaches
the  water,  it  allows  its  legs  to  hang,  opens  its  bill,  and  while  seizing  its
food,  raises  its  wings  erect  and  flaps  them  quickly  to  support  its  body.
Now  with  loaded  bill  it  sweeps  off  to  some  distance,  alights,  and  devours
its  prey.

When  in  pursuit  of  a shoal  of  small  fish,  it  assembles  in  flocks,  keeps
up  a constant  yelping  noise,  dips  every  instant  among  the  fry,  and  conti-
nues to  feed  until  so  gorged  as  to  be  unable  to  fly.  Alighting  in  groups,
they  float  with  great  buoyancy,  and  it  is  pleasant  to  see  them  rising  and
falling  alternately  on  the  waves  of  a moderately  agitated  sea,  the  snowy
whiteness  of  their  under  parts  contrasting  with  the  deep  green  water,  and
their  elongated  wings  extending  beyond  the  tail,  giving  the  appearance
of  lightness  and  agility  to  their  form.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  light  and  long  sustained,  and  the  circum-
stance of  birds  of  this  genus  being  able  to  find  food  almost  anywhere,  in-
duces them  at  times  to  proceed  far  out  to  sea  ; and  I have  now  and  then
been  gratified  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  several  birds  of  the  present
species  to  the  lee  of  the  ship,  on  whose  deck  I was  with  impatience
watching  for  the  sight  of  land.  The  winged  pilgrims  would  no  sooner
come  up  than  they  also  would  express  their  pleasure  by  their  cries,  espe-
cially when  they  received  from  the  passengers  bits  of  bread  or  such  gar-
bage as  might  be  at  hand.  Once  fed,  they  would  fly  about  us  the  whole
day,  and  sometimes  would  be  seen  the  next ; and  then  perhaps  all  at
once,  as  if  made  aware  of  the  existence  of  land  in  a particular  direction,
they  would  fly  off,  and  we  would  see  no  more  of  them.

When  spring  has  fairly  commenced,  our  Common  Gulls  assemble  in
parties  of  hundreds,  and  alight  on  mud  flats  or  sandy  beaches,  in  our
eastex’n  estuaries  and  bays.  For  a while  they  regularly  resort  to  these
places,  which  to  the  Gulls  are  what  the  scratching  or  tooting  grounds  are
to  the  Pinnated  Grous.  The  male  Gulls,  however,  although  somewhat  pug-
nacious, are  not  very  inveterate  in  their  quarrels,  making  up  by  clamour
for  the  deficiency  of  prowess  in  their  tournaments.  The  males  bow  to
the  females  with  swollen  throats,  and  walk  round  them  with  many  odd


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


101


gesticulations.  As  soon  as  the  birds  are  paired,  they  give  up  their  ani-
mosities, and  for  the  rest  of  the  season  live  together  on  the  best  terms.
After  a few  weeks  spent  in  these  preparatory  pleasures,  the  flocks  take  to
wing,  and  betake  themselves  to  their  breeding  places.

On  an  island  within  a few  miles  of  Eastport  in  Maine,  I found  these
birds  breeding  in  great  numbers  in  the  beginning  of  May.  Their  nests
were  there  placed  amid  the  scanty  tufts  of  grass.  On  the  Gannet  Rock,
early  in  June,  they  were  breeding  on  the  shelves  towards  the  summit,
along  with  the  Guillemots,  while  the  Kittiwakes  had  secured  their  nests
far  below.  The  different  species  kept  apart,  but  yet  exhibited  no  anti-
pathy towards  each  other.  On  the  18th  of  July,  we  discovered  a low
rocky  island  at  the  bottom  of  a bay  ten  miles  from  the  open  sea,  opposite
the  harbour  of  Little  Macatina,  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  where  we  found
upwards  of  two  hundred  nests,  all  containing  eggs  with  the  chicks  more
or  less  advanced.  The  number  of  eggs  in  each  nest  was  three  or  four,
moi’e  generally  three.  They  resembled  those  of  the  Great  Black-backed
Gull  in  form  and  colour,  but  were  much  smaller,  measuring  two  inches
and  three  quarters  in  length,  by  one  and  five  and  a half  eighths  in  their
greatest  diameter.  There  was  considerable  diversity  both  in  the  tint
of  their  ground  colour,  and  in  the  number  and  size  of  the  spots  on
them,  as  is  the  case  with  the  eggs  of  most  water  birds.  In  general,
however,  they  were  of  a dull  dark  cream-colour,  thickly  blotched,  sprink-
led and  touched  with  different  shades  of  purple,  umber,  and  black.  When
fresh,  these  eggs  are  delicious  food,  as  I have  bad  abundant  occasion
to  know.  The  nests  were  in  this  place  all  situated  on  the  bare  rock,
but  in  all  other  respects  resembled  those  found  among  the  grass  or  on
more  elevated  rocks  ; they  were  formed  of  seaweeds,  well  construct-
ed, about  six  inches  across  within,  and  twelve  in  their  greatest  dia-
meter. Some  of  the  nests  were  much  thicker  and  larger  than  others ;
many  were  placed  within  the  distance  of  a foot  from  each  other ; and  the
whole  place  was  covered  with  feathers  and  dung,  which  emitted  a very
disagreeable  stench,  proving  to  us  that  it  was  annually  resorted  to  by
these  birds.  To  our  surprise  the  birds  were  very  shy.  Among  those
killed  by  us  were  some  having  all  the  appearance  of  mature  age,  such  as
I have  mentioned  above.  The  number  of  individuals  among  them  hav-
ing the  black  ring  on  the  bill  was  much  greater  than  among  those  found
near  Grand  Manan  ; some,  however,  were  without  this  ring,  and  on
others  it  was  but  partially  marked.  Some  had  no  white  on  the  tips  of  the


102


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


primaries,  and  differences  were  also  observable  in  the  length  of  the  tarsus
and  toes  ; but  all  had  the  same  voice,  and  were  actually  of  the  same  spe-
cies. We  also  found  considerable  differences  in  their  size  and  weight,
even  in  individuals  of  the  same  sex,  some  weighing  one  pound,  others  four
ounces  more,  and  some  so  much  as  one  pound  ten  ounces.  The  males,
at  an  average,  were  larger  than  the  females.  Not  a bird  of  any  other
species  was  found  there,  or  on  the  grassy  islands.

Whatever  opinion  may  be  held  as  to  the  synonyms  of  this  Gull,  I am
perfectly  assured  of  the  above  mentioned  variations  in  the  colour,  size,
and  markings  of  the  younger  and  older  birds.  I am  equally  sure  that  no
individuals  acquire  the  full  beauty  of  their  plumage  before  the  third
spring.  The  young  are  at  first  of  a dull  greenish-yellow,  spotted  with
dark  brown  on  the  head  and  rump.  In  a very  few  days  they  leave  the
nest,  ramble  about  in  its  vicinity,  waiting  the  arrival  of  their  parents  with
food,  and  conceal  themselves  under  stones  or  in  crevices  at  the  appearance
of  danger.  When  a few  weeks  old,  they  do  not  hesitate,  on  being  pur-
sued, to  betake  themselves  to  the  water,  where  they  swim  with  great
lightness.  When  about  the  size  of  pigeons,  they  assume  a brownish  co-
lour, each  feather  being  broadly  banded  or  tipped  with  light  ferruginous
and  grey.  At  this  season,  the  fishermen  of  Labrador  and  Newfoundland
kill  them  In  great  numbers,  and  pack  them  in  salt  for  winter  use.  I was
much  surprised  one  morning  while  at  Labrador,  to  see  one  of  the  barges
of  the  Gulnare  come  alongside  of  the  Ripley  after  a long  cruize,  when  offi-
cers and  men  were  glad  to  have  a good  mess  of  these  young  Gulls  in  the
bow  of  their  boat,  they  having  run  short  of  provisions.


Laeus  zonorhynchus,  Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  421.

RiNG-BiLLfiD  Mew-gull,  Larus  ZONORHYNCHUS,  Nutloll,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  300.

Adult  Male  in  summer  plumage.  Plate  CCXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  robust,  nearly  straight,  compressed.  Up-
per mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  at  the  base,  arched  and
declinate  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  slightly  convex,
the  edges  sharp  inflected,  arched,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove
rather  long  and  narrow ; nostrils  in  its  fore  part,  lateral,  longitudinal,
linear,  wider  anteriorly,  open,  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  a
prominence  at  the  end  of  the  angle,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


103


line  then  nearly  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp
and  inflected.

Head  rather  large.  Neck  of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  full.
Wings  long.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender;  tibia  bare  below;
tarsus  somewhat  compressed,  covered  before  and  behind  with  numerous
broad  scutella,  the  sides  reticulated ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated,
the  fore  toes  rather  long  and  slender,  the  fourth  longer  than  the  second,
the  third  longest,  all  scutellate  above,  and  connected  by  reticulated  en-
tire membranes,  the  lateral  toes  margined  externally  with  a narrow  mem-
brane. Claws  small,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  rather  obtuse.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  very  soft  and  blended,  on
the  back  rather  compact.  Wings  very  long,  rather  broad,  acute,  the
first  quill  longest,  the  other  primaries  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries
broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  narrow.  Tail  of  moderate
length,  even,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  marked  opposite  the  angle  with  a broad  transverse  band  of
brownish-black,  between  which  and  the  base  it  is  light  greenish-yellow,
the  tips  orange-yellow.  Edges  of  eyelids  greenish-yellow ; iris  bright
yellow.  Feet  greenish-yellow,  the  webs  tinged  with  orange;  claws  black.
The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  pure  white,  excepting  the  back
and  wings,  which  are  light  pearl-grey.  The  first  six  quills  are  black
towards  their  extremities,  the  first  and  second  being  almost  entirely  so,  the
sixth  with  only  a small  spot.  The  tips  of  these  feathers  are  white,  that
of  the  first  having  merely  a narrow  margin  of  that  colour,  which  gradu-
ally  enlarges  on  the  rest,  the  first  moreover  has  near  the  end  a long  patch
of  white,  the  second  a smaller  one  on  the  inner  web.  The  proportional
size  of  the  white  marks  on  the  outer  primaries  varies  in  individuals.
The  other  quills  and  secondaries  are  all  white  at  the  ends.

Length  to  end  of  tail  20  inches,  to  end  of  wings  22|,  to  end  of  claws
20^ ; extent  of  wings  48 ; wing  from  flexure  15|,  tail  6 ; bill  along  the  back
1 J,  along  the  edge  2|,  depth  at  the  base  ?|,  depth  at  the  prominence  | ;
bare  part  of  the  tibia  |,  tarsus  2 ; middle  toe  1/^,  its  claw  ; hind
toe  its  claw  Weight  lb.

Young  bird,  after  first  moult,  shot  on  26th  November.  Plate
CCXII.  Fig.  2.

Bill  black,  base  of  lower  mandible  and  edges  of  upper  towards  the
base,  livid  flesh-colour.  Edges  of  eyelids  livid  blue ; iris  hazel.  Feet


104


COMMON  AMERICAN  GULL.


purplish-grey  ; claws  brownish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  plum-
age is  dull  white,  mottled  with  greyish-brown  beneath,  on  the  back  with
large  brownish-black  spots,  the  dark  markings  being  central.  Anterior
to  the  eye  is  a crescent  of  greyish-black.  The  outer  primary  quills  are
black,  the  two  first  without  white  at  the  ends,  the  rest  margined  round
the  ends  with  that  colour.  The  abdominal  and  tibial  feathers  are  white;
the  lower  and  upper  tail-coverts  white,  with  brown  spots.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18|,  to  end  of  wings  20|,  extent  of  wings  44^  ;
tarsus  2,  middle  toe  l/g,  its  claws  Weight  1 lb.  3 ounces.

On  a rocky  island  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  where  this  bird  was
breeding  in  great  numbers,  a comparatively  small  number  of  individuals
only  had  the  bill  marked  with  the  black  ring,  the  others,  although  pre-
cisely similar  in  other  respects,  wanted  that  mark.  This  bird  although
in  many  respects  precisely  similar  to  that  which  is  usually  named  Larus
canus  in  Europe,  differs  greatly  in  the  size  of  the  bill,  which  even  in
young  birds  is  much  deeper  than  in  the  oldest  individuals  of  that  spe-
cies. V


( 105  )


THE  PUFFIN.

Mormon  akcticus,  Illiger.

PLATE  CCXIII.  Male  and  Female.

The  Sea  Parrot,  as  this  bird  is  usually  called  on  the  eastern  coasts
of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  by  the  fishermen  of  Newfoundland  and
Labrador,  sometimes  proceeds  as  far  south  as  the  entrance  of  the  River
Savannah  in  Georgia,  where  I saw  a good  number  in  the  winter  of
1831-32.  It  is  by  no  means,  however,  common  with  this  species  to
extend  its  southward  migrations  so  far,  and  I suspect  it  does  so  only
in  very  severe  weather.  It  is  never  plentiful  olF  Long  Island,  but  be-
comes more  abundant  the  farther  you  proceed  eastward,  until  you  reach
the  entrance  to  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  where  it  is  quite  common,  and  on  the
Islands  of  which  many  breed,  although  not  one  perhaps  now  for  a hun-
dred that  bred  there  twenty  years  ago.  Those  which  proceed  farther  north
leave  the  United  States  about  the  middle  of  April,  and  move  along  the
coast,  none  ever  crossing  over  the  land  to  any  extent.  On  my  voyage
to  Labrador  I observed  Puffins  every  day ; but  although  we  reached
that  country  in  the  early  part  of  June,  none  had  then  begun  to  breed.
As  we  approached  the  shores  of  that  inhospitable  land,  we  every  now
and  then  saw  them  around  the  vessel,  now  floating  on  the  swelling  wave,
now  disappearing  under  the  bow,  diving  with  the  swiftness  of  thought,
and  sometimes  rising  on  wing  and  flying  swiftly,  but  low,  over  the  sea.
The  nearer  we  approached  the  coast  the  more  abundant  did  we  find  the
Puffins,  and  sometimes  they  were  so  numerous  as  actually  to  cover  the
water  to  the  extent  of  half  an  acre  or  more.  At  first  we  paid  little  atten-
tion to  them,  but  as  soon  as  I became  aware  that  they  had  begun  to  breed,
I commenced  an  investigation,  of  which  I now  proceed  to  lay  before  you
the  result.

The  first  breeding  place  which  I and  my  party  visited  was  a small
island,  a few  acres  in  extent,  and  pleasant  to  the  eye,  on  account  of  the
thick  growth  of  green  grass  with  which  it  was  covered.  The  shores  were
exceedingly  rugged,  the  sea  ran  high,  and  it  required  all  the  good  ma-
nagement of  our  captain  to  effect  a safe  landing,  which,  however,  was  at
length  accomplished  at  a propitious  moment,  when,  borne  on  the  summit


106


PUFFIN.


of  a great  wave,  we  reached  the  first  rocks,  leaped  out  in  an  instant,  and
held  our  boat,  while  the  angry  waters  rolled  back  and  left  it  on  the  land.
After  securing  the  boat,  we  reached  with  a few  steps  the  green  sward,
and  directly  before  us  found  abundance  of  Puffins.  Some  already  alarmed
flew  past  us  with  the  speed  of  an  arrow,  others  stood  erect  at  the  entrance
of  their  burrows,  while  some  more  timid  withdrew  within  their  holes  as
we  advanced  towards  them.  In  the  course  of  half  an  hour  we  obtained  a
good  number.  The  poor  things  seemed  not  at  all  aware  of  the  effect  of
guns,  for  they  would  fly  straight  towards  us  as  often  as  in  any  other  di-
rection ; but  after  a while  they  became  more  knowing,  and  avoided  us
with  more  care.  W e procured  some  eggs,  and  as  no  young  ones  were  yet
to  be  found,  we  went  off  satisfied.  The  soil  was  so  light,  and  so  easily
dug,  that  many  of  the  burrows  extended  to  the  depth  of  five  or  six  feet,
although  not  more  than  a few  inches  below  the  surface,  and  some  of  the
poor  birds  underwent  a temporary  imprisonment  in  consequence  of  the
ground  giving  way  under  our  weight.  The  whole  island  was  perforated
like  a rabbit-warren,  and  every  hole  had  its  entrance  placed  due  south,  a
circumstance  which  allowed  the  birds  to  emerge  in  our  sight  almost  all  at
once,  presenting  a spectacle  highly  gratifying  to  us  all.  Our  visit  to  this
island  took  place  on  the  28th  of  June  1833.

On  the  12th  of  August,  the  day  after  my  son  procured  the  two  Jer-
falcons  mentioned  in  the  second  volume  of  this  work,  our  Captain,  my
friends  George  Shattuck  and  William  Ingalls,  with  four  sailors,
and  another  boat  in  company,  went  on  a visit  to  “ Perroket  Island,”  dis-
tant about  two  miles  from  the  harbour  of  Bras  d’Or.  The  place  is  known
to  all  the  cod-fishers,  and  is  celebrated  for  the  number  of  Puffins  that  an-
nually breed  there.  As  we  rowed  towards  it,  although  we  found  the  water
literally  covered  with  thousands  of  these  birds,  the  number  that  flew  over
and  around  the  green  island  seemed  much  greater,  insomuch  that  one  might
have  imagined  half  the  Puffins  in  the  world  had  assembled  there.  This  far-
famed  isle  is  of  considerable  extent,  its  shores  are  guarded  by  numberless
blocks  of  rock,  and  within  a few  yards  of  it  the  water  is  several  fathoms  in
depth.  The  ground  rises  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre  to  the  height  of
about  seventy  feet,  the  greatest  length  being  from  north  to  south,  and  its
southern  extremity  fronting  the  Streight  of  BeUeisle.  For  every  burrow  in
the  island  previously  visited  by  us  there  seemed  to  be  a hundred  here,  on
every  crag  or  stone  stood  a Puffin,  at  the  entrance  of  each  hole  another,
and  yet  the  sea  was  covered  and  the  air  filled  by  them.  I had  two  double-


PUFFIN.


107


barrelled  guns  and  two  sailors  to  assist  me ; and  I shot  for  one  hour  by
my  watch,  always  firing  at  a single  bird  on  wing.  How  many  Puffins  I
killed  in  that  time  I take  the  liberty  of  leaving  you  to  guess.

The  burrows  were  all  inhabited  by  young  birds,  of  different  ages  and
sizes,  and  clouds  of  Puffins  flew  over  our  heads,  each  individual  holding
a “ lint”  by  the  head.  This  fish,  which  measures  four  or  five  inches  in
length,  and  is  of  a very  slender  form,  with  a beautiful  silvery  hue,  exist-
ed in  vast  shoals  in  the  deep  water  around  the  island.  The  speed  with
which  the  birds  flew  made  the  fish  incline  by  the  side  of  their  neck.
While  flying  the  Puffins  emitted  a loud  croaking  noise,  but  they  never
dropped  the  fish,  and  many  of  them,  when  brought  down  by  a shot,  still
held  their  prey  fast.  I observed  with  concern  the  extraordinary  affection
manifested  by  these  birds  towards  each  other ; for  whenever  one  fell  dead
or  wounded  on  the  water,  its  mate  or  a stranger  immediately  alighted  by
its  side,  swam  round  it,  pushed  it  with  its  bill  as  if  to  urge  it  to  fly  or
dive,  and  seldom  would  leave  it  until  an  oar  was  raised  to  knock  it  on
the  head,  when  at  last,  aware  of  the  danger,  it  would  plunge  below  in  an
instant.  Those  which  fell  wounded  immediately  ran  with  speed  to  some
hole,  and  dived  into  it,  on  which  no  further  effort  was  made  to  secure
them.  Those  which  happened  to  be  caught  alive  in  the  hand  bit  most
severely,  and  scratched  with  their  claws  at  such  a rate  that  we  were
glad  to  let  them  escape.  The  burrows  here  communicated  in  various
ways  with  each  other,  so  that  the  whole  island  was  perforated  as  if  by
a multitude  of  subterranean  labyrinths,  over  which  one  could  not  run
without  the  risk  of  falling  at  almost  every  step.  The  voices  of  the  young
sounded  beneath  our  feet  like  voices  from  the  grave,  and  the  stench  was
extremely  disagreeable,  so  that  as  soon  as  our  boats  were  filled  with  birds
we  were  glad  to  get  away.

During  the  whole  of  our  visit,  the  birds  never  left  the  place,  but  con-
stantly attended  to  their  avocations.  Here  one  would  rise  from  beneath
our  feet,  there,  within  a few  yards  of  us,  another  would  alight  with  a fish,
and  dive  into  its  burrow,  or  feed  the  young  that  stood  waiting  at  the  en-
trance. The  young  birds  were  far  from  being  friendly  towards  each
other,  and  those  which  we  carried  with  us  kept  continually  fighting  so
long  as  we  kept  them  alive.  They  used  their  yet  extremely  small  and
slender  bills  with  great  courage  and  pertinacity,  and  their  cries  resembled
the  wailings  of  young  whelps.  The  smaller  individuals  were  fed  by  the
parents  by  regurgitation,  or  received  little  pieces  of  fish  which  were  placed


108


PUFFIN.


in  their  mouths ; the  larger  picked  up  the  fish  that  were  dropped  before
them  ; but  almost  all  of  them  seemed  to  crawl  to  the  entrance  of  the  holes
for  the  purpose  of  being  fed.  In  all  the  burrows  that  communicated  with
others,  a round  place  was  scooped  out  on  one  side  of  the  avenue,  in  the
form  of  an  oven ; while  in  those  which  were  single,  this  oven-bke  place
was  found  at  the  end,  and  was  larger  than  the  corridor.  All  the  passages
were  flattish  above,  and  rounded  beneath,  as  well  as  on  the  sides.  In
many  instances  we  found  two  birds  sitting  each  on  its  egg  in  the  same
hole.

The  Puffin  never  lays  more  than  one  egg,  unless  the  first  may  have
been  destroyed  or  taken  away  ; nor  does  it  raise  more  than  a single  young
one  in  the  season.  The  time  of  incubation  is  probably  from  twenty-five  to
twenty-eight  days,  although  I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  precise
period.  Both  birds  work  in  digging  the  hole,  using  their  bills  and  feet ;
they  also  sit  alternately  on  their  egg,  although  the  female  engages  more
industriously  in  this  occupation,  while  the  male  labours  harder  at  the
burrow.  The  egg  is  pure  white  when  first  deposited,  but  soon  becomes
soiled  by  the  earth,  as  no  nest  is  formed  for  its  reception.  It  generally
measures  two  and  a half  inches  by  one  and  three-fourths,  but  varies  in
size  according  to  the  age  of  the  bird,  as  well  as  in  shape,  some  being  con-
siderably more  rounded  at  the  smaller  end  than  others.  When  boiled,  the
white  is  of  a livid-blue  colour.  The  captain  and  myself  were  the  only
persons  of  our  party  who  tried  to  eat  some.  The  eggs  are  certainly  very
bad,  and  are  never  collected  by  “ The  Eggers.”  The  flesh  of  the  birds
is  very  dark,  tough,  and  so  fishy,  as  to  be  eatable  only  in  cases  of  great
want.  Two  Italians  who  had  come  to  Labrador  to  purchase  cod-fish,  and
were  short  of  provisions,  fed  upon  Puffins  daily,  to  the  great  amusement
of  our  party.  The  fishermen  at  times,  when  bait  is  scarce  along  the  coast,
destroy  a great  number  of  these  birds,  which  they  skin  like  rabbits,  and
then  cut  the  flesh  into  slices.

The  flight  of  the  Puffin  is  firm,  generally  direct,  now  and  then  pretty
well  sustained.  It  is  able  to  rise  at  once  from  the  water  or  the  land,  al-
though at  times  it  runs  on  both  before  taking  to  wing.  This  depends
much  on  necessity,  for  if  pushed  it  flies  at  once  from  tlie  ground,  or
plunges  under  the  surface  of  the  water.  There  they  swim,  with  the  wings
partially  opened,  at  a small  depth,  passing  along  in  the  manner  of  Divers  ;
and  by  this  means  they  catch  their  prey ; hut  at  other  times  they  dive  to
the  bottom,  many  fathoms  deep,  for  shell-fish  ami  other  objects.


PUFFIN.


109


During  the  love  season,  the  males  chase  each  other  in  the  air,  on  the
water,  or  beneath  its  surface,  with  so  much  quickness,  as  to  resemble  the
ricochets  of  a cannon-ball.  Having  kept  several  for  about  a week,  I
threw  them  overboard  in  the  harbour  where  we  were  at  anchor,  and  where
the  water  was  beautifully  clear.  On  leaving  my  gloved  hand,  they
plunged  through  the  air,  entered  the  water,  and  swam  off,  assisting  them-
selves by  their  wings  to  the  distance  of  from  fifty  to  an  hundred  yards.
On  coming  up,  they  washed  their  plumage  for  a long  time,  and  then  dived
in  search  of  food.  While  on  board,  they  ran  about  from  the  dark  towards
the  light,  keeping  themselves  erect,  and  moving  with  great  briskness,  un-
til at  times  close  to  my  feet,  when  they  would  watch  my  motions  like
hawks,  and  if  I happened  to  look  towards  them,  would  instantly  make
for  some  hiding-place.  They  fed  freely  and  were  agreeable  pets,  only
that  they  emitted  an  unpleasant  grunting  noise,  and  ran  about  incessantly
during  the  night,  when  each  footstep  could  be  counted.  When  on  rocky
shores,  or  islands  with  large  stones,  I observed  that  the  Puffins  often  flew
from  one  crag  or  stone  to  another,  alighting  with  ease,  and  then  standing
erect.

The  young,  while  yet  covered  with  down,  are  black,  with  a white  patch
on  the  belly.  Their  bills  do  not  acquire  much  of  the  form  which  they
ultimately  have  for  several  weeks ; nor  do  they  assume  their  perfect  shape
for  years.  I have  examined  many  hundred  individuals,  among  which  I
have  found  great  differences  in  the  size  and  form  of  the  bill.  In  fact,  the
existence  of  this  diversity  has  induced  many  persons  to  think  that  we  have
several  species  of  Puffin  on  our  coasts  ; but,  after  having  examined  many
specimens  in  Europe,  I am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  this  species  is  the
same  that  occurs  in  both  continents,  and  that  we  have  only  one  more  at
all  common  on  our  eastern  coasts.  The  sexes  differ  in  no  perceptible  de-
gree, only  that  the  males  are  somewhat  larger.  When  two  years  old  they
may  be  considered  of  their  full  size,  although  the  bill  continues  to  grow
and  acquires  furrows,  until  it  becomes  as  you  see  it  in  the  Plate.


Alca  arctica,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  i.  p.  211. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  voL  ii.  p.  792.
Mormon  arcticus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  430.
Puffin,  or  Coulterneb,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  542.

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCXIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  nearly  as  high  as  long,  exceedingly


110


PUFFIN.


compressed,  at  the  base  as  high  as  the  head,  obliquely  furrowed  on  the
sides.  Upper  mandible  with  a horny  rim  along  the  basal  margin,  its  dor-
sal line  curved  from  the  base,  the  ridge  very  narrow  but  rounded,  the
sides  rapidly  sloped,  and  marked  with  three  curved  oblique  grooves,  the
edges  obtuse,  their  outline  nearly  straight,  the  tip  deflected,  very  narrow
but  obtuse.  Between  the  basal  rim  and  the  first  groove  is  a triangular
flat  space  analogous  to  the  nasal  groove,  in  the  lower  part  of  which,  close
to  the  edge  of  the  bill,  is  the  linear  direct  nostril.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  very  narrow,  and  so  placed  that  the  base  of  the  bill  is  inflected
beyond  the  perpendicular,  the  dorsal  line  a little  convex  at  first,  towards
the  end  straight,  the  ridge  narrow,  broader  about  the  middle,  the  sides
nearly  flat,  grooved  and  ridged  as  in  the  upper,  the  edges  strong,  the  tip
very  narrow.  The  gape  extends  downwards  a Little  beyond  the  base  of
the  bill,  and  is  furnished  with  a soft  corrugated  extensible  membrane.

Head  large,  oblong,  anteriorly  compressed.  Eye  rather  small,  with
bare  orbits ; over  the  upper  eyehd  an  oblong,  nearly  erect,  horny  body,
along  the  lower  a more  elongated  one  of  the  same  nature.  Neck  short
and  thick.  Body  full  and  rounded.  Wings  short.  Feet  short,  rather
stout ; tibia  bare  for  a short  way  above  the  joint.  Tarsus  very  short,
little  compressed,  anteriorly  with  a series  of  small  scutella,  the  rest  with
reticular  angular  scales.  Hind  toe  wanting.  Toes  of  moderate  length,
rather  slender,  scuteUate  above,  connected  by  reticulated  entire  mem-
branes which  project  a little,  the  third  and  fourth  toes  about  equal,  the
second  considerably  shorter,  with  a narrow  marginal  web.  Claws  strong,
of  moderate  length,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  that  of  the  inner  toe
much  curved  and  acute.

Plumage  close,  blended,  soft,  very  short  on  the  head.  Wings  curved,
short,  narrow,  acute.  Primary  quills  narrow,  incurved,  first  longest,  se-
cond a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated.  Secondaries  very  short,
small  and  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  slightly  rounded,  of  sixteen  narrow
rounded  feathers.

Bill  with  the  basal  rim  and  first  ridge  of  upper  mandible  dull  yellow,
the  intervening  space  greyish-blue,  basal  margin  of  lower  bright  red,  first
ridge  and  intervening  space  as  in  the  upper,  the  rest  bright  red  (carmine
tinged  with  vermilion)  ; membrane  at  the  base  of  the  gape  gamboge-yellow,
inside  of  mouth  and  tongue  yellow.  Edge  of  eyehds  vermilion,  horny
appendages  of  eyelids  greyish-blue.  Iris  light  blue.  Feet  vermilion,  claws
black.  Throat  and  sides  of  the  head  white,  that  colour  extending  over


PUFFIN.


Ill


the  eye,  and  passing  in  a narrow  line  behind  the  occiput.  Upper  part  of
the  head  blackish-grey,  tinged  with  olive,  paler  anteriorly.  The  middle
of  the  neck  all  round,  and  all  the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  deep  black,
with  blue  reflections,  the  quills  tinged  with  brown.  The  whole  under
surface  white,  except  the  upper  part  of  the  sides,  which  are  dusky.

Length  to  end  of  tail  11|  inches,  to  end  of  claws  13^,  extent  of
wings  23;  bill  along  the  back  2,  along  the  edge  of  upper  mandible  ;
depth  of  bill  at  base  If,  its  greatest  diameter  f ; tarsus  1,  middle  toe  If,
its  claw  f.  Weight  | lb.

Female.  Plate  CCXIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male,  but  of  somewhat  smaller


size.


( 11*-^  )


THE  RAZOR-BILLED  AUK.

Alca  Tojida,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXIV.  Male  and  Female.

A FEW  birds  of  this  species  occasionally  go  as  far  south  as  New  York
during  winter ; but  beyond  that  parallel  I never  met  with  one.  From  Bos-
ton eastward  many  are  seen,  and  some  breed  on  the  Seal  Islands  off  the
entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  These  Auks  generally  arrive  on  our  At-
lantic coast  about  the  beginning  of  November,  and  return  northward  to
breed  about  the  middle  of  April.  During  their  stay  with  us,  they  are
generally  seen  singly,  and  at  a greater  distance  from  the  shores  than  the
Guillemots  or  Puffins  ; and  I have  no  doubt  that  they  are  able  to  procure
shell-fish  at  greater  depths  than  these  birds.  I have  observed  them  fish-
ing on  banks  where  the  bottom  was  fifteen  or  eighteen  fathoms  from  the
surface,  and,  from  the  length  of  time  that  they  remained  under  water,
felt  no  doubt  that  they  dived  to  it.  On  my  voyage  round  Nova  Scotia
and  across  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  we  saw  some  of  them  constantly.
Some  had  eggs  on  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  where,  as  the  inhabitants  in-
formed us,  these  birds  arrive  about  the  middle  of  April,  when  the  Gulf
is  stiU  covered  with  ice.  As  we  proceeded  towards  Labrador,  they  passed
us  every  now  and  then  in  long  files,  flying  at  the  height  of  a few  yards
from  the  water,  in  a rather  undulating  manner,  with  a constant  beat  of
the  wings,  often  within  musket-shot  of  our  vessel,  and  sometimes  mov-
ing round  us  and  coming  so  close  as  to  induce  us  to  believe  that  they  had
a wish  to  alight.  The  thermometer  indicated  44°.  The  sight  of  these
files  of  birds  passing  swiftly  by  was  extremely  pleasing ; each  bird  would
alternately  turn  towards  us  the  pure  white  of  its  lower  parts,  and  again
the  jetty  black  of  the  upper.  As  I expected  ere  many  days  should  pass
to  have  the  gratification  of  inspecting  their  breeding  grounds,  I expe-
rienced great  delight  in  observing  them  as  they  sped  their  flight  toward
the  north.

After  we  had  landed,  we  every  day  procured  Auks,  notwithstanding
their  shyness,  which  exceeded  that  of  almost  all  the  other  sea-birds.  The
fishermen  having  given  me  an  account  of  their  principal  breeding  places,
the  Ripley  proceeded  toward  them  apace.  One  fair  afternoon  we  came


RAZOR-BILLED  AUK.


113


in  view  of  the  renowned  Harbour  of  Whapati  Guan,  and  already  saw  its
curious  beacon,  which,  being  in  form  like  a huge  mounted  cannon  placed
on  the  elevated  crest  of  a great  rock,  produced  a most  striking  effect.  We
knew  that  the  harbour  was  within  the  stupendous  wall  of  rock  before  us,
but  our  pilot,  either  from  fear  or  want  of  knowledge,  refused  to  guide  us
to  it,  and  our  captain,  leaving  the  vessel  in  charge  of  the  mate,  was  obliged
to  go  off  in  a boat,  to  see  if  he  could  find  a passage.  He  was  absent  more
than  an  hour.  The  Ripley  stood  off  and  on,  the  yards  were  manned  on
the  look-out,  the  sea  was  smooth  and  its  waters  as  clear  as  crystal,  but
the  swell  rose  to  a prodigious  height  as  it  passed  sluggishly  over  the  great
rocks  that  seemed  to  line  the  shallows  over  which  we  floated.  We  were
under  no  apprehension  of  personal  danger,  however,  for  we  had  several
boats  and  a very  efficient  crew  ; and  besides,  the  shores  were  within  can-
non shot ; but  the  idea  of  losing  our  gallant  bark  and  all  our  materials
on  so  dismal  a coast  haunted  my  mind,  and  at  times  those  of  my  com-
panions. From  the  tops  our  sailors  called  out  “ Quite  shallow  here.  Sir.”
Up  went  the  helm,  and  round  swung  the  Ripley  like  a duck  taken  by
surprise.  Then  suddenly  near  another  shoal  we  passed,  and  were  careful
to  keep  a sharp  look-out  until  our  commander  came  up.

Springing  upon  the  deck,  and  turning  his  quid  rapidly  from  side  to  side,
he  called  out,  “All  hands  square  the  yards,”  and  whispered  to  me  “All’s
safe,  my  good  Sir.”  The  schooner  advanced  towards  the  huge  barrier,
merrily  as  a fair  maiden  to  meet  her  beloved;  now  she  doubles  a sharp
cape,  forces  her  way  through  a narrow  pass  ; and  lo  ! before  you  opens
the  noble  harbour  of  Whapati  Guan.  All  around  was  calm  and  solemn  ;
the  waters  were  smooth  as  glass,  the  sails  fell  against  the  masts,  but  the
impetus  which  the  vessel  had  received  urged  her  along.  The  lead  was
heaved  at  every  yard,  and  in  a few  minutes  the  anchor  was  dropped.

Reader,  I wish  you  had  been  there,  that  you  might  yourself  describe
the  wild  scene  that  presented  itself  to  our  admiring  gaze.  W e were  se-
parated from  the  rolling  swell  of  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence  by  an  im-
mense wall  of  rock.  Far  away  toward  the  east  and  north,  rugged  mounds
innumerable  rose  one  above  another.  Multitudes  of  frightened  Cor-
morants croaked  loudly  as  they  passed  us  in  the  air,  and  at  a distance
fled  divers  Guillemots  and  Auks.  The  mossy  beds  around  us  shone  with
a brilliant  verdure,  the  lark  piped  its  sweet  notes  on  high,  and  thousands
of  young  codfish  leaped  along  the  surface  of  the  deep  cove  as  if  with  joy.
Such  a harbour  I had  never  seen  before ; such  another,  it  is  probable,  I

VOL.  IIT.


H


114


RAZOR-BILLED  AUK.


may  never  see  again ; the  noblest  fleet  that  ever  ploughed  the  ocean  might
anchor  in  it  in  safety.  To  augment  our  pleasures,  our  captain  some  days
after  piloted  the  Gulnare  into  it.  But,  you  will  say,  “ Where  are  the
Auks,  we  have  lost  sight  of  them  entirely.”  Never  fear,  good  reader,  we
are  in  a delightful  harbour,  and  anon  you  shall  hear  of  them.

Winding  up  the  basin  toward  the  north-east,  Captain  Emery,  myself,
and  some  sailors,  all  well  armed,  proceeded  one  day  along  the  high  and
precipitous  shores  to  the  distance  of  about  four  miles,  and  at  last  reached
the  desired  spot.  We  landed  on  a small  rugged  island.  Our  men  were
provided  with  long  poles,  having  hooks  at  their  extremities.  These  sticks
were  introduced  into  the  deep  and  narrow  Assures,  from  which  we  care-
fully drew  the  birds  and  eggs.  One  place,  in  particular,  was  full  of  birds ;
it  was  a horizontal  fissure,  about  two  feet  in  height,  and  thirty  or  forty
yards  in  depth.  We  crawled  slowly  into  it,  and  as  the  birds  affrighted
ffew  hurriedly  past  us  by  hundreds,  many  of  their  eggs  were  smashed.
The  farther  we  advanced,  the  more  dismal  did  the  cries  of  the  birds  sound
in  our  ears.  Many  of  them,  despairing  of  effecting  their  escape,  crept
into  the  surrounding  recesses.  Having  collected  as  many  of  them  and
their  eggs  as  we  could,  we  returned,  and  glad  were  we  once  more  to
breathe  the  fresh  air.  No  sooner  were  we  out  than  the  cracks  of  the
sailors’  guns  echoed  among  the  rocks.  Rare  fun  to  the  tars,  in  fact,  was
every  such  trip,  and,  when  we  joined  them,  they  had  a pile  of  Auks  on
the  rocks  near  them.  The  birds  flew  directly  towards  the  muzzles  of  the
guns,  as  readily  as  in  any  other  course,  and  therefore  it  needed  little
dexterity  to  shoot  them.

When  the  Auks  deposit  their  eggs  along  with  the  Guillemots,  which
they  sometimes  do,  they  drop  them  in  spots  from  which  the  water  can
escape  without  injuring  them ; but  when  they  breed  in  deep  fissures,
which  is  more  frequently  the  case,  many  of  them  lie  close  together,
and  the  eggs  are  deposited  on  small  beds  of  pebbles  or  broken  stones
raised  a couple  of  inches  or  more,  to  let  the  water  pass  beneath  them.
Call  this  instinct  if  you  will : — I really  do  not  much  care  ; but  you  must
permit  me  to  admire  the  wonderful  arrangements  of  that  Nature  from
which  they  have  received  so  much  useful  knowledge.  When  they  lay
their  eggs  in  such  a horizontal  cavern  as  that  which  I have  mentioned
above,  you  find  them  scattered  at  the  distance  of  a few  inches  from  each
other ; and  there,  as  well  as  in  the  fissures,  they  sit  flat  upon  them  like
Ducks,  for  example,  whereas  on  an  exposed  rock,  each  bird  stands  almost


RAZOR  BILLED  AUK.


115


upright  upon  its  egg.  Another  thing  quite  as  curious,  which  I observed,
is,  that,  while  in  exposed  situations,  the  Auk  seldom  lays  more  than  one
egg,  yet  in  places  of  greater  security  I have,  in  many  instances,  found
two  under  a single  bird.  This  may  perhaps  astonish  you,  but  I really
cannot  help  it.

The  Razor-billed  Auks  begin  to  drop  their  eggs  in  the  beginning  of
May.  In  July  we  found  numerous  young  ones,  although  yet  small.
Their  bill  then  scarcely  exhibited  the  form  which  it  ultimately  assumes.
They  were  covered  with  down,  had  a lisping  note,  but  fed  freely  on
shrimps  and  small  bits  of  fish,  the  food  with  which  their  parents  supply
them.  They  were  very  friendly  towards  each  other,  differing  greatly  in
this  respect  from  the  young  Puffins,  which  were  continually  quarrelling.
They  stood  almost  upright.  Whenever  a finger  was  placed  within  their
reach,  they  instantly  seized  it,  and  already  evinced  the  desire  to  bite  se-
verely so  cordially  manifested  by  the  old  birds  of 'this  species,  which  in
fact  will  hang  to  your  hand  until  choked  rather  than  let  go  their  hold.
The  latter  when  wounded  threw  themselves  on  their  back,  in  the  manner
of  Hawks,  and  scratched  fiercely  with  their  claws.  They  walked  and
ran  on  the  rocks  with  considerable  ease  and  celerity,  taking  to  wing,  how-
ever, as  soon  as  possible.  When  thus  disturbed  while  breeding,  they  fly
round  the  spot  many  times  before  they  alight  again.  Sometimes  a whole
flock  will  alight  on  the  water  at  some  distance,  to  watch  your  departure,
before  they  will  venture  to  return.

This  bird  lays  one  or  two  eggs,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  place.
The  eggs  measure  at  an  average  three  inches  and  one-eighth,  by  two  and
one-eighth,  and  are  generally  pure  white,  greatly  blotched  with  dark  red-
dish-brown or  black,  the  spots  generally  forming  a circle  towards  the  lar-
ger end.  They  differ  considerably  from  those  of  the  Common  and  the
Thick-billed  Guillemots,  being  less  blunted  at  the  smaller  end.  The  eggs
afford  excellent  eating ; the  yolk  is  of  a pale  orange  colour,  the  white
pale  blue.  The  eggers  collect  but  few  of  the  eggs  of  this  bird,  they  be-
ing more  difficult  to  be  obtained  than  those  of  the  Guillemot,  of  which
they  take  vast  numbers  every  season.

The  food  of  the  Razor-billed  Auk  consists  of  shrimps,  various  other
marine  animals,  and  small  fishes,  as  well  as  roe.  Their  flesh  is  by  the
fishers  considered  good,  and  I found  it  tolerable,  when  well  stewed,  al-
though it  is  dark  and  therefore  not  prepossessing.  The  birds  are  two
years  in  acquiring  the  full  size  and  form  of  their  bill,  and,  when  full

II  2


116


RAZOR-BILLED  AUK.


grown,  they  weighed  about  a pound  and  a half.  The  stomach  is  an  ob-
long sac,  the  lower  part  of  which  is  rather  muscular,  and  answers  the  pui--
pose  of  a gizzard.  In  many  I found  scales,  remnants  of  fish,  and  pieces
of  shells.  The  intestines  were  upwards  of  three  feet  in  length.

Immediately  after  the  breeding  season,  these  birds  drop  their  quills,
and  are  quite  unable  to  fly  until  the  beginning  of  October,  when  they
all  leave  their  breeding  grounds  for  the  sea,  and  move  southward.  The
young  at  this  period  scarcely  shew  the  white  streak  between  the  bill  and
the  eye ; their  cheeks,  like  those  of  the  old  birds  at  this  time,  and  the
fore  part  of  the  neck,  are  dingy  white,  and  remain  so  until  the  following
spring,  when  the  only  difference  between  the  young  and  the  old  is,  that
the  former  have  the  bill  smaller  and  less  furrowed,  and  the  head  more
brown.  The  back,  tail,  and  lower  parts  do  not  seem  to  undergo  any
material  change.


Alca  Torda,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vo!.  i.  p.  210 Lath.  Ind.  Oimith.  vol.  ii.  p.  703

Ch.  Bonap.  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  4.S1.

Razor-bill,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  547-

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  feathered  as  far  as  the  nostrils,  beyond  which
it  is  very  high,  exceedingly  compressed,  and  obliquely  furrowed  on  the
sides.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  curved  so  as  to  form  the
third  of  a circle,  the  ridge  extremely  narrow  but  rounded,  the  sides  near-
ly flat,  with  five  grooves,  the  one  next  the  base  deeper  and  more  narrow,
the  edges  inflected  and  sharp,  the  tip  decurved  and  obtuse.  Nostrils
medial,  marginal,  linear,  short,  pervious,  but  concealed  by  the  feathers.
Lower  mandible  mth  the  angle  very  narrow,  and  having  a horny  triangular
appendage,  the  base  at  first  horizontal  and  extremely  narrow,  then  slop-
ing forwards  and  rounded,  the  dorsal  outline  rounded,  towards  the  end
concave,  the  sides  slightly  concave,  the  edges  inflected,  the  tip  decurved.

Head  large,  oblong,  anteriorly  narrowed.  Eyes  small.  Neck  short
and  strong.  Body  full,  rather  depressed.  Wings  small.  Feet  placed
far  behind,  .short,  rather  strong ; tibia  bare  a short  way  above  the  joint ;
tarsus  very  short,  compressed,  anteriorly  scutellate,  laterally  covered  with
reticulated  angular  scales,  posteriorly  granulate.  Hind  toe  wanting ;
toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  connected  by  re-


RAZOR-BILLED  AUK.


117


ticulated  entire  membranes,  the  inner  toe  having  also  a projecting  mar-
gin ; outer  toe  slightly  longer  than  middle  one  ; inner  considerably  shorter.
Claws  rather  small,  arched,  compressed,  obtuse.

Plumage  close,  blended,  very  soft,  on  the  head  very  short  and  velvety.
Wings  short,  curved,  narrow,  acute.  Primary  quills  narrow,  incurved,
acute,  first  longest,  second  slightly  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ;
secondary  quills  very  short,  obliquely  rounded.  Tail  short,  tapering,  of
twelve  narrow,  pointed  feathers.

Bill  black,  with  a white  line  across  each  mandible ; inside  of  the
mouth  gamboge-yellow.  Iris  deep  hazel.  Feet  black.  Fore  part  of
neck  below,  and  all  the  lower  parts,  white ; the  rest  black,  the  head,
hind  neck,  and  back,  glossed  with  olive-green,  the  throat  and  sides  of
the  neck  tinged  with  chocolate,  the  wings  with  brown,  the  tips  of  the  se-
condary quills,  and  a narrow  line  from  the  bill  to  the  eye,  white.

Length  to  the  end  of  tail  17  inches,  to  the  end  of  claws  17f ; extent
of  wings  29J  ; wing  from  flexure  8^,  tail  4;  bill  along  the  ridge  1^’g,
along  the  edge2^%,  its  greatest  depth  ; tarsus  1^%,  middle  toe  its
claw  Weight  pound.

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  CCXIV.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male.

The  Young  in  their  winter  plumage  have  the  colouring  distributed
as  in  the  old  birds,  but  with  the  black  duller,  the  wings  more  brown,  the
throat  and  sides  of  the  head  mottled  with  white,  the  white  line  from  the
bill  to  the  eye  existing,  but  the  bill  much  smaller,  without  furrows  or  a
white  line.

The  Old  Birds  in  winter  have  the  throat  and  sides  of  the  neck  mottled
as  described  above  ; but  in  other  respects  their  colours  are  the  same  as
in  summer.

The  gullet  wide,  dilated  towards  the  lower  extremity,  its  mucous
coat  longitudinally  corrugated ; the  proventriculus  very  wide  and  glan-
dular ; the  stomach  rather  small,  oblong,  muscular,  with  an  inner,  longi-
tudinally corrugated  and  horny  cuticular  coat.  Pylorus  very  small ; in-
testine near  its  commencement  /g  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  gradually  con-
tracted to  the  cajca,  where  it  is  ; caeca  half  an  inch  long,  tapering.  The
length  of  the  gullet  and  stomach  together  is  8,  that  of  the  intestine  41  inches.


( H8  )


HYPERBOREAN  PHALAROPE.

Phalaropus  hyperbore  us,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXV.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Few  individuals  of  this  species  are  ever  seen  to  the  South  of  New  York.
Near  Boston  I procured  several,  and  my  learned  friend  Thomas  Nut-
tall  presented  me  with  some  that  had  been  shot  in  the  neighbourhood
of  that  city,  as  did  Mr  John  Bethune  and  Mr  Rodman  of  New  Bed-
ford. As  we  advanced  eastward  in  the  month  of  May,  we  saw  more  and
more  of  them,  and  while  at  Eastport  in  Maine  my  son  John  shot  seve-
ral out  of  flocks  of  sixty  or  more.  At  one  time  a flock  consisting  of
more  than  a hundred  was  seen  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  They  were  ex-
ceedingly shy,  and  the  gunners  of  Eastport,  who  knew  them  under  the
name  of  Sea  Geese,  spoke  of  them  as  very  curious  birds.

They  procure  their  food  principally  upon  the  water,  on  which  they
alight  like  Ducks,  float  as  light  as  Gulls,  and  move  about  in  search  of  food
with  much  nimbleness.  The  sight  of  a bank  of  floating  sea-weeds  or
garbage  of  any  kind  induces  them  at  once  to  alight  upon  it,  when  they
walk  about  as  unconcernedly  as  if  on  land.  Their  notes,  which  resemble
the  syllables  tweet,  tweet,  tweet,  are  sharp  and  clear,  and  in  their  flight
they  resemble  our  common  American  Snipe.  At  the  approach  of  an
enemy,  they  immediately  close  their  ranks,  until  they  almost  touch  each
other,  when  great  havock  is  made  among  them  ; but  if  not  immediately
shot  at,  they  rise  all  at  once  and  fly  swiftly  off  emitting  their  shrill  cries,
and  remove  to  a great  distance.  These  Phalaropes  congregate  in  this
manner  for  the  purpose  of  moving  northwards  to  their  breeding  grounds,
although  some  remain  and  breed  as  far  south  as  Mount  Desert  Island.
I have  met  with  them  in  equally  large  flocks  at  a distance  of  more  than
a hundred  miles  from  the  shores.  They  were  feeding  on  great  beds  of
floating  seaweeds,  and  in  several  instances  some  Red  Phalaropes  were
seen  in  their  company.

Whilst  in  Labrador,  I observed  that  the  Hyperborean  Phalarope  oc-
curred only  in  small  parties  of  a few  pairs,  and  that  instead  of  keeping  at
sea  or  on  the  salt-water  bays,  they  were  always  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  small  fresh-water  lakes  or  ponds,  near  which  they  bred.  The  nest  was


HYPERBOREAN  PIIALAROPE.


119


a hollow  scooped  out  among  the  herbage,  and  covered  with  a few  bits
of  dried  grass  and  moss.  The  eggs  are  always  four ; they  measure  at  an
average  an  inch  and  three-sixteenths  in  length,  seven-eighths  in  their  great-
est diameter,  are  rather  pointed  at  the  smaller  end,  and  are  more  uni-
form in  their  size  and  markings  than  those  of  most  water-birds.  The
ground  colour  is  a deep  dull  buff,  and  is  irregularly  marked  with  large
and  small  blotches  of  dark  reddish-brown,  which  are  larger  and  more
abundant  on  the  crown.  The  birds  shewed  great  anxiety  for  the  safety
of  their  eggs,  limping  before  us,  or  running  with  extended  wings,  and
emitting  a feeble  melancholy  note  as  if  about  to  expire.  When  we  ap-
proached them,  they  resumed  all  their  natural  alacrity,  piped  in  their
usual  manner,  flew  off  and  alighted  on  the  water.  Captain  Emery  and
myself  followed  some  nearly  an  hour,  assisted  by  a pointer  dog,  in  the  hope
of  tiring  them  out ; but  they  seemed  to  laugh  at  our  efforts,  and  when  Dash
was  quite  close  to  them,  they  would  suddenly  fly  off  in  another  direction,
and  with  great  swiftness,  always  leading  us  farther  from  their  nests.  The
young  leave  the  nest  shortly  after  they  are  hatched,  and  run  after  their
parents  over  the  moss,  and  along  the  edges  of  the  small  ponds ; but  I
saw  none  on  the  water  that  were  not  fully  fledged.  Both  young  and  old
had  departed  by  the  beginning  of  August.

The  Hyperborean  Phalarope  seems  to  undergo  an  almost  continual
moult,  and  is  in  full  plumage  only  about  six  weeks  each  year.  The
young  when  fledged  are  nearly  grey  above,  and  all  white  beneath.  Some  of
them  breed  before  they  have  acquired  what  may  be  considered  the  perfect
plumage ; and  the  very  old  birds  become  greyish  also  at  the  approach
of  winter,  the  red  of  the  throat  and  other  parts  becoming  bright  again
in  the  beginning  of  May,  or  sometimes  in  April.  The  scapulars  of  the
young  are  conspicuously  shorter  than  the  longest  primaries,  but  after  the
first  moult  are  equal  in  length.  The  upper  wing-coverts  are  then  also
short.

I have  never  met  with  this  species  in  any  part  of  the  interior,  although
I have  procured  the  Red  Phalarope  and  Wilson’s  Phalarope  in  many
parts  to  the  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  at  a distance  of  more  than
a thousand  miles  from  the  sea  coast.


120


HYPERBOREAN  PHALAROPE.


Phalaropus  hyperboreus,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  774. — Ch,  Bonaparte,  Synops.

of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  342 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer-

part  ii.  p.  406.

Hyperborean  Phalarope,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii. — Nuttall,  Manual,
vol.  ii.  p.  239.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  long,  very  slender,  flexible,  nearly  cylindrical,  but  towards  the
point  tapering.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  excepting
at  the  end,  where  it  is  a little  curved,  the  ridge  broad  and  depressed,  the
sides  slightly  sloping,  the  edges  rounded,  and  inflected  towards  the  nar-
row slightly  curved,  acute  tip.  Nasal  groove  long,  linear  ; nostrils  basal,
linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,
the  sides  convex,  the  tip  narrowed.

Head  small,  with  the  fore  part  high  and  rounded.  Eyes  small.  Neck
rather  long  and  slender.  Body  slender.  Wings  long.  Feet  of  moderate
length,  slender ; tibia  bare  a considerable  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus
much  compressed,  narrowed  before,  very  thin  behind,  covered  anteriorly
with  numerous  scutella ; toes  slender  ; first  extremely  small,  free,  with  a
slight  membrane  beneath  ; second  slightly  shorter  than  fourth,  third  con-
siderably longer  ; toes  all  scutellate  above,  margined  on  both  sides  with
lobed  and  pectinated  membranes,  which  are  united  at  the  base,  so  as  to
render  the  foot  half  webbed ; the  outer  web  much  longer  than  the  inner.
Claws  very  small,  compressed,  arched,  that  of  the  middle  toe  with  a re-
curved sharp  edge.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Feathers  of  the  back,  and  especially  the
scapulars,  elongated.  Wings  long  and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,
but  rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  second  scarcely  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly
graduated  ; secondary  quills  rather  short  and  narrow,  the  inner  tapering
and  elongated  so  as  nearly  to  equal  the  longest  primaries  when  the  wing
is  closed.  Tail  rather  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  bluish-grey ; claws  black.  The
general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  greyish-black,  the  head  lighter  and
more  tinged  with  grey,  the  scapulars  and  some  of  the  feathers  of  the  back
edged  with  yellowish-red,  of  which  colour  also  are  the  sides  of  the  head
and  neck  ; throat  and  sides  of  the  upper  part  of  the  neck  white.  Wing-
coverts  and  quills  brownish -black,  tinged  with  grey,  the  shafts  of  the
quills,  the  margins  and  tips  of  the  secondaries,  and  a broad  bar  on  the


HYPERBOREAN  PHALAROPE.


121


tips  of  the  secondary  coverts,  white.  Tail  light  grey,  the  feathers  mar-
gined with  white,  the  two  middle  ones  dark  brownish-grey,  the  lateral
upper  tail-coverts  white,  barred  with  dusky.  The  breast  and  abdomen
white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  6 inches,  to  end  of  claws  6 j,  to  end  of  wing  5| ;
extent  of  wings  13^;  wing  from  flexure  ; tail  2 j ; bill  along  the
back  II,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  || ; tarsus  middle  toe
its  claw

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  the  red  markings  are  not  so
deep  in  tint.

Young  fully  fledged.  Plate  CCXV.  Fig.  3.

The  young  bird  has  the  markings  similarly  disposed,  but  the  upper
parts  are  in  general  of  a dull  dark  grey,  the  red  of  the  neck  much  fainter,
and  that  of  the  scapulars  much  paler,  and  inclining  to  greyish-yellow.


( 122  )


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO

It  is  with  mingled  feelings  of  pleasure  and  regret  that  I recall  to  my
mind  the  many  pleasant  days  I have  spent  on  the  shores  of  the  Ohio.
The  visions  of  former  years  crowd  on  my  view,  as  I picture  to  myself
the  fertile  soil  and  genial  atmosphere  of  our  great  western  garden,  Ken-
tucky, and  view  the  placid  waters  of  the  fair  stream  that  flows  along  its
western  boundary.  Methinks  I am  now  on  the  banks  of  the  noble  river.
Twenty  years  of  my  life  have  returned  to  me  ; my  sinews  are  strong,  and
the  “ bowstring  of  my  spirit  is  not  slack bright  visions  of  the  future
float  before  me,  as  I sit  on  a grassy  bank,  gazing  on  the  glittering  wa-
ters. Around  me  are  dense  forests  of  lofty  trees  and  thickly  tangled  un-
dergrowth, amid  which  are  heard  the  songs  of  feathered  choristers,  and
from  whose  boughs  hang  clusters  of  glowing  fruits  and  beautiful  flowers.
Reader,  I am  very  happy.  But  now  the  dream  has  vanished,  and  here  I
am  in  the  British  Athens,  penning  an  episode  for  my  Ornithological  Bio-
graphy, and  having  before  me  sundry  well-thumbed  and  weather-beaten
folios,  from  which  I expect  to  be  able  to  extract  some  interesting  particu-
lars respecting  the  methods  employed  in  those  days  in  catching  Cat-fish.

But,  before  entering  on  my  subject,  I will  present  you  with  a brief
description  of  the  place  of  my  residence  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio.  When
I first  landed  at  Henderson  in  Kentucky,  my  family,  like  the  village,  was
quite  small.  The  latter  consisted  of  six  or  eight  houses;  the  former  of  my
wife,  myself,  and  a young  child.  Few  as  the  houses  were,  we  fortunately
found  one  empty.  It  was  a \og-cahin,  not  a \og-house ; but  as  better
could  not  be  had,  we  were  pleased.  Well,  then,  we  were  located.  The
country  around  was  thinly  peopled,  and  all  purchasable  provisions  rather
scarce ; but  our  neighbours  were  friendly,  and  we  had  brought  with  us
flour  and  bacon-hams.  Our  pleasures  were  those  of  young  people  not
long  married,  and  full  of  life  and  merriment ; a single  smile  from  our  in-
fant was,  I assure  you,  more  valued  by  us  than  all  the  treasures  of  a
modern  Croesus  would  have  been.  The  woods  were  amply  stocked  with
game,  the  river  with  fish  ; and  now  and  then  the  hoarded  sweets  of  the
industrious  bees  were  brought  from  some  hollow  tree  to  our  little  table.
Our  child’s  cradle  was  our  richest  piece  of  furniture,  our  guns  and  fish-
ing-lines our  most  serviceable  implements,  for  although  we  began  to  cul-


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO.


123


tivate  a garden,  the  rankness  of  the  soil  kept  the  seeds  we  planted  far
beneath  the  tall  weeds  that  sprung  up  the  first  year.  I had  then  a part-
ner, a “ man  of  business,”  and  there  was  also  with  me  a Kentucky  youth,
who  much  preferred  the  sports  of  the  forest  and  river  to  either  day-book
or  ledger.  He  was  naturally,  as  I may  say,  a good  woodsman,  hunter,
and  angler,  and,  like  me,  thought  chiefly  of  procuring  supplies  of  fish
and  fowl.  To  the  task  accordingly  we  directed  all  our  energies.

Quantity  as  well  as  quality  was  an  object  with  us,  and  although  we
well  knew  that  three  species  of  Cat-fish  existed  in  the  Ohio,  and  that  all
were  sufficiently  good,  we  were  not  sure  as  to  the  best  method  of  securing
them.  We  determined,  however,  to  work  on  a large  scale,  and  imme-
diately commenced  making  a famous  “ trot-line.”  Now,  reader,  as  you  may
probably  know  nothing  about  this  engine,  I shall  describe  it  to  you.

A trot-line  is  one  of  considerable  length  and  thickness,  both  qualities,
however,  varying  according  to  the  extent  of  water,  and  the  size  of  the
fish  you  expect  to  catch.  As  the  Ohio,  at  Henderson,  is  rather  more
than  half  a mile  in  breadth,  and  as  Cat-fishes  weigh  from  one  to  an  hun-
dred pounds,  we  manufactured  a line  which  measured  about  two  hundred
yards  in  length,  as  thick  as  the  little  finger  of  some  fair  one  yet  in  her
teens,  and  as  white  as  the  damsel’s  finger  well  could  be,  for  it  was  wholly
of  Kentucky  cotton,  just,  let  me  tell  you,  because  that  substance  stands
the  water  better  than  either  hemp  or  flax.  The  main  line  finished,  we
made  a hundred  smaller  ones,  about  five  feet  in  length,  to  eaoh  of  which
we  fastened  a capital  hook  of  Kirby  and  Co.’s  manufacture.  Now  for
the  bait !

It  was  the  month  of  May.  Nature  had  brought  abroad  myriads  of
living  beings : they  covered  the  earth,  glided  through  the  water,  and
swarmed  in  the  air.  The  Cat-fish  is  a voracious  creature,  not  at  all  nice
in  feeding,  but  one  who,  like  the  vulture,  contents  himself  with  carrion
when  nothing  better  can  be  had.  A few  experiments  proved  to  us  that,
of  the  dainties  with  which  we  tried  to  allure  them  to  our  hooks,  they  gave
a decided  preference,  at  that  season,  to  live  toads.  These  animals  were
very  abundant  about  Henderson.  They  ramble  or  feed,  whether  by  in-
stinct or  reason,  during  early  or  late  twilight  more  than  at  any  other  time,
especially  after  a shower,  and  are  unable  to  bear  the  heat  of  the  sun’s  rays
for  several  hours  before  and  after  noon.  We  have  a good  number  of
these  crawling  things  in  America,  particularly  in  the  western  and  southern
parts  of  the  Union,  and  are  very  well  supplied  with  frogs,  snakes,  lizards,


124


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO.


and  even  crocodiles,  which  we  call  alligators ; but  there  is  enough  of  food
for  them  all,  and  we  generally  suffer  them  to  creep  about,  to  leap  or  to
flounder  as  they  please,  or  in  accordance  with  the  habits  which  have  been
given  them  by  the  great  Conductor  of  all.

During  the  month  of  May,  and  indeed  until  autumn,  we  found  an
abundant  supply  of  toads.  Many  “ fine  ladies,”  no  doubt,  would  have
swooned,  or  at  least  screamed  and  gone  into  hysterics,  had  they  seen  one
of  our  baskets  filled  with  these  animals,  all  alive  and  plump.  Fortunately
we  had  no  tragedy  queen  or  sentimental  spinster  at  Henderson.  Our
Kentucky  ladies  mind  their  own  affairs,  and  seldom  meddle  with  those  of
others  farther  than  to  do  all  they  can  for  their  comfort.  The  toads,  col-
lected one  by  one,  and  brought  home  in  baskets,  were  deposited  in  a
barrel  for  use.  And  now  that  night  is  over,  and  as  it  is  the  first  trial  we
are  going  to  give  our  trot-line,  just  watch  our  movements  from  that  high
bank  beside  the  stream.  There  sit  down  under  the  large  cotton-wood
tree.  You  are  in  no  danger  of  catching  cold  at  this  season.

My  assistant  follows  me  with  a gaff  hook,  while  I carry  the  paddle  of
our  canoe ; a boy  bears  on  his  back  a hundred  toads  as  good  as  ever
hopped.  Our  line — oh,  I forgot  to  inform  you  that  we  had  set  it  last
night,  but  without  the  small  ones  you  now  see  on"  my  arm.  Fastening
one  end  to  yon  sycamore,  we  paddled  our  canoe,  with  the  rest  nicely
coiled  in  the  stern,  and  soon  reached  its  extremity,  when  I threw  over  the
side  the  heavy  stone  fastened  to  it  as  a sinker.  All  this  was  done  that  it
might  be  thoroughly  soaked,  and  without  kinks  or  snarls  in  the  morning.
Now,  you  observe,  we  launch  our  light  bark,  the  toads  in  the  basket  are
placed  next  to  my  feet  in  the  bow ; I have  the  small  lines  across  my  knees
all  ready  looped  at  the  end.  N at,  with  the  paddle,  and  assisted  by
the  current,  keeps  the  stern  of  our  boat  directly  down  stream  ; and  David
fixes,  by  the  skin  of  the  back  and  hind  parts,  the  living  bait  to  the  hook.
I hold  the  main  line  all  the  while,  and  now,  having  fixed  one  linelet  to  it,
over  goes  the  latter.  Can  you  see  the  poor  toad  kicking  and  flouncing
in  the  water.?  “ No” — well,  I do.  You  observe  at  length  that  all  the
lines,  one  after  another,  have  been  fixed,  baited,  and  dropped.  W e now
return  swiftly  to  the  shore.

“ What  a delightful  thing  is  fishing  !”  have  I more  than  once  heard
some  knowing  angler  exclaim,  who,  with  “ the  patience  of  Job,”  stands
or  slowly  moves  along  some  rivulet  twenty  feet  wide,  and  three  or
four  feet  deep,  with  a sham  fly  to  allure  a trout,  which,  when  at  length


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO.


125


caught,  weighs  half  a pound.  Reader,  I never  had  such  patience.  Al-
though I have  waited  ten  years,  and  yet  see  only  three-fourths  of  the
Birds  of  America  engraved,  although  some  of  the  drawings  of  that  work
were  patiently  made  so  long  ago  as  1805,  and  although  I have  to  wait
with  patience  two  years  more  before  I see  the  end  of  it,  I never  could  hold
a line  or  a rod  for  many  minutes,  unless  I had — not  a “ nibble,”  but  a
hearty  bite,  and  could  throw  the  fish  at  once  over  my  head  on  the
ground.  No,  no — If  I fish  for  trout,  I must  soon  give  up,  or  catch,  as
I have  done  in  Pennsylvania’s  Lehigh,  or  the  streams  of  Maine,  fifty  or
more  in  a couple  of  hours.  But  the  trot-line  is  in  the  river,  and  there
it  may  patiently  wait,  until  I visit  it  toward  night.  Now  I take  up  my
gun  and  note-book,  and,  accompanied  by  my  dog,  intend  to  ramble
through  the  woods  until  breakfast.  Who  knows  but  I may  shoot  a tur-
key or  a deer  It  is  barely  four  o’clock  ; and  see  what  delightful  morn-
ings we  have  at  this  season  in  Kentucky  !

Evening  has  returned.  The  heavens  have  already  opened  their
twinkling  eyes,  although  the  orb  of  day  has  yet  scarcely  withdrawn  it-
self from  our  view.  How  calm  is  the  air  ! The  nocturnal  insects  and
quadrupeds  are  abroad  ; the  bear  is  moving  through  the  dark  cane-
brake,  the  land  crows  are  flying  towards  their  roosts,  their  aquatic
brethren  towards  the  interior  of  the  forests,  the  squirrel  is  barking  his
adieu,  and  the  Barred  Owl  glides  silently  and  swiftly  from  his  retreat,  to
seize  upon  the  gay  and  noisy  animal.  The  boat  is  pushed  off  from  the
shore  ; the  main-line  is  in  my  hands  ; now  it  shakes  ; surely  some  fish
have  been  hooked.  Hand  over  hand  I proceed  to  the  first  hook.  No-
thing there  ! But  now  I feel  several  jerks  stronger  and  more  frequent
than  before.  Several  hooks  I pass;  but  see,  what  a fine  Cat-fish  is
twisting  round  and  round  the  little  line  to  which  he  is  fast ! Nat,
look  to  your  gaff — hook  him  close  to  the  ttiil.  Keep  it  up,  my  dear  fel-
low ! — there  now,  we  have  him.  More  are  on,  and  we  proceed.  When
we  have  reached  the  end  many  goodly  fishes  are  lying  in  the  bottom  of
our  skiff.  New  bait  has  been  put  on,  and,  as  we  return,  I congratulate  my-
self and  my  companions  on  the  success  of  our  efforts ; for  there  lies  fish
enough  for  ourselves  and  our  neighbours.

A trot-line  at  this  period  was  perfectly  safe  at  Henderson,  should  I
have  allowed  it  to  remain  for  weeks  at  a time.  The  navigation  was
mostly  performed  by  flat-bottomed  boats,  which  during  calm  nights  floated


126


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO.


in  the  middle  current  of  the  river,  so  that  the  people  on  board  could  not
observe  the  fish  that  had  been  hooked.  Not  a single  steamer  had  as  yet
ever  gone  down  the  Ohio  ; now  and  then,  it  is  true,  a barge  or  a keel-
boat  was  propelled  by  poles  and  oars ; but  the  nature  ot'  the  river  is  such
at  that  place,  that  these  boats  when  ascending  were  obliged  to  keep  near
the  Indiana  shore,  until  above  the  landing  of  the  village,  (below  which
I always  fixed  my  lines),  when  they  pulled  across  the  stream.

Several  species  or  varieties  of  Cat-fish  are  found  in  the  Ohio,  namely
the  Blue,  the  White,  and  the  Mud  Cats,  which  differ  considerably  in
their  form  and  colour,  as  well  as  in  their  habits.  The  Mud  Cat  is  the
best,  although  it  seldom  attains  so  great  a size  as  the  rest.  The  Blue
Cat  is  the  coarsest,  but  when  not  exceeding  from  four  to  six  pounds,  it
affords  tolerable  eating.  The  White  Cat  is  preferable  to  the  last,  but
not  so  common ; and  the  Yellow  Mud  Cat  is  the  best  and  rarest.  Of  the
blue  kind  some  have  been  caught  that  weighed  a hundred  pounds.  Such
fishes,  however,  are  looked  upon  as  monsters.

The  form  in  all  the  varieties  inclines  to  the  conical,  the  head  being
disproportionately  large,  while  the  body  tapers  away  to  the  root  of  the
tail.  The  eyes,  which  are  small,  are  placed  far  apart,  and  situated  as  it
were  on  the  top  of  the  forehead,  but  laterally.  Their  mouth  is  wide,  and
armed  with  numerous  small  and  very  sharp  teeth,  while  it  is  defended  by
single-sided  spines,  which,  when  the  fish  is  in  the  agonies  of  death,  stand
out  at  right  angles,  and  are  so  firmly  fixed  as  sometimes  to  break  before
you  can  loosen  them.  The  Cat-fish  has  also  feelers  of  proportionate
length,  apparently  intended  to  guide  its  motions  over  the  bottom,  whilst
its  eyes  are  watching  the  objects  passing  above.

Trot-lines  cannot  be  used  with  much  success  unless  during  the  mid-
dle stages  of  the  water.  When  very  low,  it  is  too  clear,  and  the  fish,  al-
though extremely  voracious,  will  rarely  risk  its  life  for  a toad.  When
the  waters  are  rising  rapidly,  your  trot-lines  are  likely  to  be  carried  away
by  one  of  the  numerous  trees  that  float  in  the  stream.  A “ happy  me-
dium” is  therefore  best.

When  the  waters  are  rising  fast  and  have  become  muddy,  a single
line  is  used  for  catching  Cat-fish.  It  is  fastened  to  the  elastic  branch  of
some  willow  several  feet  above  the  water,  and  must  be  twenty  or  thirty
feet  in  length.  The  entrails  of  a Wild  Turkey,  or  a piece  of  fresh  veni-
son, furnish  good  bait ; and  if,  when  you  visit  your  line  the  next  morning


FISHING  IN  THE  OHIO.


127


after  you  have  set  it,  the  water  has  not  risen  too  much,  the  swinging  of
the  willow  indicates  that  a fish  has  been  hooked,  and  you  have  only  to
haul  the  prize  ashore.

One  evening  I saw  that  the  river  was  rising  at  a great  rate,  although
it  was  still  within  its  banks.  I knew  that  the  White  Perch  were  running,
that  is,  ascending  the  river  from  the  sea,  and,  anxious  to  have  a tasting  of
that  fine  fish,  I baited  aline  with  a cray-fish,  and  fastened  it  to  the  bough
of  a tree.  Next  morning  as  I pulled  in  the  line,  it  felt  as  if  fast  at  the
bottom,  yet  on  drawing  it  slowly  I found  that  it  came.  Presently  I felt
a strong  pull,  the  line  slipped  through  my  fingers,  and  next  instant  a
large  Cat-fish  leaped  out  of  the  water.  I played  it  for  a while,  un-
til it  became  exhausted,  when  I drew  it  ashore.  It  had  swallowed  the
hook,  and  I cut  off  the  line  close  to  its  head.  Then  passing  a stick
through  one  of  the  gills,  I and  a servant  tugged  the  fish  home.  On
cutting  it  open,  we,  to  our  surprise,  found  in  its  stomach  a fine  White
Perch,  dead,  but  not  in  the  least  injured.  The  Perch  had  been  lightly
hooked,  and  the  Cat-fish,  after  swallowing  it,  had  been  hooked  in  the  sto-
mach, so  that,  although  the  instrument  was  small,  the  torture  caused  by  it
no  doubt  tended  to  disable  the  Cat-fish.  The  Perch  we  ate,  and  the  Cat,
which  was  fine,  we  divided  into  four  parts,  and  distributed  among  our
neighbours.  My  most  worthy  friend  and  relative,  Nicholas  Berthoud,
Esq.,  who  formerly  resided  at  Shippingport  in  Kentucky,  but  now  in
New  York,  a better  fisher  than  whom  I never  knew,  once  placed  a trot-
line in  “ the  basin'”  below  “ Tarascon’’s  Mills,'”  at  the  foot  of  the  Rapids
of  the  Ohio.  I cannot  recollect  the  bait  which  was  used  ; but  on  taking
up  the  line  we  obtained  a remarkably  fine  Cat-fish,  in  which  was  found
the  greater  part  of  a sucking  pig  !

I may  here  add,  that  I have  introduced  a figure  of  the  Cat-fish  in
Plate  XXXI.  of  my  first  volume  of  my  Illustrations,  in  which  I have
represented  the  White-headed  Eagle.


( )


THE  WOOD  IBIS

Tantalus  loculatob,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXVI.  Male.

This  very  remarkable  bird,  and  all  others  of  the  same  genus  that  are
known  to  occur  in  the  United  States,  are  constant  residents  in  some  part
of  our  Southern  Districts,  although  they  perform  short  migrations.  A
few  of  them  now  and  then  stray  as  far  as  the  Middle  States,  but  instances
of  this  are  rare ; and  I am  not  aware  that  any  have  been  seen  farther  to
the  eastward  than  the  southern  portions  of  Maryland,  excepting  a few
individuals  of  the  Glossy  and  the  White  Ibises,  which  have  been  procured
in  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  and  New  York.  The  Carolinas,  Georgia,
the  Floridas,  Alabama,  Lower  Louisiana,  including  Opellousas,  and  Mis-
sissippi, are  the  districts  to  which  they  resort  by  preference,  and  in
which  they  spend  the  whole  year.  With  the  exception  of  the  Glossy
Ibis,  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  a bird  of  the  Mexican  territories,  and
which  usually  appears  in  the  Union  singly  or  in  pairs,  they  all  live  social-
ly in  immense  flocks,  especially  during  the  breeding  season.  The  coun-
try which  they  inhabit  is  doubtless  the  best  suited  to  their  habits ; the
vast  and  numerous  swamps,  lagoons,  bayous,  and  submersed  savannahs
that  occur  in  the  lower  parts  of  our  Southern  States,  all  abounding  with
fishes  and  reptiles ; and  the  temperature  of  these  countries  being  conge-
nial to  their  constitutions.

In  treating  of  the  bird  now  under  your  notice,  Mr  Wili.iam  Bartram
says,  “ This  solitary  bird  does  not  associate  in  flocks,  but  is  generally  seen
alone.”  This  was  published  by  Wilson,  and  every  individual  who  has
since  written  on  the  subject,  has  copied  the  assertion  without  probably
having  any  other  reason  than  that  he  believed  the  authors  of  it  to  state  a
fact.  But  the  habits  of  this  species  are  entirely  at  variance  with  the  above
quotation,  to  which  I direct  your  attention  not  without  a feeling  of  pain,
being  assured  that  Mr  Bartram  could  have  made  such  a statement  only
because  he  had  few  opportunities  of  studying  the  bird  in  question  in  its
proper  haunts.

The  Wood  Ibis  is  rarely  met  with  single,  even  after  the  breeding  sea-
son, and  it  is  more  easy  for  a person  to  see  an  hundred  together  at  any


WOOD  IBIS.


129


period  of  the  year,  than  to  meet  with  one  by  itself.  Nay,  I have  seen
flocks  composed  of  several  thousands,  and  that  there  is  a natural  necessity
for  their  flocking  together  I shall  explain  to  you.  This  species  feeds  en-
tirely on  fish  and  aquatic  reptiles,  of  which  it  destroys  an  enormous  quan-
tity, in  fact  more  than  it  eats ; for  if  they  have  been  killing  fish  for  half
an  hour  and  have  gorged  themselves,  they  suffer  the  rest  to  lie  on  the
water  untouched,  when  it  becomes  food  for  alligators,  crows,  and  vultures,
whenever  these  animals  can  lay  hold  of  it.  To  procure  its  food,  the
Wood  Ibis  walks  through  shallow  muddy  lakes  or  bayous  in  numbers.
As  soon  as  they  have  discovered  a place  abounding  in  fish,  they  dance  as
it  were  all  through  it,  until  the  water  becomes  thick  with  the  mud  stirred
from  the  bottom  by  their  feet.  The  fishes,  on  rising  to  the  surface,  are
instantly  struck  by  the  beaks  of  the  Ibises,  which,  on  being  deprived  of
life,  they  turn  over  and  so  remain.  In  the  course  of  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,
hundreds  of  fishes,  frogs,  young  alligators,  and  water-snakes  cover  the
surface,  and  the  birds  greedily  swallow  them  until  they  are  completely
gorged,  after  which  they  walk  to  the  nearest  margins,  place  themselves  in
long  rows,  with  their  breasts  all  turned  towards  the  sun,  in  the  manner  of
Pelicans  and  Vultures,  and  thus  remain  for  an  hour  or  so.  When  diges-
tion is  partially  accomplished,  they  all  take  to  wing,  rise  in  spiral  circlings
to  an  immense  height,  and  sail  about  for  an  hour  or  more,  performing
the  most  beautiful  evolutions  that  can  well  be  conceived.  Their  long
necks  and  legs  are  stretched  out  to  their  full  extent,  the  pure  white  of
their  plumage  contrasts  beautifully  with  the  jetty  black  of  the  tips  of  their
wings.  Now  in  large  circles  they  seem  to  ascend  toward  the  upper  regions
of  the  atmosphere  ; now,  they  pitch  towards  the  earth  ; and  again,  gently
rising,  they  renew  their  gyrations.  Hunger  once  more  induces  them  to
go  in  search  of  food,  and,  with  extended  front,  the  band  sails  rapidly  to-
wards another  lake  or  bayou.

Mark  the  place,  reader,  and  follow  their  course  through  cane-brake,
cypress-swamp,  and  tangled  wood.  Seldom  do  they  return  to  the  same
feeding  place  on  the  same  day.  You  have  reached  the  spot,  and  are
standing  on  the  margin  of  a dark-watered  bayou,  the  sinuosities  of  which
lead  your  eye  into  a labyrinth  ending  in  complete  darkness.  The  tall
canes  bow  to  each  other  from  the  shores ; the  majestic  trees  above  them,
all  hung  with  funereal  lichen,  gently  wave  in  the  suffocating  atmosphere ;
the  bullfrog,  alarmed,  shrinks  back  into  the  water ; the  alligator  raises
his  head  above  its  surface,  probably  to  see  if  the  birds  have  arrived,  and

VOL.  III.


I


130


WOOD  IBIS.


the  wily  cougar  is  stealthily  advancing  toward  one  of  the  Ibises,  which  he
expects  to  carry  off  into  the  thicket.  Through  the  dim  light  your  eye
catches  a glimpse  of  the  white-plumaged  birds,  moving  rapidly  like  spec- ,
tres  to  and  fro.  The  loud  clacking  of  their  mandibles  apprises  you  of  the
havock  they  commit  among  the  terrified  inhabitants  of  the  waters,  while
the  knell-like  sounds  of  their  feet  come  with  a feeling  of  dread.  Move,
gently  or  not,  move  at  all,  and  you  infallibly  lose  your  opportunity  of
observing  the  actions  of  the  birds.  Some  old  male  has  long  marked  you  ;
whether  it  has  been  with  eye  or  with  ear,  no  matter.  The  first  stick
your  foot  cracks,  his  hoarse  voice  sounds  the  alarm.  Off  they  aU  go,
battering  down  the  bending  canes  with  their  powerful  pinions,  and  break-
ing the  smaller  twigs  of  the  trees,  as  they  force  a passage  for  themselves.

Talk  to  me  of  the  stupidity  of  birds,  of  the  dulness  of  the  Wood  Ibis !
say  it  is  fearless,  easily  approached,  and  easily  shot.  I listen,  but  it  is
merely  through  courtesy ; for  I have  so  repeatedly  watched  its  movements,
in  all  kinds  of  circumstances,  that  I am  quite  convinced  we  have  not  in
the  United  States  a more  shy,  wary,  and  vigilant  bird  than  the  Wood
Ibis.  In  the  course  of  two  years  spent,  I may  say,  among  them,  for  I
saw  some  whenever  I pleased  during  that  period,  I never  succeeded  in
surprising  one,  not  even  under  night,  when  they  were  roosting  on  trees  at
a height  of  nearly  a hundred  feet,  and  sometimes  rendered  farther  secure
by  being  over  extensive  swamps.

My  Journal  informs  me,  that,  one  autumn  while  residing  near  Bay-
ou Sara,  being  intent  on  procuring  eight  or  ten  of  these  birds,  to  skin
for  my  learned  and  kind  friend  the  Prince  of  Musignano,  I took  with  me
two  servants,  who  were  first-rate  woodsmen,  and  capital  hands  at  the  rifle,
and  that  notwithstanding  our  meeting  with  many  hundreds  of  Wood  Ibi-
ses, it  took  us  three  days  to  shoot  fifteen,  which  were  for  the  most  part
killed  on  wing  with  rifle-balls,  at  a distance  of  about  a hundred  yards.
On  that  occasion  we  discovered  that  a flock  roosted  regularly  over  a large
corn  field  covered  with  huge  girted  trees,  the  tops  of  which  were  almost
all  decayed.  We  stationed  ourselves  apart  in  the  field,  concealed  among
the  tall  ripened  corn,  and  in  silence  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  birds.
After  the  sun  had  disappeared,  the  broad  front  of  a great  flock  of  Ibises
was  observed  advancing  towards  us.  They  soon  alighted  in  great  num-
bers on  the  large  branches  of  the  dead  trees ; but  whenever  one  of  the
branches  gave  way  under  their  weight,  all  at  once  rose  in  the  air,  flew
about  several  times,  and  alighted  again.  One  of  my  companions,  having


WOOD  IBIS.


I3I


a good  opportunity,  fired,  and  brought  two  down  with  a single  bullet ;
but  here  the  sport  was  ended.  In  five  minutes  after,  not  an  Ibis  was
within  a mile  of  the  place,  nor  did  any  return  to  roost  there  for  more
than  a month.  When  on  the  margin  of  a lake,  or  even  in  the  centre  of
it — for  all  the  lakes  they  frequent  are  exceedingly  shallow — the  first
glimpse  they  have  of  a man  induces  them  to  exert  all  their  vigilance ;
and  should  he  after  this  advance  a few  steps,  the  birds  fly  off*.

The  name  of  “ Wood  Ibis”  given  to  this  bird,  is  not  more  applicable
to  it  than  to  any  other  species ; for  every  one  with  which  I am  acquainted
resorts  quite  as  much  to  the  woods  at  particular  periods.  All  our  species
may  be  found  on  wet  savannahs,  on  islands  surrounded  even  by  the  waters
of  the  sea,  the  Florida  Keys  for  example,  or  in  the  most  secluded  parts
of  the  darkest  woods,  provided  they  are  swampy,  or  are  furnished  with
ponds.  I have  found  the  Wood,  the  Red,  the  White,  the  Brown,  and
the  Glossy  Ibises,  around  ponds  in  the  centre  of  immense  forests ; and
in  such  places,  even  in  the  desolate  pine-barrens  of  the  Floridas ; some-
times several  hundred  miles  from  the  sea  coast,  on  the  Red  River,  in  the
State  of  Louisiana,  and  above  Natchez,  in  that  of  Mississippi,  as  well  as
within  a few  miles  of  the  ocean.  Yet,  beyond  certain  bmits,  I never  saw
one  of  these  birds.

One  of  the  most  curious  circumstances  connected  with  this  species  is,
that  although  the  birds  are,  when  feeding,  almost  constantly  within  the
reach  of  large  alligators,  of  which  they  devour  the  young,  these  reptiles
never  attack  them  ; whereas  if  a Duck  or  a Heron  comes  within  the  reach
of  their  tails,  it  is  immediately  killed  and  swallowed.  The  Wood  Ibis
will  wade  up  to  its  belly  in  the  water,  round  the  edges  of  “ alligators’
holes,”  without  ever  being  injured;  but  should  one  of  these  birds  be  shot,
an  alligator  immediately  makes  towards  it  and  pulls  it  under  water.  The
gar-fish  is  not  so  courteous,  but  gives  chase  to  the  Ibises  whenever  an  op-
portunity occurs.  The  Snapping  Turtle  is  also  a great  enemy  to  the
young  birds  of  this  species.

The  flight  of  the  Wood  Ibis  is  heavy  at  its  rising  from  the  ground.
Its  neck  at  that  moment  is  deeply  curved  downward,  its  wings  flap  hea-
vily but  with  great  power,  and  its  long  legs  are  not  stretched  out  behind
until  it  has  proceeded  many  yards.  But  as  soon  as  it  has  attained  a
height  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  it  ascends  with  great  celerity,  generally  in  a
spiral  direction,  in  silence  if  not  alarmed,  or,  if  frightened,  with  a rough
croaking  guttural  note.  When  fairly  on  wing,  they  proceed  in  a direct

I 2


132


WOOD  IBIS.


flight,  with  alternate  flappings  and  sailings  of  thirty  or  forty  yards,  the
sailings  more  prolonged  than  the  flappings.  They  alight  on  trees  with
more  ease  than  Herons  generally  do,  and  either  stand  erect  or  crouch  on
the  branches,  in  the  manner  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  the  Herons  seldom
using  the  latter  attitude.  When  they  are  at  rest,  they  place  their  bill
against  the  breast,  while  the  neck  shrinks  as  it  were  between  the  shoul-
ders. In  this  position  you  may  see  fifty  on  the  same  tree,  or  on  the
ground,  reposing  in  perfect  quiet  for  hours  at  a time,  although  some  in-
dividual of  the  party  will  be  constantly  on  the  look-out,  and  ready  to
sound  the  alarm.

In  the  spring  months,  when  these  birds  collect  in  large  flocks,  before
they  return  to  their  breeding  places,  I have  seen  thousands  together,  pass-
ing over  the  woods  in  a line  more  than  a mile  in  extent,  and  moving  with
surprising  speed  at  the  height  of  only  a few  yards  above  the  trees.  When
a breeding  place  has  once  been  chosen,  it  is  resorted  to  for  years  in  suc-
cession ; nor  is  it  easy  to  make  them  abandon  it  after  they  have  deposited
their  eggs,  although,  if  much  annoyed,  they  never  return  to  it  after  that
season.

Besides  the  great  quantity  of  fishes  that  these  Ibises  destroy,  they  also
devour  frogs,  young  alligators,  wood-rats,  young  rails  and  grakles,  fiddlers
and  other  crabs,  as  well  as  snakes  and  small  turtles.  They  never  eat  the
eggs  of  the  alligator,  as  has  been  alleged,  although  they  probably  would
do  so,  could  they  demolish  the  matted  nests  of  that  animal,  a task  beyond
the  power  of  any  bird  known  to  me.  I never  saw  one  eat  any  thing  which
either  it  or  some  of  its  fellows  had  not  killed.  Nor  will  it  eat  an  animal
that  has  been  dead  for  some  time,  even  although  it  may  have  been  killed
by  itself.  When  eating,  the  clacking  of  their  mandibles  may  be  heard  at
the  distance  of  several  hundred  yards.

When  wounded,  it  is  dangerous  to  approach  them,  for  they  bite  se-
verely. They  may  be  said  to  be  very  tenacious  of  life.  Although
usually  fat,  they  are  very  tough  and  oily,  and  therefore  are  not  fit  for
food.  The  Negroes,  however,  eat  them,  having,  previous  to  cooking  them,
torn  off  the  skin,  as  they  do  with  Pelicans  and  Cormorants.  My  own
attempts,  I may  add,  were  not  crowned  with  success.  Many  of  the  Ne-
groes of  Louisiana  destroy  these  birds  when  young,  for  the  sake  of  the
oil  which  their  flesh  contains,  and  which  they  use  in  greasing  machines.

The  French  Creoles  of  that  State  name  them  “ Grands  Flamans,”
while  the  Spaniards  of  East  Florida  know  them  by  the  name  of  “ Gan-


WOOD  IBIS.


133


nets.”  When  in  the  latter  country,  at  St  Augustine,  I was  induced  to
make  an  excursion,  to  visit  a large  pond  or  lake,  where  I was  assured
there  were  Gannets  in  abundance,  which  I might  shoot  off  the  trees,
provided  I was  careful  enough.  On  asking  the  appearance  of  the  Gannets,
I was  told  that  they  were  large  white  birds,  with  wings  black  at  the  end,
a long  neck,  and  a large  sharp  bill.  The  description  so  far  agreeing  with
that  of  the  Common  Gannet  or  Solan  Goose,  I proposed  no  questions  re-
specting the  legs  or  tail,  but  went  off.  Twenty-three  miles.  Reader,  I
trudged  through  the  woods,  and  at  last  came  in  view  of  the  pond  ; when,
lo ! its  borders  and  the  trees  around  it  were  covered  with  Wood  Ibises.
Now,  as  the  good  people  who  gave  the  information  spoke  according  to  their
knowledge,  and  agreeably  to  their  custom  of  calling  the  Ibises  Gannets,
had  I not  gone  to  the  pond,  I might  have  written  this  day  that  Gannets
are  found  in  the  interior  of  the  woods  in  the  Floridas,  that  they  alight  on
trees,  &c.  which,  if  once  published,  would  in  all  probability  have  gone
down  to  future  times  through  the  medium  of  compilers,  and  all  perhaps
without  acknowledgment.

The  Wood  Ibis  takes  four  years  in  attaining  full  maturity,  although
birds  of  the  second  year  are  now  and  then  found  breeding.  This  is  rare,
however,  for  the  young  birds  live  in  flocks  by  themselves,  until  they  have
attained  the  age  of  about  three  years.  They  are  at  first  of  a dingy  brown,
each  feather  edged  with  paler  ; the  head  is  covered  to  the  mandibles  with
short  downy  feathers,  which  gradually  fall  off’  as  the  bird  advances  in  age.
In  the  third  year,  the  head  is  quite  bare,  as  well  as  a portion  of  the  upper
part  of  the  neck.  In  the  fourth  year,  the  bird  is  as  you  see  it  in  the  plate.
The  male  is  much  larger  and  heavier  than  the  female,  but  there  is  no
difference  in  colour  between  the  sexes.


Tantalus  loculator,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  240 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii^
p.  702 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  310.

Wood  Ibis,  Tantalus  loculator,  Wits.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  viii.  p.  39.  pi.  68.
fig.  1.  Adult. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  82.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXVI.

Bill  long,  stout,  at  the  base  as  wide  as  the  face,  deeper  than  broad,
compressed,  tapering  towards  the  end,  which  is  curved.  Upper  man-
dible with  the  dorsal  line  straight  to  near  the  end,  then  considerably
curved,  the  ridge  rather  broad  and  flattened  at  the  base,  narrowed  at  the


134


WOOD  IBIS.


middle,  convex  towards  the  end,  the  sides  sloping  and  rather  flat  at  the
base,  towards  the  end  rounded,  the  edges  overlapping,  inflected,  sharp
but  strong,  the  tip  declinate,  narrow,  rounded,  with  a notch  on  either
side.  Nostrils  basal,  close  to  the  ridge,  direct,  pervious,  oblong  ; no  na-
sal groove.  Lower  mandible  curved  towards  the  end,  like  the  upper,  its
angle  rather  wide,  and  having  a bare  dilatable  membrane,  the  sides  ra-
ther flat  and  erect  at  the  base,  afterwards  narrowed  and  with  the  back
rounded,  the  edges  erect,  sharp,  with  a groove  externally  for  the  inser-
tion of  those  of  the  upper  mandible.

Head  of  ordinary  size,  short,  compressed.  Neck  long.  Body  rather
slender,  deeper  than  broad.  Wings  large.  Feet  very  long,  slender,  like
those  of  the  Herons.  Tibia  long,  slender,  bare  for  one-half  of  its  length ;
and  with  the  long,  compressed  tarsus,  covered  all  round  with  hexagonal
scales.  Toes  rather  long  and  slender,  the  first  smallest,  the  second  next
in  length,  the  third  longest,  the  fourth  intermediate  between  the  second  and
third,  all  covered  above  with  numerous  scutella,  laterally  with  angular
scales,  beneath  flattened  with  soft  margins,  the  anterior  connected  at  the
base  by  pretty  large  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  larger.  Claws  small,
rather  compressed,  rounded  above,  obtuse,  the  thin  edge  of  that  of  the
third  not  serrated.

The  head  all  round,  and  the  hind  neck  half  way  down,  destitute  of
feathers,  the  skin  wrinkled  and  covered  with  irregular  scurfy  scales.  Plu-
mage in  general  rather  loose,  more  so  on  the  neck.  Wings  long,  ample,
primaries  strong,  the  third  longest,  second  almost  as  long,  fourth  about
the  same  length  as  third,  first  considerably  shorter,  all  curved,  emargi-
nate,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  dusky  yellowish-brown,  the  edges  yellow.  Sides  of  the  head
dark  bluish-purple,  upper  part  of  the  head  horn-colour  or  dull  greyish-
yellow,  the  rest  of  the  bare  skin  of  the  same  tint,  many  of  the  scales  an-
teriorly blue.  Iris  deep  brown,  at  a distance  seeming  black.  Tibia  and
tarsus  indigo-blue.  Toes  above  black,  on  the  lateral  and  hind  toes,  how-
ever, many  of  the  scutella  bluish-grey ; the  webs  pale  yellowish  flesh-
colour  ; claws  black.

The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  pure  white  with  a tinge  of  yellow.
Alula,  primary  coverts,  primary  and  secondary  quills,  excepting  the  in-
ner, and  tail,  black,  with  green  and  purplish-blue  reflections,  according  to
the  light  in  which  they  are  viewed.

Length  to  end  of  tail  44^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  to  end  of  wings


WOOD  IBIS.


135


46^ ; wing  from  flexure  18  ; tail  6 ; extent  of  wings  62 ; bill  along  the
back  05,  along  the  edge  9,  its  greatest  depth  2^ ; bare  part  of  tibia  6 ;
tarsus  9 ; middle  toe  its  claw  f.  Weight  11 1 lb.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  Male,  differing  merely  in  be-
ing smaller.  Its  weight  is  9^  lb.

The  Young  are  dusky  grey  all  over,  the  quills  and  tail  brownish-
black.  The  head  all  covered  with  down,  excepting  just  at  the  base  of
the  bill.  After  the  first  moult,  the  bare  space  extends  over  the  head  and
cheeks ; the  downy  feathers  of  the  hind  head  and  neck  are  dusky  ; the
general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  white,  the  quills  and  tail  nearly  as  in
the  adult,  but  with  less  gloss.  A Male  of  this  description  shot  in  Ja-
nuary was  in  length  35  Inches,  its  bill  7 tarsus  7,  middle  toe  4,  its
claw  ^ ; its  weight  7|  lb.

When  the  Wood  Ibis  has  caught  a fish  too  large  to  be  easily  swallow-
ed, it  shakes  its  head  in  a violent  manner,  as  if  to  force  its  prey  down  or
drive  it  up  again.  In  the  latter  case,  it  carries  the  fish  to  the  shore,  and
breaks  it  into  pieces,  which  it  then  swallows.

This  species  has  the  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue  highly  developed,
especially  along  the  breast,  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  body,  although  not
by  any  means  so  much  so  as  in  the  Brown  Pelican.  I have  represented
a flock  of  these  birds  in  the  back  ground,  with  the  view  of  giving  you  an
idea  of  the  swamps  to  which  they  usually  resort.  They  are  on  the  edge
of  an  alligator’s  hole,  at  their  avocations.  The  trees,  clad  with  dangling
mosses,  afford  evidence  of  the  insalubrity  of  the  atmosphere.  You  see
the  alligators  with  their  heads  and  backs  above  water,  watching  the  mo-
tions of  the  birds.


( 136  )


LOUISIANA  HERON.

Ardea  Ludoviciana,  Wils.

PLATE  CCXVII.  Male.

Delicate  in  form,  beautiful  in  plumage,  and  graceful  in  its  move-
ments, I never  see  this  interesting  Heron,  without  calling  it  the  Lady  of
the  Waters.  Watch  its  motions,  as  it  leisurely  walks  over  the  pure  sand
beaches  of  the  coast  of  Florida,  arrayed  in  the  full  beauty  of  its  spring
plumage.  Its  pendent  crest  exhibits  its  glossy  tints,  its  ti'ain  falls  grace-
fully over  a well  defined  tail,  and  the  tempered  hues  of  its  back  and
wings  contrast  with  those  of  its  lower  parts.  Its  measured  steps  are  so
light  that  they  leave  no  impression  on  the  sand,  and  with  its  keen  eye
it  views  every  object  around  with  the  most  perfect  accuracy.  See,  it  has
spied  a small  fly  lurking  on  a blade  of  grass,  it  silently  runs  a few  steps,
and  with  the  sharp  point  of  its  bill  it  has  already  secured  the  prey.  The
minnow  just  escaped  from  the  pursuit  of  some  larger  fish  has  almost  rushed
upon  the  beach  for  safety  ; but  the  quick  eye  of  the  Heron  has  observed
its  motions,  and  in  an  instant  it  is  swallowed  alive.  Among  the  herbage
yet  dripping  with  dew  the  beautiful  bird  picks  its  steps.  Not  a snail  can
escape  its  keen  search,  and  as  it  moves  around  the  muddy  pool,  it  secures
each  water  lizard  that  occurs.  Now  the  sun’s  rays  have  dried  up  the
dews,  the  flowers  begin  to  droop,  the  woodland  choristers  have  ended  their
morning  concert,  and  like  them,  the  Heron,  fatigued  with  its  exertions,
seeks  a place  of  repose  under  the  boughs  of  the  nearest  bush,  where  it
may  in  safety  await  the  coolness  of  the  evening.  Then  for  a short  while
it  again  searches  for  food.  Little  difficulty  does  it  experience  in  this ;
and  at  length,  with  the  last  glimpse  of  day,  it  opens  its  wings,  and  flies
off  towards  its  well-known  roosting-place,  where  it  spends  the  night  con-
tented and  happy.

This  species,  which  is  a constant  resident  in  the  southern  parts  of  the
peninsula  of  the  Floridas,  seldom  rambles  far  from  its  haunts  during  the
winter  season,  being  rarely  seen  at  that  period  beyond  Savannah  in  Geor-
gia to  the  eastward.  To  the  west  it  extends  to  the  broad  sedgy  flats
bordering  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi,  along  the  whole  Gulf  of  Mexico,
and  perhaps  much  farther  south.  In  the  beginning  of  spring,  it  is


LOUISIANA  HERON.


137


found  abundantly  in  the  Carolinas,  and  sometimes  as  far  east  as  Mary-
land, or  up  the  Mississippi  as  high  as  Natchez.  You  never  find  it  far
inland  : perhaps  forty  miles  would  be  a considerable  distance  at  any  time
of  the  year.  It  is  at  all  seasons  a social  bird,  moving  about  in  company
with  the  Blue  Heron  or  the  White  Egret.  It  also  frequently  associates
with  the  larger  species,  and  breeds  in  the  same  places,  along  with  the
White  Heron,  the  Yellow-crowned  Heron,  and  the  Night  Heron ; but
more  generally  it  resorts  to  particular  spots  for  this  purpose,  keeping  by
itself,  and  assembling  in  great  numbers.  Those  which  visit  the  Carolinas,
or  the  country  of  the  Mississippi,  make  their  appearance  there  about  the
first  of  April,  or  when  the  Egrets  and  other  species  of  Heron  seek  the
same  parts,  returning  to  the  Floridas  or  farther  south  about  the  middle
of  September,  although  I have  known  some  to  remain  there  during  mild
winters.  When  this  is  the  case,  all  the  other  species  may  be  met  with  in
the  same  places,  as  the  Louisiana  Heron  is  the  most  delicate  in  constitu-
tion of  all.  Whilst  at  St  Augustine  in  Florida,  in  the  month  of  January,
I found  this  species  extremely  abundant  there  ; but  after  a hard  frost  of
a few  days,  they  all  disappeared,  leaving  the  other  Herons,  none  of  which
seemed  to  be  affected  by  the  cold,  and  returned  again  as  soon  as  the  Fah-
renheit thermometer  rose  to  80°.  There  they  were  in  full  livery  by  the
end  of  February,  and  near  Charleston  by  the  5th  of  April.

Although  timid,  they  are  less  shy  than  most  other  species,  and  more
easily  procured.  I have  frequently  seen  one  alight  at  the  distance  of  a
few  yards,  and  gaze  on  me  as  if  endeavouring  to  discover  my  intentions.
This  apparent  insensibility  to  danger  has  given  rise  to  the  appellation  of
Egrette  folle,  which  is  given  to  them  in  Lower  Louisiana.

The  flight  of  this  beautiful  Heron  is  light,  rather  irregular,  swifter  than
that  of  any  other  species,  and  capable  of  being  considerably  protracted.
They  usually  move  in  long  files,  rather  widely  separated,  and  in  an  undulat-
ing manner,  with  constant  flappings.  When  proceeding  towards  their
roosts,  or  when  on  their  migrations,  they  pass  as  high  over  the  country  as
other  species;  on  the  former  occasion,  they  pass  and  repass  over  the  same
tract,  thus  enabling  the  gunner  easily  to  shoot  them,  which  he  may  especial-
ly calculate  on  doing  at  the  approach  of  night,  when  they  are  gorged  with
food,  and  fly  lower  than  in  the  morning.  They  may,  however,  be  still
more  surely  obtained  on  their  arriving  at  their  roosting  place,  where  they
alight  at  once  among  the  lowest  branches.  On  being  shot  at,  they  sel-
dom fly  to  a great  distance,  and  their  attachment  to  a particular  place


Ids


LOUISIANA  HERON.


is  such  that  you  are  sure  to  find  them  there  during  the  whole  period  of
their  stay  in  the  country,  excepting  the  breeding  time.  At  the  cry  of  a
wounded  one,  they  assail  you  in  the  manner  of  some  Gulls  and  Terns,
and  may  be  shot  in  great  numbers  by  any  person  fond  of  such  sport.

On  the  29th  of  April,  while  wading  around  a beautiful  key  of  the
Floridas,  in  search  of  certain  crustaceous  animals  called  the  sea  Cray-fish,
my  party  and  I suddenly  came  upon  one  of  the  breeding  places  of  the
Louisiana  Heron.  The  southern  exposures  of  this  lovely  island  were
overgrown  with  low  trees  and  bushes  matted  together  by  thousands  of
smilaxes  and  other  creeping  plants,  supported  by  various  species  of  cac-
tus. Among  the  branches  some  hundred  pairs  of  these  lovely  birds  had
placed  their  nests,  which  were  so  low  and  so  close  to  each  other,  that
without  moving  a step  one  could  put  his  hand  into  several.  The  birds
thus  taken  by  surprise  rose  affrighted  into  the  air,  bitterly  complaining
of  being  disturbed  in  their  secluded  retreat.  The  nests  were  formed  of
small  dried  sticks  crossing  each  other  in  various  ways.  They  were  flat,
had  little  lining,  and  each  contained  three  eggs,  all  the  birds  being  then
incubating.  Observing  that  many  eggs  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Crows
and  Buzzards,  as  the  shells  were  scattered  on  the  ground,  I concluded
that  many  of  the  Herons  had  laid  more  than  once,  to  make  up  their  full
complement  of  eggs ; for  my  opinion  is,  that  all  our  species,  excepting
the  Green  Heron,  never  lay  more  nor  less  than  three,  unless  an  accident
should  happen.  The  eggs  of  the  Louisiana  Heron  measure  one  inch
and  six  and  a half  twelfths  in  length,  an  inch  and  a quarter  in  breadth  ;
they  are  nearly  elliptical,  of  a beautiful  pale  blue  colour  inclining  to  green,
smooth,  and  with  a very  thin  shell.  The  period  of  incubation  is  twenty-
one  days.  Like  all  other  species  of  the  genus,  this  raises  only  one  brood
in  the  season.  The  little  island  of  which  I have  spoken  lies  exposed  to
the  sea,  and  has  an  extent  of  only  a few  acres.  The  trees  or  bushes  with
which  it  was  covered  seemed  to  have  been  stunted  by  the  effect  produced
by  their  having  been  for  years  the  receptacles  of  the  Herons’  nests.

On  the  19th  May,  in  the  same  year,  I found  another  breeding  place
of  this  species  not  far  from  Key  West.  The  young  birds,  which  stood
on  all  the  branches  of  the  trees  and  bushes  on  the  southern  side  of  the
place,  were  about  the  size  of  our  Little  Partridge.  Their  notes,  by  which
we  had  been  attracted  to  the  spot,  were  extremely  plaintive,  and  resembled
the  syllables  wlee,  zviee,  wiee.  When  we  went  up  to  them,  the  old  birds
all  flew  to  another  key,  as  if  intent  on  drawing  us  there  ^ but  in  vain,  for


LOUISIANA  HERON.


139


we  took  with  us  a good  number  of  their  young.  It  was  surprising  to  see
the  little  fellows  moving  about  among  the  branches,  clinging  to  them  in
all  sorts  of  curious  positions,  and  persevering  in  forcing  their  way  toward
the  water,  when  over  which  they  at  once  dropped,  and  swam  off  from  us
with  great  vigour  and  speed.  When  seized  with  the  hand,  they  defended
themselves  to  the  utmost.  At  this  early  period,  they  plainly  shewed  the
sprouting  feathers  of  the  crest.  Many  Crow  Blackbirds  had  nests  on  the
same  mangroves,  and  a Fish-Hawk  also  had  formed  its  nest  there  at  a
height  of  not  more  than  five  feet  from  the  water.  On  the  24th  of  May,
these  Herons  were  fully  fledged,  and  able  to  fly  to  a short  distance.  In
this  state  we,  with  some  difficulty,  procured  one  alive.  Its  legs  and  feet
were  green,  the  bill  black,  but  its  eyes,  like  those  of  an  adult  bird,  were
of  a beautiful  red  hue.  Many  were  caught  afterwards  and  taken  as  pas-
sengers on  board  the  Marion.  They  fed  on  any  garbage  thrown  to  them
by  the  sailors ; but  whenever  another  species  came  near  them,  they  leaped
towards  its  bill,  caught  hold  of  it  as  if  it  had  been  a fish,  and  hung  to  it
until  shaken  off  by  their  stronger  associates.  On  several  occasions,  how-
ever, the  Ardea  occidentalis  shook  them  off*  violently,  and  after  beating
them  on  the  deck,  swallowed  them  before  they  could  be  rescued !

The  place  farthest  up  on  the  Mississippi  where  I have  found  this  spe-
cies breeding  was  on  Buffalo  Creek,  about  forty  miles  below  Natchez,
and  ten  miles  in  a direct  line  from  the  great  river.  To  the  eastward  I
have  found  them,  breeding  in  company  with  the  Green  Heron  and  the
Night  Heron,  within  a few  miles  of  Charleston.

During  summer  and  autumn,  after  the  old  birds  have  left  their  young,
both  are  frequently  seen  in  the  rice-fields,  feeding  along  the  ditches  by
which  the  water  is  led  to  those  places.  At  this  season  they  are  uncom-
monly gentle  and  easily  approached.

The  Louisiana  Heron  acquires  the  full  beauty  of  its  plumage  the
second  year  after  its  birth,  although  it  continues  for  some  time  to  increase
in  size.  The  train  and  crest  lengthen  for  several  years  until  they  become
as  represented  in  the  plate.  To  procure  specimens  in  such  complete
plumage,  however,  requires  some  care,  for  this  state  does  not  last  many
days  after  pairing  has  taken  place,  and  by  the  time  the  young  are  hatch-
ed much  of  this  fine  plumage  has  dropped.  When  autumn  has  come,
only  a few  of  the  long  barbs  remain,  and  in  winter  no  appearance  of  them
can  be  seen.

The  flesh  of  the  young  birds  affords  tolerable  eating.  The  food  of


140


LOUISIANA  HERON.


this  species  consists  of  small  fry,  water  insects,  worms,  slugs,  and  snails,
as  well  as  leeches,  tadpoles,  and  aquatic  lizards.


Louisiana  Heron,  Ardea  ludoviciana,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  13.  pi.  64.
fig.  1.  adult Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  51.

Ardea  ludoviciana,  Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  305.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXVII.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering  to  a
point,  the  mandibles  nearly  equal.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line
nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  slightly  convex  at  the  base,  narrow-
ed towards  the  end,  a groove  from  the  base  to  two-thirds  of  the  length,
beneath  which  the  sides  are  convex,  the  edges  thin  and  sharp,  with  a
notch  on  each  side  close  to  the  sharp  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,  longitu-
dinal, with  a membrane  above  and  behind.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  extremely  narrow  and  elongated,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  it  ascend-
ing and  almost  straight,  the  edges  sharp  and  slightly  inflected,  the  tip
acuminate.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  very  long  and  slender.
Body  slender  and  compressed  ; wings  rather  large.  Feet  very  long ;
tibia  elongated,  its  lower  half  bare,  very  slender,  covered  all  round  with
angular  scales,  of  which  the  posterior  are  scutelliform ; tarsus  elongated,
slender,  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous  scutella,  laterally
and  behind  with  angular  scales.  Toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slen-
der, scutellate  above,  reticidarly  granulate  beneath  ; third  toe  much  lon-
ger than  second,  which  is  very  little  longer  than  fourth,  the  hind  toe
much  shorter  but  strong ; claws  of  moderate  size,  rather  strong,  arched,
compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  the  hind  toe  much  larger,  the  edge  of
that  of  the  third  regularly  pectinated.

Space  between  the  bill  and  eye,  and  around  the  latter,  bare,  as  is  the
lower  half  of  the  tibia.  Plumage  soft,  generally  loose.  Feathers  of  the
upper  and  hind  part  of  the  head  elongated,  tapering,  decurved,  about  six
of  them  larger  and  much  longer  ; of  the  sides,  and  especially  of  the  lower
part  of  the  neck,  also  much  elongated  and  narrow.  The  feathers  of  the
fore  part  of  the  back  long  and  narrow-pointed,  those  behind  extremely
elongated,  with  long  loose  threadlike  barbs ; the  rest  of  the  back  with
short  soft  feathers.  Wing  of  moderate  length ; primaries  tapering  but
rounded,  the  third  longest,  second  very  little  shorter,  first  and  fourth


LOUISIANA  HERON.


141


about  equal ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded,  some  of  the  inner  as  long
as  the  longest  primaries,  when  the  wing  is  closed.  Tail  very  short,  small,
slightly  rounded,  of  twelve  rather  weak  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black  on  the  greater  part  of  the  upper  mandible,  and
on  the  sides  of  the  lower  mandible  towards  the  point ; the  rest  yellow,  as
is  the  bare  space  before  and  around  the  eye.  Iris  bright  red.  Feet  light
yellowish-green,  the  anterior  scutella  dusky,  as  are  the  claws.  The  gene-
ral colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  purplish-blue ; the  elongated  fea-
thers of  the  head  and  hind  neck  above  of  a fine  reddish-purple,  as  are
those  of  the  lower  part  of  the  neck ; the  six  longest  feathers  of  the  liead
white.  The  long  loose  feathers  of  the  back  dull  purplish-yellow,  paler
towards  their  extremities.  Throat  white,  its  lower  part  chestnut ; a line
of  white  all  the  way  down  the  fore  part  of  the  neck  ; the  longer  feathers
of  the  fore  part  of  the  breast  dusky  blue  on  their  inner  webs.  The
breast,  abdomen,  tibiae,  and  under  wing-coverts,  white ; the  lower  tail-
coverts  tipped  with  blue.

Length  to  end  of  the  tail  27  inches,  to  end  of  wings  28,  to  end  of
claws  34^ ; extent  of  wings  37  ; loose  feathers  from  4 to  5 inches  beyond
the  tail ; wing  from  flexure  10| ; tail  3^ ; bill  along  the  back  4,  along
the  edges  5 ; bare  part  of  tibia  2^  ; tarsus  4|,  middle  toe  2^,  its  claws
Weight  1 lb.

The  Adult  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male.

The  Young,  when  newly  hatched,  are  covered  above  with  pale  purplish-
grey  down,  which  is  of  greater  length  on  the  head,  as  in  other  species.

The  young  fully  fledged  have  the  neck  and  fore  part  of  the  back
light  brownish-red,  the  throat  and  lower  parts  white,  as  is  the  hind  part
of  the  back  ; the  quills,  larger  wing-coverts  and  tail,  light  purplish-blue.
The  feathers  of  the  head,  neck  and  back  are  not  yet  elongated.  The  bill
nearly  as  in  the  adult,  but  the  legs  deep  greenish-olive.

After  the  first  moult,  the  feathers  of  the  head,  neck  and  back,  are  a
little  elongated,  and  begin  to  be  tinged  with  the  colours  which  they  have
when  the  bird  is  full  grown.  The  red  of  the  neck  is  changed  for  tints  of
blue  and  purple,  as  is  that  of  the  back,  although  remnants  of  it  are  still
seen.  The  fore  part  of  the  neck  is  white,  mixed  with  brownish-red  ; the
legs  lighter.


( 142  )


THE  FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.

Uria  Troile,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  bird  is  seldom  found  farther  south  than  the  entrance  of  the  Bay
of  New  York,  where,  however,  it  appears  only  during  severe  winters,
for  being  one  of  the  most  hardy  inhabitants  of  the  northern  regions,
its  constitution  is  such  as  to  enable  it  to  bear  without  injury  the  rigours
of  their  wintry  climates.  About  the  bays  near  Boston  the  Guillemots
are  seen  every  year  in  greater  or  less  numbers,  and  from  thence  to  the
eastward  they  become  gradually  more  abundant.  A very  old  gunner  whom
I employed  while  at  Boston,  during  the  winter  of  1832-3,  assured  me,
that  when  he  was  a young  man,  this  species  bred  on  many  of  the  rocky
islands  about  the  mouth  of  the  bay  there ; but  that  for  about  twenty
years  back  none  remained  after  the  first  days  of  April,  when  they  depart-
ed for  the  north  in  company  with  the  Thick-biUed  G uillemot,  the  Com-
mon Auk,  the  Puffin,  and  the  Eider  and  King  Ducks,  all  of  which  visit
these  bays  in  hard  weather.  In  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  the  Foolish  Guille-
mot is  very  numerous,  and  is  known  by  the  name  of  Murre,  which  it  re-
tains among  all  the  eggers  and  fishermen  of  Newfoundland  and  Labrador,
where  it  breeds  in  myriads.  To  those  countries,  then,  I must  lead  you,
good  Reader,  as  there  we  can  with  ease  study  the  habits  of  these  birds.

Stay  on  the  deck  of  the  Ripley  by  my  side  this  clear  and  cold  morn-
ing. See  how  swiftly  scuds  our  gallant  bark,  as  she  cuts  her  way  through
the  foaming  billows,  now  inclining  to  the  right  and  again  to  the  left.  Far
in  the  east,  dark  banks  of  low  clouds  indicate  foul  weather  to  the  wary
mariner,  who  watches  the  approach  of  a northern  storm  with  anxiety.
Suddenly  the  wind  changes  ; but  for  this  he  has  prepared  ; the  topsails
are  snugged  to  their  yards,  and  the  rest  are  securely  reefed.  A thick  fog
obscures  all  around  us.  The  waters  suddenly  checksd  in  their  former
course,  furiously  war  against  those  which  now  strike  them  in  front.  The
uproar  increases,  the  bark  is  tossed  on  every  side  ; now  a sweeping  wave
rushes  against  the  bows,  the  vessel  quivers,  while  down  along  her  deck
violently  pour  the  waters,  rolling  from  side  to  side,  seeking  for  a place


FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.


143


by  which  they  may  escape.  At  this  moment  all  about  you  are  in  dismay
save  the  Guillemots.  The  sea  is  covered  with  these  intrepid  navigators
of  the  deep.  Over  each  tumultuous  billow  they  swim  unconcerned  on
the  very  spray  at  the  bow  of  the  vessel,  and  plunging  as  if  with  pleasure,
up  they  come  next  moment  at  the  rudder.  Others  fly  around  in  large
circles,  while  thousands  contend  with  the  breeze,  moving  directly  against
it  in  long  lines,  towards  regions  unknown  to  all,  save  themselves  and  some
other  species  of  sea  birds.

The  Guillemots  pair  daring  their  migrations  ;-r-many  of  them  at  least
do  so.  While  on  my  way  toward  Labrador,  they  were  constantly  within
sight,  gambolling  over  the  surface  of  the  water,  the  males  courting  the
females,  and  the  latter  receiving  the  caresses  of  their  mates.  These  would
at  times  rise  erect  in  the  sea,  swell  their  throats,  and  emit  a hoarse  puffing
guttural  note,  to  which  the  females  at  once  responded,  with  numerous
noddings  to  their  beaux.  Then  the  pair  w'ould  rise,  take  a round  in  the
air,  re-alight,  and  seal  the  conjugal  compact ; after  which  they  flew'  or
swam  together  for  the  season,  and  so  closely,  that  among  multitudes  on
the  wing  or  on  the  waves,  one  might  easily  distinguish  a mated  pair.

Not  far  from  Great  Macatina  Harbour  lie  the  Murre  Rocks,  con-
sisting of  several  low  islands,  destitute  of  vegetation,  and  not  rising  high
from  the  waters.  There  thousands  of  Guillemots  annually  assemble  in
the  beginning  of  May,  to  deposit  each  its  single  egg,  and  raise  its  young.
As  you  approach  these  islands,  the  air  becomes  darkened  with  the  multi-
tudes of  birds  that  fly  about ; every  square  foot  of  the  ground  seems  to
be  occupied  by  a Guillemot  planted  erect  as  it  were  on  the  granite  rock,
but  carefully  warming  its  cherished  egg.  All  look  toward  the  south,  and
if  you  are  fronting  them,  the  snowy  white  of  their  bodies  produces  a very
remarkable  effect,  for  the  birds  at  some  distance  look  as  if  they  were
destitute  of  head,  so  much  does  that  part  assimilate  with  the  dark  hue
of  the  rocks  on  which  they  stand.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you  approach
them  in  the  rear,  the  isle  appears  as  if  covered  with  a black  pall.

Now  land,  and  witness  the  consternation  of  the  settlers  ! Each  af-
frighted leaves  its  egg,  hastily  runs  a few  steps,  and  launches  into  the
air  in  silence.  Thrice  around  you  they  rapidly  pass,  to  discover  the  ob-
ject of  your  unwelcome  visit.  If  you  begin  to  gather  their  eggs,  or,
still  worse,  to  break  them,  in  order  that  they  may  lay  others  which  you
can  pick  up  fresh,  the  Guillemots  all  alight  at  some  distance,  on  the  bo-
som of  the  deep,  and  anxiously  await  your  departure.  Eggs,  green  and


144


FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.


white,  and  almost  of  every  colour,  are  lying  thick  over  the  whole  rock  ;
the  ordure  of  the  birds  mingled  with  feathers,  with  the  refuse  of  half-
hatched  eggs  partially  sucked  by  rapacious  Gulls,  and  with  putrid  or
dried  carcasses  of  Guillemots,  produces  an  intolerable  stench ; and  no
sooner  are  all  your  baskets  filled  with  eggs,  than  you  are  glad  to  abandon
the  isle  to  its  proper  owners.

On  one  occasion,  whilst  at  anchor  at  Great  Macatina,  one  of  our  boats
was  sent  for  eggs.  The  sailors  had  eight  miles  to  pull  before  reaching
the  Murre  Islands,  apd  yet  ere  many  hours  had  elapsed,  the  boat  was
again  alongside,  loaded  to  a few  inches  of  the  gunwale,  with  2500  eggs !
Many  of  them,  however,  being  addle,  were  thrown  overboard.  The  order
given  to  the  tars  had  been  to  bring  only  a few  dozens ; but,  as  they  said,
they  had  forgotten !

The  eggs  are  unaccountably  large  for  the  size  of  the  bird,  their  ave-
rage length  being  three  inches  and  three-eighths,  and  their  greatest
breadth  two  inches.  They  are  pyriform  or  elongated,  with  a slight  com-
pression towards  the  smaller  end,  which  again  rather  swells  and  is  rounded
at  the  extremity.  They  afford  excellent  food,  being  highly  nutritive  and
palatable,  whether  boiled,  roasted,  poached,  or  in  omelets.  The  shell  is
rough  to  the  touch,  although  not  granulated.  Some  are  of  a lively  ver-
digris colour,  others  of  different  tints,  but  all  curiously  splashed,  as  it  were,
with  streaks  or  blotches  of  dark  umber  and  brown.  My  opinion,  how-
ever, is,  that,  when  first  dropped,  they  are  always  pure  white,  for  on  open-
ing a good  number  of  these  birds,  I found  several  containing  an  egg  ready
for  being  laid,  and  of  a pure  white  colour.  The  shell  is  so  firm  that  it
does  not  easily  break,  and  I have  seen  a quantity  of  these  eggs  very  care-
lessly removed  from  a basket  into  a boat  without  being  damaged.  They
are  collected  in  astonishing  quantities  by  “ the  eggers,”  to  whom  I have
already  given  a character,  and  sent  to  distant  markets,  where  they  are
sold  at  from  one  to  three  cents  each.

Although  the  Guillemots  are  continually  harassed,  their  eggs  being
carried  off  as  soon  as  they  are  deposited,  and  as  long  as  the  birds  can
produce  them,  yet  they  return  to  the  same  islands  year  after  year,  and,
notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  of  their  enemies,  multiply  their  numbers.

The  Foolish  Guillemot,  as  I have  said,  lays  only  a single  egg,  which
is  the  case  with  the  Thick-billed  Guillemot  also.  The  Razor-billed  Auk
lays  two,  and  the  Black  Guillemot  usually  three.  I have  assured  myself
of  these  facts,  not  merely  by  observing  the  birds  sitting  on  their  eggs,


FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.


145


but  also  by  noticing  the  following  circumstances.  The  Foolish  Guille-
mot, which  lays  only  one,  plucks  the  feathers  from  its  abdomen,  which
is  thus  left  quite  bare  over  a roundish  space  just  large  enough  to  cover
its  single  egg.  The  Thick-billed  Guillemot  does  the  same.  The  Auk,
on  the  contrary,  forms  two  bare  spots,  separated  by  a ridge  of  feathers.
The  Black  Guillemot,  to  cover  her  three  eggs,  and  to  warm  them  all  at
once,  plucks  a space  bare  quite  across  her  belly.  These  observations
were  made  on  numerous  birds  of  all  the  species  mentioned.  In  all  of
them,  the  males  incubate  as  well  as  the  females,  although  the  latter  are
more  assiduous.  When  the  Guillemots  are  disturbed,  they  fly  off  in
silence.  The  Auks,  on  the  contrary,  emit  a hoarse  croaking  note,  which
they  repeat  several  times,  as  they  fly  away  from  danger.  The  Foolish
Guillemot  seldom  if  ever  attempts  to  bite,  whereas  the  Razor-billed  Auk
bites  most  severely,  and  clings  to  a person’s  hand  until  choked.  The  plu-
mage of  all  the  birds  of  this  family  is  extremely  compact,  closely  downed
at  the  root,  and  difficult  to  be  plucked.  The  fishermen  and  eggers  often
use  their  skins  with  the  feathers  on  as  “ comforters”  round  their  wrists.
The  flesh  is  dark,  tough,  and  not  very  palatable  ; yet  many  of  these  birds
are  eaten  by  the  fishermen  and  sailors.

The  young,  which  burst  the  egg  about  the  beginning  of  July,  are
covered  with  down  of  a brownish-black  colour.  When  eight  or  ten  days
old  they  are  still  downy,  but  have  acquired  considerable  activity.  As
they  grow  up,  they  become  excessively  fat,  and  seem  to  be  more  at  ease
on  the  water  than  on  the  land.  About  the  middle  of  August  they  follow
their  parents  to  the  open  sea,  the  latter  being  then  seldom  able  to  fly,
having  dropped  their  quills ; and  by  the  middle  of  September  scarcely
any  of  these  birds  are  to  be  found  on  or  near  the  islands  on  which  they
breed,  although  great  numbers  spend  the  winter  in  those  latitudes.

Thei-e  is  no  perceptible  difference  between  the  sexes  as  to  colour,  but
the  males  are  larger  than  the  females.  The  white  line  that  encircles  the
eye  and  extends  toward  the  hind  head  is  common  to  both  sexes,  but  oc-
curs only  in  old  birds.  Thousands  of  these  Guillemots  however  breed,
without  having  yet  acquired  it,  there  merely  being  indications  of  it  to
be  seen  on  parting  the  feathers  on  the  place,  where  there  is  a natural  di-
vision.

The  flight  of  the  Foolish  Guillemot  is  rapid  and  greatly  protracted,
being  performed  by  quick  and  unintermitted  beatings.  They  move
through  the  air  either  singly  or  in  bands,  in  the  latter  case  seldom  keep-


voL.  m:.


K


146


FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.


ing  any  very  i-egular  order.  Sometimes  they  seem  to  skim  along  the  sur-
face for  miles,  while  at  other  times  they  fly  at  the  height  of  thirty  or  forty
yards.  They  are  expert  divers,  using  their  wings  like  fins,  and  under
water  looking  like  winged  fishes.  They  frequently  plunge  at  the  flash  of
the  gun,  and  disappear  for  a considerable  time.  Before  rising,  they  are
obliged  to  run  as  it  were  on  the  water,  fluttering  for  many  yards  before
they  get  fairly  on  wing.

Those  which  I kept  alive  for  weeks  on  board  the  Ripley,  walked
about  and  ran  with  ease,  with  the  whole  length  of  their  tarsus  touching
the  deck.  They  took  leaps  on  chests  and  other  objects  to  raise  them-
selves, but  could  not  fly  without  being  elevated  two  or  three  feet,  although
when  they  are  on  the  rocks,  and  can  take  a run  of  eight  or  ten  yards,
they  easily  rise  on  wing.

The  islands  on  which  the  Guillemots  breed  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,
are  flattish  at  top,  and  it  is  there,  on  the  bare  rock,  that  they  deposit
their  eggs.  I saw  none  standing  on  the  shelvings  of  high  rocks,  although
many  breed  in  such  places  in  some  parts  of  Europe.  Their  food  consists
of  small  fish,  shrimps,  and  other  marine  animals  ; and  they  swallow  some
gravel  also.


Ubia  Troile,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  796 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds

of  the  United  States,  p.  424. — Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  477-

Foolish  Guillemot,  or  Murre,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  526.

Adult  Male,  in  summer.  Plate  CCXVIII.

Bill  of  moderate  length,  rather  stout,  tapering,  compressed,  acute.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  curved,  the  ridge  narrow,
broader  at  the  base,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  short  and  inflected,  the
tip  a little  decurved  with  a slight  notch.  Nasal  groove  broad,  feathered ;
nostrils  at  its  lower  edge,  sub-basal,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,  pervious.
Lower  mandible,  with  the  angle  medial,  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  sloping
upwards,  and  straight,  the  back  very  narrow,  the  sides  nearly  flat,  the
edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  oblong,  depressed,  narrowed  before.  Eyes  rather  small.  Neck
short  and  thick.  Body  stout,  rather  depressed.  Wings  rather  small.
Feet  short,  placed  far  behind  ; the  greater  part  of  the  tibia  concealed,  its
lower  portion  bare ; tarsus  short,  stout,  compressed,  anteriorly  sharp,  and


FOOLISH  GUILLEMOT.


147


covered  with  a double  row  of  scutella,  the  sides  with  angular  scales  ; toes
of  moderate  length,  the  first  wanting,  the  third  nearly  longest,  the  fourth
longer  than  the  second ; all  covered  above  with  numerous  scutella,  webbed,
the  lateral  ones  with  small  margins ; claws  small,  slightly  arched,  com-
pressed, rather  acute,  the  middle  one  larger,  with  a dilated  inner  edge.

Plumage  dense,  very  soft,  blended  ; on  the  head  very  short.  Wings
rather  short,  narrow,  acute ; primary  quills  curved,  tapering,  the  first
longest,  the  second  little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries
short,  incurved,  broad,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  rounded,  of  twelve
narrow  feathers.

Pill  black  ; inside  of  moutb  gamboge-yellow.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet
black.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  greyish-black  on  the  upper
parts ; the  sides  of  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the  neck  black,  tinged
with  brown.  A white  bar  across  the  wing,  formed  by  the  tips  of  the  se-
condary quills,  and  a line  of  the  same  encircling  the  eye,  and  extending
behind  it.  The  lower  parts  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  17  J inches,  to  end  of  claws  19|^,  to  end  of  wings
174;  extent  of  wings  30  inches;  wing  from  flexure  7|;  tail  2;  tarsus

; middle  toe  1 its  claw  Weight  2 lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  male,  and,  when  mature,  has  the  white
line  round  and  behind  the  eye.


K


O


( 148  }


THE  BLACK  GUILLEMOT.

Uria  Grylle,  Lath.

Plate  CCXIX.  adult  in  Summer,  Adult  in  Winter,  and  Young.

It  was  a frightful  thing  to  see  my  good  Captain,  Hexry  Emery,
swinging  on  a long  rope  upon  the  face  of  a rocky  and  crumbling  emi-
nence, at  a height  of  several  hundred  feet  from  the  water,  in  search  of
the  eggs  of  the  Black  Guillemot,  with  four  or  five  sailors  holding  the
rope  above,  and  walking  along  the  edge  of  the  precipice.  I stood  watch-
ing the  motions  of  the  adventurous  sailor.  When  the  friction  of  the  rope
by  which  he  was  suspended  loosened  a block,  which  with  awful  crash  came
tumbling  down  from  above  him,  he,  with  a promptness  and  dexterity  that
appeared  to  me  quite  marvellous,  would,  by  a sudden  jerk,  throw  himself
aside  to  the  right  or  left,  and  escape  the  danger.  Now  he  would  run
his  arm  into  a fissure,  which,  if  he  found  it  too  deep,  he  would  probe
with  a boat-hook.  Whenever  he  chanced  to  touch  a bird,  it  would  come
out  whirring  like  a shot  in  his  face  ; while  others  came  flying  from  afar
toward  their  beloved  retreats  with  so  much  impetuosity  as  almost  to  alarm
the  bold  rocksman.  After  much  toil  and  trouble  he  procured  only  a few
eggs,  it  not  being  then  the  height  of  the  breeding  season.  You  may  ima-
gine, good  Reader,  how  relieved  I felt  when  I saw  Mr  Emery  drawn  up,
and  once  more  standing  on  the  bold  eminence  waving  his  hat  as  a signal
of  success.  This  happened  in  one  of  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  in  the  Gulf
of  St  Lawrence.

During  severe  winters,  I have  seen  the  Black  Guillemot  playing  over
the  waters  as  far  south  as  the  shores  of  Maryland.  Such  excursions,
however,  are  of  rare  occurrence,  and  it  is  seldom  that  any  of  these  birds
are  to  be  seen  until  you  reach  the  Bay  of  Boston.  About  the  different
entrances  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  this  species  is  a constant  resident,  and
many  individuals  breed  in  fissures,  at  a moderate  height  above  the  water,
on  the  rocky  shores  of  the  Island  of  Grand  Manan,  and  others  in  the
same  latitude.  Proceeding  farther  toward  the  north-east,  we  found  them
on  Jesticoe  Island,  and  wherever  else  we  happened  to  touch  on  our  way
to  Labrador,  in  which  country  there  is  a regular  nursery  of  these  birds.

Unlike  the  Foolish  and  Thick-billed  Guillemots,  or  the  Razor -billed


BLACK  GUILLEMOT.


I4y

Auk,  they  do  not  confine  themselves  to  any  particular  spot,  but  take  up
their  abode  for  the  season  in  any  place  that  presents  suitable  conve-
niences. Wherever  there  are  fissures  in  the  rocks,  or  great  piles  of  blocks
with  holes  in  their  interstices,  there  you  may  expect  to  find  the  Black
Guillemot.

Whether  European  writers  have  spoken  of  this  species  at  random,  or
after  due  observation,  I cannot  say.  All  I know  is,  that  every  one  of  them
whose  writings  I have  consulted,  says  that  the  Black  Guillemot  lays  on-
ly one  egg.  As  1 have  no  reason  whatever  to  doubt  their  assertion,  I
might  be  tempted  to  suppose  that  our  species  differs  from  theirs,  were  I
not  perfectly  aware  that  birds  in  different  places  will  construct  different
nests,  and  lay  more  or  fewer  eggs.  Our  species  always  deposits  three,
unless  it  may  have  been  disturbed  ; and  this  fact  I have  assured  myself
of  by  having  caught  the  birds  in  more  than  twenty  instances  sitting
on  that  number.  Nay,  on  several  occasions,  at  Labrador,  some  of  my
party  and  myself  saw  several  Black  Guillemots  sitting  on  eggs  in  the
same  fissure  of  a rock,  where  every  bird  had  three  eggs  under  it,  a
fact  which  I communicated  to  my  friend  Thomas  Nuttall.  What
was  most  surprising  to  me  was,  that  even  the  fishermen  there  thought
that  this  bird  laid  only  a single  egg ; and  when  I asked  them  how
they  knew,  they  simply  and  good-naturedly  answered  that  they  had
heard  so.  Thus,  Reader,  I might  have  been  satisfied  with  the  say-
ings of  others,  and  repeated  that  the  bird  in  question  lays  one  egg;
but  instead  of  taking  this  easy  way  of  settling  the  matter,  I found  it  ne-
cessary to  convince  myself  of  the  fact  by  my  own  observation.  I had
therefore  to  receive  many  knocks  and  bruises  in  scrambling  over  rugged
crags  and  desolate  headlands ; whereas,  with  less  incredulity,  I might  very
easily  have  announced  to  you  from  my  easy  chair  in  Edinburgh,  that  the
Black  Guillemots  of  America  lay  only  a single  egg.  No  true  student  of
nature  ought  ever  to  be  satisfied  without  personal  observation  when  it
can  be  obtained.  It  is  the  “ American  Woodsman”  that  tells  you  so,
anxious  as  he  is  that  you  should  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  studying  and  ad-
miring the  beautiful  works  of  Nature.

To  satisfy  yourself  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  statements  which  he
here  lays  before  you,  go  to  the  desolate  shores  of  Labrador.  There,  in
the  vernal  month  of  June,  place  yourself  on  some  granite  rock,  against
the  base  of  which  the  waves  dasli  in  impotent  rage ; and  ere  long  you
will  see  the  gay  Guillemot  coming  from  afar  by  the  side  of  its  mate.


150


BLACK  GUILLEMOT.


They  shoot  past  you  on  fluttering  wings,  and  suddenly  disappear.  Go
to  the  place ; lay  yourself  down  on  the  dripping  rock,  and  you  will  be
sure  to  see  the  birds  preparing  their  stony  nest,  for  each  has  brought  a
smooth  pebble  in  its  bill.  See  how  industriously  they  are  engaged  in
raising  this  cold  fabric  into  the  form  of  a true  nest,  before  the  female  lays
her  eggs,  so  that  no  wet  may  reach  them,  from  the  constant  trickling  of
the  waters  beneath.  Up  to  the  height  of  two  or  three  inches  the  pebbles
are  gradually  raised,  the  male  stands  by  his  beloved  ; and  some  morning
when  you  peep  into  the  crevice,  you  observe  that  an  egg  has  been  de-
posited. Two  days  after  you  find  the  number  complete.

A closet-naturalist  was  quite  surprised,  I have  been  told,  when  he
read  in  one  of  my  volumes  that  Grakles  form  no  nests  in  one  portion
of  the  United  States,  being  there  contented  with  merely  dropping  their
eggs  in  the  bottom  of  a Woodpecker’s  hole;  while  in  the  Middle  States
the  same  species  forms  a very  snug  nest.  That  his  astonishment  was
great  I do  not  in  the  least  doubt,  especially  as  I know  how  surprised
I was  to  find  the  Larus  argentatus  breeding  on  fir-trees  forty  feet  above
the  ground,  and  to  see  three  eggs,  instead  of  one,  placed  on  a bed  of
small  pebbles  beautifully  arranged,  and  every  one  belonging  to  a single
pair  of  Black  Guillemots.  Yet,  good  Reader,  as  I have  also  been  told,
the  same  person  had  no  doubt  whatever  that  ermines  turn  from  brown
to  white  in  winter,  that  snakes  and  crabs  cast  off"  their  skins  and  shells,
and  that  “ fleas  are  not  lobsters  but  then  the  reason  of  his  belief  was
simply  that  he  had  read  of  these  things ; and  his  doubts  as  to  the  Grakles
arose  from  the  facts  having  been  recently  reported  by  a stranger  from  the
“ far  west,”  who,  it  seems,  talked  of  things  which  he  had  not  read  of  be-
fore.

Whilst  in  Labrador,  I was  delighted  to  see  with  what  judgment  the
Black  Guillemot  prepares  a place  for  its  eggs.  Whenever  the  spot  chosen
happens  to  be  so  situated  as  to  preclude  damp,  not  a pebble  does  the  bird
lay  there,  and  its  eggs  are  placed  on  the  bare  rock.  It  is  only  in  what  I
call  cases  of  urgency  that  this  trouble  is  taken.  About  fifty  or  sixty
pebbles  or  bits  of  stone  are  then  used,  and  the  number  is  increased  or  dimi-
nished according  to  circumstances.

The  eggs  of  this  species,  which  appear  disproportionately  large,  mea-
sui’e  two  inches  and  three  eighths  in  length,  by  an  inch  and  five-eighths
in  breadth.  Their  form  is  regular  ; they  are  rather  rough  to  the  touch,
although  not  granulated  ; their  ground  colour  an  earthy  white,  thickly


BLACK  GUILLEMOT.


151


blotched  with  very  dark  purplish-black,  the  markings  larger  and  closer
towards  the  great  end,  which,  however,  is  generally  left  free  of  them.
The  shell  is  much  thinner  than  that  of  the  egg  of  the  Foolish  Guillemot
or  Razor-billed  Auk.  As  an  article  of  food  they  are  excellent,  being  de-
licate and  nutritious.

The  parents  pluck  the  feathers  from  a space  across  the  lower  part  of
their  belly,  as  soon  as  incubation  commences ; and  this  bare  place,  when
the  bird  is  taken  alive,  it  immediately  conceals  by  drawing  the  feathers  of
the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  over  it,  as  if  it  were  anxious  that  it  should
not  be  observed.  When  driven  from  the  nest,  the  Black  Guillemot  at
once  runs  out  of  its  hiding-place  and  flies  to  the  water,  on  which  it  plays,
bathes  as  it  were,  dives  a few  times,  and  anxiously  watches  your  retreat,
after  which  it  soon  returns  and  resumes  the  arduous  task  of  incubation.

The  young,  which  are  at  first  quite  black,  are  covered  with  soft  down,
and  emit,  although  in  an  under  tone,  the  same  lisping  notes  as  their  pa-
rents. Their  legs,  feet,  and  bill  are  black.  The  red  colour  of  the  legs
of  the  old  birds  is  much  brighter  during  the  breeding-season  than  at  any
other  time,  and  the  mouth  also  is  bright  red.  About  the  first  of  August
the  Guillemots  lead  their  progeny  to  the  water,  and  although  at  this  time
neither  old  nor  young  are  able  to  fly,  they  dive  deeply  and  with  great
ease,  which  enables  them  to  procure  abundance  of  food,  for  at  this  season,
lints,  shrimps,  and  marine  insects  are  plentiful  in  all  the  waters.

While  in  Labrador,  1 made  a severe  experiment  to  ascertain  how  long
the  Black  Guillemot  could  live  without  food, — an  experiment  on  which
I have  never  since  been  able  to  think,  without  some  feeling  of  remorse.
I confined  a pair  of  them  in  the  fissure  of  a rock  for  many  days  in  suc-
cession. After  the  entrance  was  securely  closed,  I left  the  place,  and  for
eight  days  the  wind  blew  so  hard  that  no  boat  was  safe  on  the  waters
without  the  harbour.  Many  a time  I thought  of  the  poor  captives,  and
at  last  went  to  their  retreat  one  rainy  afternoon,  over  a great  swell  of  the
sea.  The  entrance  of  the  fissure  was  opened,  and  a stick  pushed  into  the
hole,  when  I had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  both  birds,  although  apparently
in  a state  of  distress,  run  out  by  me,  and  at  once  fly  to  the  water.

The  flight  of  the  Black  Guillemot  is  rapid  and  continued.  As  they
proceed  in  their  course,  they  alternately  shew  the  black  of  their  lower
parts  and  the  white  of  their  wings.  They  walk  on  the  rocks  with  consider-
able ease,  using  short  steps,  and  whenever  they  wish  to  remove  from  one


152


BLACK  GUILLEMOT.


crag  or  block  to  another,  make  use  of  their  wings.  When  their  nests  are  very
high  above  the  water,  they  fly  directly  into  them ; and  from  such  heights,
if  necessity  demands  it,  they  at  once  dive  towards  the  water.

I kept  many  alive  on  board  the  Ripley.  They  ran  on  the  floor  in  an
erect  position  for  a few  yards,  fell  down  on  their  breasts,  rose  again,  and
continued  their  exertions  to  escape,  until  they  got  fairly  concealed  behind
a chest  or  barrel.

The  winter  plumage  of  this  species  differs  so  greatly  from  that  of  sum-
mer, that  I have  been  induced  to  present  you  with  a figure  of  the  bird  in
both  states.  It  is  difficult  to  perceive  any  external  difference  between  the
sexes,  only  the  males  are  rather  larger  than  the  females.  Their  flesh,  al-
though black  and  tough,  is  not  very  unpalatable.

The  trachea  is  flattened,  with  numerous  close,  transparent  rings.  The
gullet,  as  in  all  the  other  species  of  this  genus,  is  very  dilatable.  The
gizzard,  which  is  small,  has  its  inner  membrane  thin  and  of  a yellow  co-
lour. The  intestines  are  about  the  thickness  of  a goose  quill,  and  mea-
sure two  feet  eight  inches  in  length.

Uria  Grylle,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  797 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds

of  the  United  States,  p.  423 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Boreali-Americana,

part  ii.  p.  478.

Black  Guillemot,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  523.

Adult  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  straight,  rather  stout,  tapering,  compress-
ed, acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  and  slop-
ing, towards  the  tip  slightly  arched,  the  sides  sloping  and  towards  the  end
a little  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  slightly  inflected.  Nostrils  basal,  la-
teral, linear,  partially  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  ascending,  straight,  the  sides
sloping  upwards,  slightly  convex,  flat  at  the  base,  the  edges  sharp  and  in-
flected, the  tip  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong ; neck  short ; body  full,  depressed ;
wings  rather  small.  Feet  placed  far  behind,  short,  of  moderate  size ;
tarsus  short,  compressed,  anteriorly  scutellate,  laterally  covered  with  re-
ticulated angular  scales ; toes  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  connected
by  entire  reticulated  webs,  the  outer  and  inner  with  a small  marginal


BLACK  GUILLEMOT.


153


membrane  ; the  first  toe  wanting,  the  third  and  fourth  about  equal,  the
second  shortest ; claws  small,  arched,  compressed,  rather  obtuse,  that  of
the  middle  toe  with  a dilated  thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended  and  velvety  ; feathers  of  the  head  very
short,  on  the  back  broadly  rounded,  of  the  lower  parts  more  elongated.
Wings  rather  small ; primary  quills  curved,  the  first  longest,  the  second
little  shorter,  the  rest  rather  rapidly  diminishing;  secondary  incurved,
broadly  rounded.  Tail  short,  narrow,  rounded,  of  twelve  rather  pointed
feathers.

Bill  black,  inside  of  mouth  vermilion  tinged  with  carmine.  Iris  deep
brown.  Feet  of  the  same  colour  as  the  mouth,  claws  black.  The  general
colour  of  the  plumage  is  deep  black,  on  the  upper  part  tinged  with  green,
on  the  lower  with  red,  there  being  only  a large  patch  on  each  wing,  in-
cluding the  secondary  coverts  and  some  of  the  smaller  feathers  pure  white,
as  are  the  lower  wing-coverts.  The  quills  and  tail  are  tinged  with  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13|  inches,  to  end  of  claws  16|,  to  end  of
wings  13 ; extent  of  wings  21^  ; wing  from  flexure  tail  2 ; bill  along
the  ridge  1;^,  along  the  gape  1| ; tarsus  lj%,  middle  toe  1|,  its  claw  |.
Weight  oz.

Adult  in  winter.  Plate  CCXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  bill  and  iris  are  of  the  same  colour  as  in  summer,  but  the  red  of
the  feet  is  paler.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  white,  the  sides
of  the  head,  the  neck  all  round,  the  lower  parts,  and  the  rump  being  of
that  colour,  more  or  less  shaded  with  grey.  The  upper  part  of  the  head
obscurely  mottled  with  greyish-black  ; the  back  and  scapulars  black,
each  feather  tipped  with  greyish-white,  those  of  the  latter  more  broadly.
The  wings  and  tail  brownish-black,  the  former  with  the  conspicuous  white
patch,  as  in  summer.

Young  a few  days  old.  Plate  CCXIX.  Fig.  3.

Bill  and  feet  black,  the  former  tinged  with  red  ; iris  dark  brown.  The
general  colour  of  the  soft  thick  down  with  which  the  whole  body  is  covered
is  brownish-black.


( 1^4  )


THE  PIPING  PLOVER.

Charadrius  melodus,  Ord.

PLATE  CCXX.  Male  and  Female.

During  the  spring  and  summer  months,  this  pretty  little  Plover  is
found  on  the  sandy  beaches  of  our  extensive  coasts,  from  the  southern
point  of  the  Floridas  to  the  confines  of  Maine.  As  you  proceed  toM'ards
Labrador,  you  find  it  in  every  suitable  place,  as  far  as  the  Magdeleine
Islands,  on  the  sands  of  which  I saw  many  that  were  paired  and  had  eggs
on  the  11th  of  June  1833.  It  breeds  on  all  parts  of  the  eastern  coast  of
the  United  States,  wherever  the  locality  is  adapted  to  its  habits.  On  the
3d  of  May,  this  bird  was  found  with  eggs  on  the  Keys  of  the  Floridas  ;
about  a month  later,  you  may  meet  wijh  it  in  the  States  of  Maryland,
New  Jersey,  and  New  York.  Those  which  leave  the  south  at  the  ap-
proach of  spring,  return  to  it  about  October ; and  during  the  whole  win-
ter you  may  find  them  on  the  sandy  beaches,  from  South  Carolina  to  the
western  coast  of  the  Floridas.  The  species,  therefore,  may  be  considered
as  resident  with  us.

While  migrating  eastward,  the  Piping  Plovers  proceed  in  pairs  ; and
should  one  of  these  on  its  way  find  a convenient  place  for  breeding,  and
remain  there,  several  others  are  often  induced  to  take  up  their  abode  in
the  neighbourhood.  In  autumn,  they  go  in  flocks  of  twenty  or  thirty  in-
dividuals, and  at  times  associate  with  other  species,  particularly  the  Turn-
stone, in  whose  company  I have  found  them  abundantly  on  the  coast  of
Florida,  in  the  winter  months.  They  never  proceed  to  any  distance  in-
land, even  along  the  sandy  margins  of  our  largest  rivers ; nor  are  they  seen
along  very  rocky  shores  or  places  covered  with  deep  mud.

The  favourite  breeding  stations  of  this  species  are  low  islands,  mostly
covered  with  drifting  sand,  having  a scanty  vegetation,  and  not  liable  to
inundation.  In  such  a place  many  pairs  may  be  found,  with  nests  thirty
or  forty  yards  apart.  The  nest  is  sometimes  placed  at  the  foot  of  a tuft
of  withered  grass,  at  other  times  in  an  exposed  situation.  A cavity  is
merely  scooped  out  in  the  soil,  and  there  are  deposited  in  it  four  eggs,
which  are  in  a great  measure  hatched  by  the  heat  which  the  sand  acquires
under  the  influence  of  a summer  sun  ; but  in  rough  weather,  and  always


PIPING  PLOVER.


155


by  night,  the  female  is  careful  to  sit  upon  them.  Her  mate  is  extremely
attentive  to  her  during  the  period  of  incubation,  and  should  you  happen
to  stroll  near  the  nest,  you  are  sure  to  meet  him  at  his  station.  The
eggs,  which  are  four,  and  have  their  points  placed  together,  measure
one  inch  and  one-eighth  by  seven  and  a half  eighths,  are  pyriform,
broad,  and  flatly  rounded  at  the  larger  end,  and  tapering  directly  to
the  smaller,  which  is  also  rounded.  They  are  of  a pale  bluish-buff’
colour,  sprinkled  and  lined  nearly  all  over  with  dark  red,  brown,  and
black.  Only  one  brood  is  raised  in  the  season.  The  young,  which  go
abroad  immediately  after  they  are  hatched,  run  with  remarkable  speed,
and,  at  the  least  note  of  the  parent  bird  indicative  of  danger,  squat  so
closely  on  the  sand,  that  you  may  walk  over  them  without  seeing  them.
Their  downy  covering  is  grey  mottled  with  brown ; their  bill  almost
black.  If  taken  up  in  the  hand,  they  emit  a soft  plaintive  note  resem-
bling that  of  the  old  bird.  The  strange  devices  which  their  parents  at
this  time  adopt  to  ensure  their  safety,  cannot  fail  to  render  the  student  of
nature  very  unwilling  to  carry  them  off*  without  urgent  necessity.  You
may  see  the  mother,  with  expanded  tail  and  wings  trailing  on  the  ground,
limping  and  fluttering  before  you,  as  if  about  to  expire.  It  is  true  you
know  it  to  be  an  artifice,  but  it  is  an  artifice  taught  by  maternal  love ;
and,  when  the  bird  has  fairly  got  rid  of  her  unwelcome  visitor,  and  you
see  her  start  up  on  her  legs,  stretch  forth  her  wings,  and  fly  away  piping
her  soft  note,  you  cannot  but  participate  in  the  joy  that  she  feels.

The  flight  of  this  Plover  is  extremely  rapid,  as  well  as  protracted.
It  passes  through  the  air  by  glidings  and  extended  flappings,  either  close
over  the  sand,  or  high  above  the  shores.  On  the  ground,  few  birds  are
swifter  of  foot : It  runs  in  a straight  line  before  you,  sometimes  for
twenty  or  thirty  yards,  with  so  much  celerity,  that  unless  you  have  a
keen  eye,  it  is  almost  sure  to  become  lost  to  your  view.  Then,  in  an  in-
stant it  stops,  becomes  perfectly  motionless,  and  if  it  perceives  that  you
have  not  marked  it,  squats  flat  on  the  sand,  which  it  so  much  resembles
in  colour,  that  you  may  as  well  search  for  another,  as  try  to  find  it  again.

Their  notes,  which  are  so  soft  and  mellow  as  nearly  to  resemble  those
of  the  sweetest  songster  of  the  forest,  reach  your  ear  long  before  you  have
espied  the  Piping  Plover.  Now  and  then,  these  sounds  come  from  per-
haps twenty  different  directions,  and  you  are  perplexed,  as  well  as  de-
lighted. At  the  approach  of  autumn,  this  species  becomes  almost  mute,


156


PIPING  PLOVER.


the  colour  of  the  plumage  fades  ; and  it  is  then  very  difficult  for  you  to
perceive  one  that  may  be  only  a few  yards  off,  until  it  starts  and  runs  or
flies  before  you.  At  this  season  they  are  less  shy  than  before.

During  winter  they  are  generally  in  good  condition,  and  their  flesh  is
very  delicate  and  savoury,  although,  on  account  of  their  small  size,  they
seldom  draw  the  sportsman  after  them.  Their  food  consists  of  marine
insects,  minute  shell-fish,  and  small  sand  worms.


Ringed  Plover,  Charadrius  Hiaticula,  var.  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  v.  p.  30.
pi.  37.  fig.  3.

Charadrius  melodds,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  296.

Piping  Ringed  Plover,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  18.

Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  half  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  somewhat  cylindrical.  Up-
per mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight^  to  the  middle,  then  bulging  a
little  and  curving  to  the  tip,  which  projects  beyond  that  of  the  lower  man-
dible, the  sides  flat  and  sloping  at  the  base,  convex  towards  the  end,  the
edges  sharp  and  overlapping.  Nasal  groove  extended  to  the  middle  of
the  bill,  filled  with  a bare  membrane  ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  in  the  lower
part  of  the  membrane,  open,  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  rather  short,  rounded,  the  sides  at  the  base  sloping  outwards  and
flat,  the  dorsal  line  ascending  and  slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and
inflected.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed,  the  forehead  rounded.
Eyes  large.  Neck  short.  Body  rather  slender,  ovate.  Wings  long.
Feet  of  moderate  length,  slender  •,  tibia  bare  a little  above  the  joint ; tar-
sus rather  compressed,  covered  all  round  with  reticulated  angular  scales ;
toes  slender ; the  hind  toe  wanting ; third  or  middle  toe  longest,  outer
toe  considerably  longer  than  inner,  all  scutellate  above  and  marginate,
the  outer  connected  with  the  middle  by  a short  membrane  ; claws  small,
compressed,  obtuse,  the  rather  blunt  inner  edge  of  the  middle  claw  a little
dilated.

Plumage  soft  and  blended  ; the  feathers  rounded,  those  on  the  back
somewhat  distinct.  Wings  long  and  pointed  ; primary  quills  tapering,
the  first  longest,  the  second  a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ;
inner  secondaries  tapering  and  elongated,  so  as  nearly  to  equal  the  longest


PIPING  PLOVER.


ir>7


primaries.  Tail  of  moderate  length,  slightly  roimded,  of  twelve  rather
narrow  feathers,  which  taper  a little  towards  their  rounded  extremities.

Bill  orange  in  its  basal  half,  the  rest  black.  Iris  reddish-brown  ; mar-
gins of  eyelids  orange.  Feet  brownish-yellow ; claws  dusky.  Forehead,
sides  of  the  face,  throat,  and  the  whole  under  parts,  pure  white.  Upper
parts  pale  brownish-grey.  A black  band  across  the  upper  part  of  the
forehead,  another  surrounds  the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  broad  on  the
sides,  but  narrow  above  and  below,  where  it  is  formed  merely  by  the  tips
of  some  of  the  feathers.  Above  this  is  a white  band  over  the  hind  neck,
also  very  narrow  above.  Primaries  dusky,  each  with  a large  white  patch
on  a portion  of  the  outer,  and  on  the  greater  part  of  the  inner  web  ; se-
condaries of  a lighter  brown,  white  on  the  inner  webs,  some  of  those  nearest
the  body  entirely  white  ; the  five  innermost  like  the  back  ; most  of  the
quills  are  more  or  less  tipped  with  white,  the  primary  and  secondary
coverts  more  distinctly  so.  The  tail-feathers  may  be  described  as  white  ;
the  second  has  a brown  spot  on  the  inner  web  towards  the  end,  the  third
a larger  spot  or  band  on  both  webs,  and  the  colour  enlarges  on  the  rest,
until  the  middle  feathers  are  nearly  all  dusky  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  inches,  to  end  of  claws  7,  to  end  of  wings  6| ;
extent  of  wings  15| ; wing  from  flexure  4^ ; tail  2 ; bill  along  the  back

along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  its

claw  j%.  Weight  3 oz.

Female  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXX.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  considerably  smaller,  but  resembles  the  male  in  colour-
ing, only  the  dark  bands  on  the  forehead  and  neck  are  narrower,  and  of
a dusky  brown  tint.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7 inches,  extent  of  wings  14^.

The  young,  previous  to  their  first  moult,  have  the  bill  black,  the  feet
flesh-coloured,  with  dusky  claws.  The  colours  of  the  plumage  are  nearly
the  same  as  in  the  adult,  but  there  is  no  dark  band  on  the  forehead,  and
that  on  the  lower  neck  is  merely  indicated  by  a brownish-grey  patch  on
each  side.  The  neck  is  surrounded  by  a collar  of  downy  white  feathers,
and  the  tips  and  margins  of  the  feathers  of  the  head  and  back  are  pale
ochre.


( )


THE  WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.

Long  before  I reached  the  lovely  islets  that  border  the  south-eastern
shores  of  the  Floridas,  the  accounts  I had  heard  of  “ The  Wreckers”  had
deeply  prejudiced  me  against  them.  Often  had  I been  informed  of  the  cruel
and  cowardly  methods  which  it  was  alleged  they  employed  to  allure  ves-
sels of  all  nations  to  the  dreaded  reefs,  that  they  might  plunder  their  car-
goes, and  rob  their  crews  and  passengers  of  their  effects.  I therefore
could  have  little  desire  to  meet  with  such  men  under  any  circumstances,
much  less  to  become  liable  to  receive  their  aid  ; and  with  the  name  of
Wreckers,  there  were  associated  in  my  mind  ideas  of  piratical  depreda-
tion, barbarous  usage,  and  even  murder.

One  fair  afternoon,  while  I was  standing  on  the  polished  deck  of  the
United  States’  revenue  cutter  the  Marion,  a sail  hove  in  sight,  bearing  in
an  opposite  course,  and  “ close-hauled”  to  the  wind.  The  gentle  rake  of
her  masts,  as  she  rocked  to  and  fro  in  the  breeze,  brought  to  my  mind
the  wavings  of  the  reeds  on  the  fertile  banks  of  the  Mississippi.  By-and-
by  the  vessel  altering  her  course,  approached  us.  The  Marion,  like  a
sea-bird,  with  extended  wings,  swept  through  the  waters,  gently  inclining
to  either  side,  while  the  unknown  vessel  leaped  as  it  were  from  wave  to
wave,  like  the  dolphin  in  eager  pursuit  of  his  prey.  In  a short  time,  we
were  gliding  side  by  side,  and  the  commander  of  the  strange  schooner  sa-
luted our  captain,  who  promptly  returned  the  compliment.  What  a
beautiful  vessel ! we  all  thought ; how  trim,  how  clean-rigged,  and  how
well  manned  ! She  swims  bke  a duck  ; and  now  with  a broad  sheer,  off
she  makes  for  the  reefs,  a few  miles  under  our  lee.  There,  in  that  nar-
row passage,  well  known  to  her  commander,  she  rolls,  tumbles,  and  dances,
like  a giddy  thing,  her  copper  sheathing  now  gleaming,  and  again  disap-
pearing under  the  waves.  But  the  passage  is  thrid,  and  now,  hauling  on
the  wind,  she  resumes  her  former  course,  and  gradually  recedes  from  the
view.  Reader,  it  was  a Florida  Wrecker  !

When  at  the  Tortugas,  I paid  a visit  to  several  vessels  of  this  kind,  in
company  with  my  excellent  friend  Robebt  Day,  Esq.  We  had  observed
the  regularity  and  quickness  of  the  men  then  employed  at  their  arduous
tasks,  and  as  we  approached  the  largest  schooner,  I admired  her  form  so
well  adapted  to  her  occupation,  her  great  breadth  of  beam,  her  light


WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.


159


draught,  the  correctness  of  her  water-line,  the  neatness  of  her  painted
sides,  the  smoothness  of  her  well-greased  masts,  and  the  beauty  of  her
rigging.  We  were  welcomed  on  board  with  all  the  frankness  of  our  na-
tive tars.  Silence  and  order  prevailed  on  her  decks.  The  commander
and  the  second  officer  led  us  into  a spacious  cabin,  well  lighted,  and  fur-
nished with  every  convenience  for  fifteen  or  more  passengers.  The  for-
mer brought  me  his  collection  of  marine  shells,  and  whenever  I pointed
to  one  that  I had  not  seen  before,  offered  it  with  so  much  kindness,  that
I found  it  necessary  to  be  careful  in  expressing  my  admiration  of  any  par-
ticular shell.  He  had  also  many  eggs  of  rare  birds,  which  were  all  handed
over  to  me,  with  an  assurance  that  before  the  month  should  expire,  a new
set  could  easily  be  procured,  “ for,”  said  he,  “ we  have  much  idle  time  on
the  reefs  at  this  season.”  Dinner  was  served,  and  we  partook  of  their
fare,  which  consisted  of  fish,  fowl,  and  other  materials.  These  rovers,
who  were  both  from  “ down  east,”  were  stout  active  men,  cleanly  and
smart  in  their  attire.  In  a short  time,  we  were  all  extremely  social  and
merry.  They  thought  my  visit  to  the  Tortugas,  in  quest  of  birds,  was
rather  “ a curious  fancy ;”  but,  notwithstanding,  they  expressed  their
pleasure  while  looking  at  some  of  my  drawings,  and  offered  their  services
in  procuring  specimens.  Expeditions  far  and  near  were  proposed,  and
on  settling  that  one  of  them  was  to  take  place  on  the  morrow,  we  parted
friends.

Early  next  morning,  several  of  these  kind  men  accompanied  me  to  a
small  key  called  Booby  Island,  about  ten  miles  distant  from  the  light-
house. Their  boats  were  well  manned,  and  rowed  with  long  and  steady
strokes,  such  as  whalers  and  men-of-war’s  men  are  wont  to  draw.  The
captain  sang,  and  at  times,  by  way  of  frolic,  ran  a race  with  our  own
beautiful  bark.  The  Booby  Isle  was  soon  reached,  and  our  sport  there
was  equal  to  any  we  had  elsewhere.  They  were  capital  shots,  had  excel-
lent guns,  and  knew  more  about  boobies  and  noddies  than  nine-tenths  of
the  best  naturalists  in  the  world.  But  what  will  you  say  when  I tell  you
that  the  Florida  Wreckers  are  excellent  at  a deer  hunt,  and  that  at  cer-
tain seasons,  “ when  business  is  slack,”  they  are  wont  to  land  on  some  ex-
tensive key,  and  in  a few  hours  procure  a supply  of  debcious  venison.

Some  days  afterwards,  the  same  party  took  me  on  an  expedition  in
quest  of  sea-shells.  There  we  were  all  in  the  water  at  times  to  the  waist,
and  now  and  then  much  deeper.  Now  they  would  dip,  like  ducks,  and
on  emerging  would  hold  up  a beautiful  shell.  This  occupation  they
seemed  to  enjoy  above  all  others.


IGO


WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.


The  duties  of  the  Marion  having  been  performed,  intimation  of  our
intended  departure  reached  the  Wreckers.  An  invitation  was  sent  to  me
to  go  and  see  them  on  board  their  vessels,  which  I accepted.  Their  ob-
ject on  this  occasion  was  to  present  me  with  some  superb  corals,  shells,
live  turtles  of  the  Hawk-billed  species,  and  a great  quantity  of  eggs.  Not
a “ pecayon”  would  they  receive  in  return,  but  putting  some  letters  in  my
hands,  requested  me  to  “ be  so  good  as  put  them  in  the  mail  at  Charles-
ton,” adding  that  they  were  for  their  wives  “ down  east.”  So  anxious
did  they  appear  to  be  to  do  all  they  could  for  me,  that  they  proposed  to
sail  before  the  Marion,  and  meet  her  under  weigh,  to  give  me  some  birds
that  were  rare  on  the  coast,  and  of  which  they  knew  the  haunts.  Cir-
cumstances connected  with  “ the  service”  prevented  this,  however;  and
with  sincere  regret,  and  a good  portion  of  friendship,  I bade  these  excel-
lent fellows  adieu.  How  different,  thought  I,  is  often  the  knowledge  of
things  acquired  by  personal  observation,  from  that  obtained  by  report !

I had  never  before  seen  Florida  Wreclcers,  nor  has  it  since  been  my
fortune  to  fall  in  with  any ; but  my  good  friend.  Dr  Benjamin  Strobel,
having  furnished  me  with  a graphic  account  of  a few  days  which  he  spent
with  them,  I shall  present  you  with  it  in  his  own  words.

“ On  the  12th  day  of  September,  while  lying  in  harbour  at  Indian
Key,  we  were  joined  by  five  wrecking  vessels.  Their  licences  having  ex-
pired, it  was  necessary  to  go  to  Key  West  to  renew  them.  We  deter-
mined to  accompany  them  the  next  morning,  and  here  it  will  not  be  amiss
for  me  to  say  a few  words  respecting  these  far-famed  Wreckers,  their
captains  and  crews.  From  all  that  I had  heard,  I expected  to  see  a
parcel  of  dirty,  pirate-looking  vessels,  officered  and  manned  by  a set  of
black-whiskered  fellows,  who  carried  murder  in  their  very  looks.  I was
agreeably  surprised  on  discovering  that  the  vessels  were  fine  large  sloops
and  schooners,  regular  clippers,  kept  in  first-rate  order.  The  Captains
generally  were  jovial,  good-humoured  sons  of  Neptune,  who  manifested
a disposition  to  be  polite  and  hospitable,  and  to  afford  every  facility  to
persons  passing  up  and  down  the  Reef.  The  crews  were  hearty,  well-
drest,  and  honest-looking  men.

“ On  the  13th,  at  the  appointed  hour,  we  all  set  sail  together,  that  is,
the  five  Wreckers  and  the  schooner  Jane.  As  our  vessel  was  not  noted
for  fast-sailing,  we  accepted  an  invitation  to  go  on  board  of  a Wrecker.
The  fleet  got  under  weigh  about  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  the  wind
light  but  fair,  the  water  smooth,  and  the  day  fine.  I can  scarcely  find


WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.


161

words  to  express  the  pleasure  and  gratification  which  I this  day  experi-
enced. d'he  sea  was  of  a beautiful  soft,  pea-green  colour,  smooth  as  a
sheet  of  glass,  and  as  transparent,  its  surface  agitated  only  by  our  vessels
as  they  parted  its  bosom,  or  by  the  Pelican  in  pursuit  of  his  prey,  which
rising  for  a considerable  distance  in  the  air,  would  suddenly  plunge  down
with  distended  mandibles  and  secure  his  food.  The  vessels  of  our  little
fleet,  with  every  sail  set  that  could  catch  a breeze,  and  the  white  foam
curling  round  the  prows,  glided  silently  along,  like  islands  of  flitting
shadows,  on  an  immovable  sea  of  light.  Several  fathoms  below  the  sur-
face of  the  water,  and  under  us,  we  saw  great  quantities  of  fish  diving
and  sporting  among  the  sea-grass,  sponges,  sea-feathers,  and  corals,  with
which  the  bottom  was  covered.  On  our  right  hand  were  the  Florida
Keys,  which,  as  we  made  them  in  the  distance,  looked  like  specks  upon
the  surface  of  the  water,  but  as  we  neared  them,  rose  to  view  as  if  by  en-
chantment, clad  in  the  richest  livery  of  spring,  each  variety  of  colour  and
hue  rendered  soft  and  delicate  by  a clear  sky  and  a brilliant  sun  over
head.  All  was  like  a fairy  scene ; my  heart  leaped  up  in  delighted  ad-
miration, and  I could  not  but  exclaim  in  the  language  of  Scott,

“ Those  seas  behold.

Round  thrice  an  hundred  islands  rolled.”

The  trade-wind  played  around  us  with  balmy  and  refreshing  sweetness  ;
and,  to  give  life  and  animation  to  the  scene,  we  had  a contest  for  the
mastery  between  all  the  vessels  of  the  fleet,  while  a deep  interest  was  ex-
cited in  favour  of  this  or  that  vessel,  as  she  shot  ahead,  or  fell  astern.

About  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  arrived  off  the  Bay  of
Honda.  The  wind  being  light,  and  no  prospect  of  reaching  Key  West
that  night,  it  was  agreed  that  we  should  make  a harbour  here.  We
entered  a beautiful  basin  and  came  to  anchor  about  four  o’clock.  Boats
were  got  out,  and  several  hunting  parties  formed.  We  landed,  and  were
soon  on  the  scent,  some  going  in  search  of  shells,  others  of  birds.  An  In-
dian, who  had  been  picked  up  somewhere  along  the  coast  by  a Wrecker,
and  who  was  employed  as  a hunter,  was  sent  ashore  in  search  of  venison.
Previous  to  his  leaving  the  vessel,  a rifle  was  loaded  with  a single  ball,
and  put  into  his  hands.  After  an  absence  of  several  hours,  he  returned
with  two  deer,  which  he  had  killed  at  a single  shot.  He  watched  until
they  were  both  in  range  of  liis  gun,  side  by  side,  when  he  fired  and
brought  them  down.

VOL.  in.  L


«


WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.


162

All  hands  having  returned,  and  the  fruits  of  our  excursion  being  col-
lected, we  had  wherewithal  to  make  an  abundant  .supper.  Most  of  the  game
was  sent  on  board  the  largest  vessel,  where  we  proposed  supping.  Our
vessels  were  all  lying  within  hail  of  each  other,  and  as  soon  as  the  moon
arose,  boats  were  seen  passing  from  vessel  to  vessel,  and  all  were  busily
and  happily  engaged  in  exchanging  civilities.  One  could  never  have  sup-
posed that  these  men  were  professional  rivals,  so  apparent  was  the  good-
feeling that  prevailed  among  them.  About  nine  o'clock  we  started  for
supper ; a number  of  persons  had  already  collected,  and  as  soon  as  we
arrived  on  board  the  vessel,  a German  sailor,  who  played  remarkably  well
on  the  violin,  was  summoned  on  the  quarter-deck,  when  all  hands,  with  a
good  will,  cheerily  danced  to  lively  airs  until  supper  was  ready.  The
table  was  laid  in  the  cabin,  and  groaned  under  its  load  of  venison,  wild
ducks,  pigeons,  curlews,  and  fish.  Toasting  and  singing  succeeded  the
supper,  and  among  other  curious  matters  introduced,  the  following  song
was  sung  by  the  German  fiddler,  who  accom'^anied  his  voice  with  his  in-
strument. He  is  said  to  be  the  author  of  the  song.  I say  nothing  of
the  poetry,  but  merely  give  it  as  it  came  on  my  ear.  It  is  certainly  very
characteristic.


THE  WRECKER’S  SONG.

Come  ye,  goot  people,  von  and  all,

Come  listen  to  my  song  :

A few  remarks  I have  to  make.

Which  vont  be  very  long.

’Tis  of  our  vessel  stout  and  goot.

As  ever  yet  was  built  of  woot.

Along  the  reef  where  the  breakers  roar,

De  Wreckers  on  de  Florida  shore  !

Key  Tavernier’s  our  rendezvous  ;

At  anchor  there  we  lie.

And  see  the  vessels  in  the  Gulf,

Carelessly  passing  by.

When  night  comes  on  we  dance  and  sing,
Whilst  the  current  some  vessel  is  floating  in  ;
When  day-light  comes,  a ship’s  on  shore.
Among  de  rocks  where  de  breakers  roar.


WRECKERS  OF  FLORIDA.


163


When  day-light  dawns,  we’re  under  weigh,

And  every  sail  is  set.

And  if  the  wind  it  should  prove  light.

Why  then,  our  sails  we  wet.

To  gain  her  first  each  eager  strives.

To  save  de  cargo  and  de  people’s  lives,

Amongst  de  rocks  where  de  breakers  roar,

De  Wreckers  on  de  Florida  shore.

When  we  get  ’longside,  we  find  she’s  bilged :

We  know  vel  vat  to  do.

Save  de  cargo  dat  we  can,

De  sails  and  rigging  too  ;

Den  down  to  Key  West  we  soon  vill  go,

When  quickly  our  salvage  we  shall  know ;

When  every  ting  it  is  fairly  sold,

Our  money  down  to  us  it  is  told.

Den  one  week’s  cruize  we’ll  have  on  shore,

Before  we  do  sail  again.

And  drink  success  to  de  sailor  lads
Dat  are  ploughing  of  de  main.

And  when  you  are  passing  by  dis  way.

On  the  Florida  Reef  should  you  chance  to  stray.

Why,  we  will  come  to  you  on  de  shore.

Amongst  de  rocks  where  de  breakers  roar.

Great  emphasis  was  laid  upon  particular  words  by  the  singer,  who
had  a broad  German  accent.  Between  the  verses  he  played  a symphony,
remarking,  “ Gentlemens,  I makes  dat  myself.”  The  chorus  was  trolled
by  twenty  or  thirty  voices,  which,  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  produced
no  unpleasant  effect.


( 164  >


THE  MALLARD.

Anas  Boschas,  Linn.

PIjATE  CCXXI.  Males  and  Females.

Although  it  is  commonly  believed  that  the  Mallard  is  found  abun-
dantly everywhere  in  the  United  States,  I have  received  sufficient  proof
to  the  contrary.  If  authors  had  acknowledged  that  they  state  so  on  re-
port, or  had  said  that  in  the  tame  state  the  bird  is  common,  I should  not
have  blamed  them.  According  to  my  observation,  and  I may  be  allowed
to  say  that  I have  had  good  opportunities,  this  valuable  species  is  ex-
tremely rare  in  the  wild  state,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Boston  in  Mas-
sachusetts ; and  in  this  assertion,  I am  supported  by  my  talented  and
amiable  friend  Mr  Nutt  all,  who  has  resided  Jthere  for  many  years.  Far-
ther eastward,  this  bird  is  so  rare  that  it  is  scarcely  known,  and  not  one
was  seen  by  myself  or  my  party  beyond  Portland  in  Maine.  On  the
western  coast  of  Labrador  none  of  the  inhabitants  that  we  conversed  w’ith
had  ever  seen  the  Mallard,  and  in  Newfoundland  the  people  were  equally
unacquainted  with  it,  the  species  being  in  those  countries  replaced  by  the
Black  Duck,  Anas  fusca.  From  New  York  southward,  the  Mallards
become  more  plentiful,  and  numbers  of  them  are  seen  in  the  markets  of
Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  Richmond  in  Virginia,  and  other  towns.  Al-
though they  are  very  abundant  in  the  Carolinas  and  Floridas,  as  well  as
in  Lower  Louisiana,  they  are  much  more  so  in  the  Western  Country.
The  reason  of  this  is  merely  that  the  Mallard,  unlike  the  sea  ducks,  is
rarely  seen  on  salt  water,  and  that  its  course  from  the  countries  where  it
chiefly  breeds  is  across  the  interior  of  the  continent.  From  our  great
lakes,  they  spread  along  the  streams,  betake  themselves  to  the  ponds,
wet  meadows,  submersed  savannahs,  and  inland  swamps,  and  are  even
found  in  the  thick  beech  woods,  in  early  autumn,  and  indeed  long  before
the  males  have  acquii'ed  the  dark  green  colour  of  the  head.  Many  of
them  proceed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  United  States.  '

It  would  be  curious  to  know  when  this  species  was  first  domesticated ;
but.  Reader,  the  solution  of  such  a question  is  a task  on  which  I shall
not  venture.  In  the  domestic  state  every  body  knows  the  Mallard.
When  young  it  affords  excellent  food,  and  when  old  lays  eggs.  A bed


MALLARD.


165


made  of  its  feathers  is  far  preferable  to  the  damp  earth  of  the  camp  of  an
American  woodsman,  or  the  plank  on  which  the  trained  soldier  lays  his
wearied  limbs  at  night.  You  may  find  many  other’ particulars  if  you
consult  in  chronological  order  all  the  compilers  from  Aldrovandds  to
the  present  day.

Be  not  startled,  good  Reader,  when  I tell  you  that  many  of  these
ducks  are  bred  in  the  lakes  near  the  Mississippi,  nay  even  in  some  of  the
small  ponds  in  the  low  lands  or  bottoms  of  the  States  of  Kentucky,  In-
diana and  Illinois;  for  in  many  parts  of  those  districts  I have  surprised
the  females  on  their  eggs,  have  caught  the  young  when  their  mother  was
cautiously  and  with  anxiety  leading  them  for  greater  safety  to  some
stream,  and  have  shot  many  a fat  one  before  the  poor  thing  could  fly,
and  when  it  was  so  plump,  tender,  and  juicy,  that  I doubt  much  whether,
you,  like  myself,  should  not  much  prefer  them  to  the  famed  Canvass-
backed  Duck.

Look  at  that  Mallard  as  he  floats  on  the  lake  ; see  his  elevated  head
glittering  with  emerald-green,  his  amber  eyes  glancing  in  the  light  ! Even
at  this  distance,  he  has  marked  you,  and  suspects  that  you  bear  no  good
will  towards  him,  for  he  sees  that  you  have  a gun,  and  he  has  many  a
time  been  frightened  by  its  report,  or  that  of  some  other.  The  wary
bird  draws  his  feet  under  his  body,  springs  upon  them,  opens  his  wings,
and  with  loud  quacks  bids  you  farewell.

Now  another  is  before  you,  on  the  margin  of  that  purling  streamlet.
How  brisk  are  all  his  motions  compared  with  those  of  his  brethren  that
waddle  across  your  poultry-yard  ! how  much  more  graceful  in  form  and
neat  in  apparel ! The  duck  at  home  is  the  descendant  of  a race  of  slaves,
and  has  lost  his  native  spirit : his  wings  have  been  so  little  used  that  they
can  hardly  raise  him  from  the  ground.  But  the  free-born,  the  untamed
duck  of  the  swamps, — see  how  he  springs  on  wing,  and  hies  away  over
the  woods.

The  Mallards  generally  arrive  in  Kentucky  and  other  parts  of  the
Western  Country,  from  the  middle  of  September  to  the  first  of  October,
or  as  soon  as  the  acorns  and  beech-nuts  are  fully  ripe.  In  a few  days
they  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  ponds  that  are  covered  with  seed-bearing
grasses.  Some  flocks,  which  appear  to  be  guided  by  an  experienced
leader,  come  directly  down  on  the  water  with  a rustling  sound  of  their
wings  that  can  be  compared  only  to  the  noise  produced  by  an  Eagle  in
the  act  of  stooping  upon  its  prey,  while  other  flocks,  as  if  they  felt  im-


166


MALLARD.


easy  respecting  the  safety  of  the  place,  sweep  around  and  above  it  se-
veral times  in  perfect  silence,  before  they  alight.  In  either  case,  the
birds  immediately  bathe  themselves,  beat  their  bodies  with  their  Avings,
dive  by  short  plunges,  and  cut  so  many  capers  that  you  might  imagine
them  to  be  stark  mad.  The  fact,  however,  seems  to  be,  that  all  this  ala-
crity and  gaiety  only  shews  the  necessity  they  feel  of  clearing  themselves
of  the  insects  about  their  plumage,  as  well  as  the  pleasure  they  experience
on  finding  themselves  in  a milder  climate,  with  abundance  of  food  around
them,  after  a hard  journey  of  perhaps  a day  and  a night.  They  Avash
themselves  and  arrange  their  dress,  before  commencing  their  meal ; and
in  this  other  travellers  would  do  well  to  imitate  them.

Now,  towards  the  grassy  margins  they  advance  in  straggling  parties.
See  hoAV  they  leap  from  the  water  to  bend  the  loaded  tops  of  the  tall  reeds.
Woe  be  to  the  slug  or  snail  that  comes  in  their  way.  Some  are  probing
the  mud  beneath,  and  waging  Avar  against  the  leech,  frog,  or  lizard,  that
is  within  reach  of  their  bills  ; Avhile  many  of  the  older  birds  run  into  the
woods,  to  fill  their  crops  with  beech-nuts  and  acorns,  not  disdaining  to
swalloAv  also,  should  they  come  in  their  way,  some  of  the  wood-mice  that,
frightened  by  the  approach  of  the  foragers,  hie  towards  their  burrows.
The  cackling  they  keep  up  Avould  almost  deafen  you,  Avere  you  near  them ;
but  it  is  suddenly  stopped  by  the  approach  of  some  unusual  enemy,  and
at  once  all  are  silent.  With  heads  erected  on  out-stretched  necks,  they
anxiously  look  around.  It  is  nothing,  however,  but  a bear,  Avho  being,
like  themselves,  fond  of  mast,  is  ploughing  up  the  newly  fallen  leaves
with  his  muzzle,  or  removing  an  old  rotting  log  in  search  of  worms.  The
ducks  resume  their  employment.  But  another  sound  is  noAv  heard,  one
more  alarming.  The  bear  raises  himself  on  his  hind  legs,  snuffs  the  air,
and  Avith  a loud  snort  gallops  off  toAvards  the  depths  of  his  cane-brake.
The  ducks  retreat  to  the  water,  betake  themselves  to  the  centre  of  the
pool,  and  uttering  half-stifled  notes  aAvait  the  sight  of  the  object  they
dread.  There  the  enemy  cunningly  advances  first  covered  by  one  tree,
then  by  another.  He  has  lost  his  chance  of  the  bear,  but  as  he  is  pushed
by  hunger,  a Mallard  Avill  do  for  the  bullet  of  his  rusty  rifle.  It  is  an
Indian,  as  you  perceive  by  his  red  skin  and  floAving  black  hair,  Avhich,
however,  has  been  cut  close  from  the  sides  of  his  head.  In  the  centre  of
his  dearly  purchased  blanket,  a hole  has  been  cut,  through  which  he  has
thrust  his  bare  head,  and  the  ragged  garment,  like  a horse’s  netting,  is
engaged  as  it  were  in  flapping  off  the  last  hungry  musquitoes  of  the  sea-


MALLARD.


167


son  that  are  fast  sucking  the  blood  from  his  limbs.  Watch  him,  Mallard,
Nay,  wait  no  longer,  for  I see  him  taking  aim  ; better  for  you  all  to  fly  !
No — well,  one  of  you  will  certainly  furnish  him  with  a repast.  Amid  the
dark  wood  rises  the  curling  smoke,  the  report  comes  on  my  ear,  the  ducks
all  rise  save  a pair,  that,  with  back  downwards  and  feet  kicking  against
the  air,  have  been  hit  by  tbe  prowler.  The  free  son  of  the  forest  slowly
approaches  the  pool,  judges  at  a glance  of  the  depth  of  the  mire,  and
boldly  advances,  until  with  a cane  he  draws  the  game  towards  him.  Re-
turning to  the  wood,  he  now  kindles  a little  fire,  the  feathers  fill  the  air
around ; from  each  wing  he  takes  a quill,  to  clean  the  touch-hole  of  his
gun  in  damp  weather  ; the  entrails  he  saves  to  bait  some  trap.  In  a short
time  the  ducks  are  ready,  and  the  hunter  enjoys  his  meal,  although  brief
time  does  he  take  in  swallowing  the  savoury  morsels.  Soon,  the  glimmer-
ing light  of  the  moon  will  see  him  again  on  his  feet,  and  lead  him  through
the  woods,  as  he  goes  in  pursuit  of  other  game.

The  Mallards  that  remain  with  us  during  the  whole  year,  and  breed
on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  or  Lake  Michigan,  or  in  the  beautiful
meadows  that  here  and  there  border  the  Schuylkil  in  Pennsylvania,  begin
to  pair  in  the  very  heart  of  winter ; and  although  ducks  are  quite  desti-
tute of  song,  their  courtships  are  not  devoid  of  interest.  The  males,  like
other  gay  deceivers,  offer  their  regards  to  the  first  fair  one  that  attracts
their  notice,  promise  unremitting  fidelity  and  affection,  and  repeat  their
offers  to  the  next  they  meet.  See  that  drake,  how  he  proudly  shews,  first
the  beauty  of  his  silky  head,  then  the  brilliancy  of  his  wing-spots,  and,  with
honeyed  jabberings,  discloses  the  warmth  of  his  affection.  He  plays  around
this  one,  then  ai'ound  another,  until  the  passion  of  jealousy  is  aroused  in
the  breasts  of  the  admired  and  flattered.  Bickerings  arise ; the  younger
duck  disdains  her  elder  sister,  and  a third,  who  conceives  herself  a co-
quette of  the  first  order,  interposes,  as  if  to  ensure  the  caresses  of  the
feathered  beau.  Many  tricks  are  played  by  ducks,  good  Reader,  but
ere  long,  the  females  retire  in  search  of  a safe  place  in  which  they  may
deposit  their  eggs  and  rear  their  young.  They  draw  a quantity  of  weed  5
around  them,  and  form  an  ill-arranged  sort  of  nest,  in  which  from  seven
to  ten  eggs  are  laid.  From  their  bodies  they  pluck  the  softest  down,  and
placing  it  beneath  the  eggs,  begin  the  long  process  of  incubation,  which
they  intermit  only  for  short  periods,  when  it  becomes  absolutely  neces-
sary to  procure  a little  sustenance.


168


MALLARD.


At  length,  in  about  three  weeks,  the  young  began  to  cheep  in  the
shell,  from  which,  after  a violent  struggle,  they  make  their  escape.  What
beautiful  creatures  ! See  how,  with  their  little  bills,  they  dry  their
downy  apparel ! Now  in  a long  line,  one  after  another,  they  follow  their
glad  mother  to  the  water,  on  arriving  at  which  they  take  to  swimming
and  diving,  as  if  elated  with  joy  for  having  been  introduced  into  exist-
ence. The  male,  wearied  and  emaciated,  is  far  away  on  some  other  pond.
The  unnatural  barbarian  cares  nothing  about  his  progeny,  nor  has  a
thought  arisen  in  his  mind  respecting  the  lonely  condition  of  his  mate,
the  greatness  of  her  cares,  or  the  sadness  that  she  may  experience  under
the  idea  that  she  has  been  utterly  forsaken  by  him  who  once  called  her
his  only  and  truly  beloved.  No,  Reader,  not  a thought  of  this  kind  has
he  wasted  on  her  whom  he  has  left  alone  in  charge  of  a set  of  eggs,  and
now  of  a whole  flock  of  innocent  ducklings,  to  secure  which  from  danger,
and  see  them  all  grow  up  apace,  she  manifests  the  greatest  care  and
anxiety.  She  leads  them  along  the  shallow  edges  of  grassy  ponds,  and
teaches  them  to  seize  the  small  insects  that  abound  there,  the  flies,  the
musquitoes,  the  giddy  beetles  that  skim  along  the  surface  in  circles  and
serpentine  lines.  At  the  sight  of  danger  they  run  as  it  were  on  the  water,
make  directly  for  the  shore,  or  dive  and  disappear.  In  about  six  weeks,
those  that  have  escaped  from  the  ravenous  fishes  and  turtles  have  attained
a goodly  size ; the  quills  appear  on  their  wings ; their  bodies  are  encased
with  feathers  ; but  as  yet  none  are  able  to  fly.  They  now  procure  their
food  by  partial  immersions  of  the  head  and  neck  in  the  manner  of  the  old
bird.  At  this  period  they  are  already  fit  for  the  table,  and  delicate  as
well  as  savoury  food  they  afford.  By  the  time  that  the  leaves  are  changing
their  hues,  the  young  Mallards  take  freely  to  their  wings,  and  the  old
males  join  the  congregated  flocks.

The  Squatters  of  the  Mississippi  raise  a considerable  number  of  Mal-
lards, which  they  catch  when  quite  young,  and  which,  after  the  first  year,
are  as  tame  as  they  can  wish.  These  birds  raise  broods  which  are  supe-
rior even  to  those  of  the  wild  ones,  for  a year  or  two,  after  which  they
become  similar  to  the  ordinary  ducks  of  the  poultry-yard.  The  hybrids
produced  between  the  iMallard  and  the  Muscovy  Duck  are  of  great  size,
and  afford 'excellent  eating.  Some  of  these  half-breeds  now  and  then
wander  off,  become  quite  wild,  and  have  by  some  persons  been  considered
fis,  forming  a distinct  species.  They  also  breed,  when  tame,  with  the


MALLARD.


169


Black  Duck  (Anas Jmca)  and  the  Gadwal,  the  latter  connection  giving
rise  to  a very  handsome  hybrid,  retaining  the  yellow  feet  and  barred  plu-
mage of  the  one,  and  the  green  head  of  the  other  parent.

I have  found  the  Mallard  breeding  on  large  prostrate  and  rotten  logs,
three  feet  above  the  ground,  and  in  the  centre  of  a cane-brake,  nearly  a
mile  distant  from  any  water.  Once  I found  a female  leading  her  young
through  the  woods,  and  no  doubt  conducting  them  towards  the  Ohio.
When  I first  saw  her,  she  had  already  observed  me,  and  had  squatted
flat  among  the  grass,  with  her  brood  around  her.  As  I moved  onwards,
she  rutfled  her  feathers,  and  hissed  at  me  in  the  manner  of  a goose,  while
the  little  ones  scampered  off  in  all  directions.  I had  an  excellent  dog,
well  instructed  to  catch  young  birds  without  injuring  them,  and  I ordered
him  to  seek  for  them.  On  this  the  mother  took  to  wing,  and  flew  through
the  woods  as  if  about  to  fall  down  at  every  yard  or  so.  She  passed  and
repassed  over  the  dog,  as  if  watching  the  success  of  his  search  ; and  as
one  after  another  the  ducklings  were  brought  to  me,  and  struggled  in  my
bird-bag,  the  distressed  parent  came  to  the  ground  near  me,  rolled  and
tumbled  about,  and  so  affected  me  by  her  despair,  that  I ordered  my  dog
to  lie  down,  while,  with  a pleasure  that  can  be  felt  only  by  those  who  are
parents  themselves,  I restored  to  her  the  innocent  brood,  and  walked  off.
As  I turned  round  to  observe  her,  I really  thought  I could  perceive  gra-
titude expressed  in  her  eye ; and  a happier  moment  I never  felt  while
rambling  in  search  of  knowledge  through  the  woods.

In  unfrequented  parts,  the  Mallards  feed  both  by  day  and  by  night ;
but  in  places  where  they  are  much  disturbed  by  gunners,  they  feed  most-
ly by  night,  or  towards  evening  and  about  sunrise.  In  extremely  cold
weather,  they  betake  themselves  to  the  sources  of  streams,  and  even  to
small  springs,  where  they  may  be  found  along  with  the  American  Snipe.
At  times,  after  heavy  falls  of  rain,  they  are  seen  searching  for  ground-
worms  over  the  corn-fields,  and  during  the  latter  part  of  autumn,  the
rice  plantations  of  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas  afford  them  excellent  pas-
ture grounds.  I have  thought  indeed  that  at  this  season  these  birds  per-
form a second  migration  as  it  were,  for  they  then  pour  into  the  rice-fields
by  thousands  from  the  interior.  In  the  Floridas,  they  are  at  times  seen
in  such  multitudes  as  to  darken  the  air,  and  the  noise  they  make  in  rising
from  off  a large  submer.sed  savannah,  is  like  the  rumhling  of  thunder.  So
numei'ous  were  the  Mallards  while  I was  at  General  Hernandez’s  in
East  Florida,  that  a single  Negro  whom  that  gentleman  kept  as  a hunter.


170


MALLARD.


would  shoot  from  fifty  to  a hundred  and  twenty  in  a day,  thus  supplying
the  plantation  with  excellent  food.

The  flight  of  the  Mallard  is  swift,  strong,  and  well  sustained.  It  rises
either  from  the  ground  or  from  the  water  at  a single  spring,  and  flies  al-
most perpendicularly  for  ten  or  fifteen  yards,  or,  if  in  a thick  wood,  until
quite  above  the  tops  of  the  tallest  trees,  after  which  it  moves  horizontally.
If  alarmed,  it  never  rises  without  uttering  several  quacks ; but  on  other
occasions  it  usually  leaves  its  place  in  silence.  While  travelling  to  any
distance,  the  whistling  sound  of  their  Avings  may  be  heard  a great  way  off.
more  especially  in  the  quiet  of  night.  Their  progress  through  the  air  I
have  thought  might  be  estimated  at  a mile  and  a half  in  the  minute ; and
I feel  very  confident  that  when  at  full  speed  and  on  a long  journey,  they
can  fly  at  the  rate  of  a hundred  and  twenty  miles  in  the  hour.

The  Mallard  is  truly  omnivorous,  its  food  consisting  of  every  thing
that  can  possibly  satisfy  the  cravings  of  its  extraordinary  appetite.  Nor
is  it  at  all  cleanly  in  this  respect,  for  it  will  swallow  ^ny  kind  of  offals,
and  feed  on  all  sorts  of  garbage,  even  putrid  fish,  as  well  as  on  snakes
and  small  quadrupeds.  Nuts  and  fruits  of  all  kinds  are  dainties  to  it,
and  it  soon  fattens  on  rice,  corn,  or  any  other  grain.  My  friend  John
Bachman,  who  usually  raises  a great  number  of  Mallards  every  year,  has
the  young  fed  on  chopped  fish,  on  which  they  thrive  uncommonly  well.
So  very  greedy  are  these  birds,  that  I have  often  observed  a couple  of
them  tugging  for  a long  time  against  each  other  for  the  skin  of  an  eel,
which  was  already  half  swallowed  by  the  one,  while  the  other  was  en-
gaged at  the  opposite  end.  They  are  expert  fly-catcher.s,  and  are  in  the
habit  of  patting  with  their  feet  the  damp  earth,  to  force  ground-worms
out  of  their  burrows.

Besides  man,  the  enemies  of  the  Mallard  are  the  White-headed  Eagle,
the  Snowy  Owl,  the  Virginian  Owl,  the  racoon,  the  lynx,  and  the  snap-
ping turtle.  Mallards  are  easily  caught  by  snares,  steel-traps  baited  with
corn,  and  figure-of-four  traps.  As  we  have  no  decoys  in  the  United
States,  I shall  not  trouble  you  with  a new  edition  of  the  many  accounts
you  will  find  in  ornithological  books  of  that  destructive  method  of  pro-
curing Wild  Ducks.

The  eggs  of  this  species  measure  two  inches  and  a quarter  in  length,
one  inch  and  five-eighths  in  breadth.  The  shell  is  smooth,  and  of  a plain
light  dingy  green.  They  are  smaller  than  those  of  the  tame  duck,  and
rarely  so  numerous.  As  soon  as  incubation  commences,  the  males  asso-


MALLARD.


171


date  together  in  flocks,  until  the  young  are  able  to  migrate.  This  spe-
cies raises  only  one  brood  in  the  season,  and  I never  found  its  nest  with
eggs  in  autumn.  The  female  covers  her  eggs  before  she  leaves  them  to
go  in  search  of  food,  and  thus  keeps  them  sufficiently  warm  until  her  re-
turn.


Anas  Boschas,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  205. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  850. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  383.

Mallaiid,  Anas  Boschas,  Wits.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  112.  pL  70.  fig.  7. —
Nuttall,  ]\Ianual,  vol.  ii.  p.  378.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXI.  Fig.  1.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  higher  than  broad  at  the  base,
depressed  and  widened  towards  the  end,  rounded  at  the  tip.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  sloping  and  a little  concave,  the  ridge  at
the  base  broad  and  flat,  towards  the  end  broadly  convex,  as  are  the  sides,
the  edges  soft  and  rather  obtuse,  the  marginal  lamellae  transverse,  fifty  on
each  side ; the  unguis  oval,  curved,  abrupt  at  the  end.  Nasal  groove  el-
liptical, subbasal,  filled  by  the  soft  membrane  of  the  bill ; nostrils  sub-
basal,  placed  near  the  ridge,  longitudinal,  elliptical,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  slightly  curved  upwards,  with  the  angle  very  long,  narrow,  and
rather  pointed,  the  lamellae  about  sixty.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed  ; neck  rather  long  and
slender;  body  full,  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  a little  behind
the  centre  of  the  body ; legs  bare  a little  above  the  joint ; tarsus  short,  a
little  compressed,  anteriorly  with  small  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with
reticulated  angular  scales.  Hind  toe  extremely  small,  with  a very  nar-
row membrane  ; third  toe  longest,  fourth  a little  shorter,  but  longer  than
second ; all  the  toes  covered  above  with  numerous  oblique  scutella  ; the
three  anterior  connected  by  reticulated  membranes,  the  outer  with  a thick
margin,  the  inner  with  the  margin  extended  into  a slightly  lobed  web.
Claws  small,  arched,  compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  the  middle  toe
much  larger,  with  a dilated,  thin,  inner  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  and  elastic ; of  the  head  and  neck  short,  blended,
and  splendent ; of  the  other  parts  in  general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings
of  moderate  length,  acute ; primaries  narrow  and  tapering,  the  second
longest,  the  first  very  little  shorter ; secondaries  broad,  curved  inwards,


172


MALLARD.


the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  much  rounded,  of  sixteen
acute  feathers,  of  which  the  four  central  are  recurved.

Bill  greenish-yellow.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  orange-red.  Head  and
upper  part  of  neck  deep  green,  a ring  of  white  about  the  middle  of  the
neck  ; lower  part  of  the  neck  anteriorly,  and  fore  part  of  breast,  dark
brownish-chestnut ; fore  part  of  back  light  yellowish-brown,  tinged  with
grey ; the  rest  of  the  back  brownish-black,  the  rump  black,  splendent
with  green  and  purplish-blue  reflections,  as  are  the  recurved  tail-feathers.
Upper  surface  of  wings  greyish-brown,  the  scapulars  lighter  except  their
inner  webs,  and  with  the  anterior  dorsal  feathers  minutely  undulated
with  brown.  The  speculum  on  about  ten  of  the  secondaries  is  of  brilliant
changing  purple  and  green,  edged  with  velvet-black  and  white,  the  ante-
rior bands  of  black  and  white  being  on  the  secondary  coverts.  Breast,
sides,  and  abdomen,  very  pale  grey,  minutely  undulated  with  darker ;
lower  tail-coverts  black  with  blue  reflections.

Length  to  the  end  of  the  tail  24  inches,  to  the  end  of  tlie  claws  23,  to
the  tips  of  the  wings  22  ; extent  of  wings  36 ; wing  from  flexure  10^  ;
tail  4j;  bill  2/^  ; tarsus  If;  middle  toe  2j\,  its  claw  Weight  from
2^  to  3 lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXl.  Figs.  2.  2.

Bill  black  in  the  middle,  dull  orange  at  the  extremities  and  along  the
edges.  Iris  as  in  the  male,  as  are  the  feet.  The  general  colour  of  the
upper  parts  is  pale  yellowish-brown,  streaked  and  spotted  with  dusky
brown.  The  feathers  of  the  head  narrowly  streaked,  of  the  back  with  the
margin  and  a central  streak  yellowish-brown,  the  rest  dark,  of  the  scapu-
lars similar,  but  with  the  light  streak  on  the  outer  web.  The  wings  are
nearly  as  in  the  male,  the  speculum  similar,  but  with  less  green.  The
lower  parts  dull  ochre,  deeper  on  the  lower  neck,  and  spotted  with  brown.

Length  22  inches.  Weight  from  2 lb.  to  2|.

The  Young  acquire  the  full  plumage  in  the  course  of  the  first  winter.


( 17:3  )


THE  WHITE  IBIS.

Ibis  alba,  Vie  ill.

PLATE  CCXXII.  Adult  Male,  and  Young.

Sandy  Island,  of  wliich  I have  already  spoken  in  my  second  volume,
is  remarkable  as  a breeding-place  for  various  species  of  water  and  land
birds.  It  is  about  a mile  in  length,  not  moi’e  than  a hundred  yards  broad,
and  in  form  resembles  a horse-shoe,  the  inner  curve  of  which  looks  toward
Cape  Sable  in  Florida,  from  which  it  is  six  miles  distant.  At  low  water,
it  is  surrounded  to  a great  distance  by  mud  flats  abounding  in  food  for
wading  and  swimming  birds,  while  the  plants,  the  fruits,  and  the  insects
of  the  island  itself,  supply  many  species  that  are  peculiar  to  the  land.
Besides  the  White  Ibis,  we  found  breeding  there  the  Brown  Pelican,  the
Purple,  the  Louisiana,  the  White,  and  the  Green  Herons,  two  species  of
Gallinule,  the  Cardinal  Grosbeak,  Crows,  and  Pigeons.  The  vegetation
consists  of  a few  tall  mangroves,  thousands  of  wild  plum  trees,  several
species  of  cactus,  some  of  them  nearly  as  thick  as  a man’s  body,  and
more  than  twenty  feet  high,  different  sorts  of  smilax,  grape-vines,  cane,
palmettoes,  Spanish  bayonets,  and  the  rankest  nettles  I ever  saw, — all  so
tangled  together,  that  I leave  you  to  guess  how  difficult  it  was  for  my
companions  and  myself  to  force  a passage  through  them  in  search  of  birds’
nests,  which,  however,  we  effected,  although  the  heat  was  excessive,  and
the  stench  produced  by  the  dead  birds,  putrid  eggs,  and  the  natural  ef-
fluvia of  the  Ibises,  was  scarcely  sufferable.  But  then,  the  White  Ibis
was  there,  and  in  thousands ; and,  although  I already  knew  the  bird,  I
wished  to  study  its  manners  once  more,  that  I might  be  enabled  to  pre-
sent you  with  an  account  of  them,  which  I now  proceed  to  do, — endeavour-
ing all  the  while  to  forget  the  pain  of  the  numerous  scratches  and  lacera-
tions of  my  legs  caused  by  the  cactuses  of  Sandy  Island.

As  we  entered  that  well-known  place,  we  saw  nests  on  every  bush,
cactus,  or  tree.  Whether  the  number  was  one  thousand  or  ten  I cannot
say,  but  this  I well  know : — I counted  forty-seven  on  a single  plum-tree.
These  nests  of  the  White  Ibis  measure  about  fifteen  inches  in  their  sreat-

O

est  diameter,  and  are  formed  of  dry  twigs  intermixed  with  fibrous  roots
and  green  branches  of  the  trees  growing  on  the  island,  which  this  bird


174


WHITE  IBIS.


easily  breaks  with  its  bill ; the  interior,  which  is  flat,  being  finished  with
leaves  of  the  cane  and  some  other  plants.  The  bird  breeds  only  once  in
the  year,  and  the  full  number  of  its  eggs  is  three.  They  measure  two
inches  and  a quarter  in  length,  with  a diameter  of  one  inch  and  five-
eighths,  are  rough  to  the  touch,  although  not  granulated,  of  a dull  white
colour,  blotched  with  pale  yellow,  and  irregularly  spotted  with  deep  reddish-
brown.  They  afford  excellent  eating,  although  when  boiled  they  do  not  look
inviting,  the  white  resembling  a livid-coloured  jelly,  and  the  yolk  being  of  a
reddish-orange,  the  former  wonderfully  transparent,  instead  of  being  opaque
like  that  of  most  other  birds.  The  eggs  are  deposited  from  the  10th  of  April
to  the  1st  of  May,  and  incubation  is  general  by  the  10th  of  the  latter  month.
The  young  birds,  which  are  at  first  covered  with  thick  down  of  a dark
grey  colour,  are  fed  by  regurgitation.  They  take  about  five  weeks  to  be
able  to  fly,  although  they  leave  the  nest  at  the  end  of  three  weeks,  and
stand  on  the  branches,  or  on  the  ground,  waiting  the  arrival  of  their  pa-
rents with  food,  which  consists  principally  of  small  fiddler  crabs  and  cray-
fish. On  some  occasions,  I have  found  them  at  this  age  miles  away  from
the  breeding-places,  and  in  this  state  they  are  easily  caught.  As  soon  as
the  young  are  able  to  provide  for  themselves,  the  old  birds  leave  them,
and  the  different  individuals  are  then  seen  searching  for  food  apart.
While  nestling  or  in  the  act  of  incubating,  these  Ibises  are  extremely  gen-
tle and  unwary,”  unless  they  may  have  been  much  disturbed,  for  they  al-
most allow  you  to  touch  them  on  the  nest.  The  females  are  silent  all  the
while,  but  the  males  evince  their  displeasure  by  uttering  sounds  which
greatly  resemble  those  of  the  White-headed  Pigeon,  and  which  may  be
imitated  by  the  syllables  crooh,  croo^  croo.  The  report  of  a gun  scarcely
alarms  them  at  first,  although  at  all  other  periods  these  birds  are  shy  and
vigilant  in  the  highest  degree.

The  change  in  the  colouring  of  the  bill,  legs,  and  feet  of  this  bird,
that  takes  place  in  the  breeding- season,  is  worthy  of  remark,  the  bill  be-
ing then  of  a deep  orange-red,  and  the  legs  and  feet  of  a red  nearly
amounting  to  carmine.  The  males  at  this  season  have  the  gular  pouch
of  a rich  orange  colour,  and  somewhat  resembling  in  shape  that  of  the
Frigate  Pelican,  although  proportionally  less.  During  winter,  these  parts
are  of  a dull  flesh  colour.  The  irides  also  lose  much  of  their  clear  blue,
and  resume  in  some  degree  the  umber  colour  of  the  young  birds.  I am
thus  particular  in  these  matters,  because  it  is  doubtful  if  any  one  else  has
ever  paid  attention  to  them.


WHITE  IBIS.


175


While  breeding,  the  White  Ibises  go  to  a great  distance  in  search  of
food  for  their  young,  flying  in  flocks  of  several  hundreds.  Their  excursions
take  place  at  particular  periods,  determined  by  the  decline  of  the  tides,
when  all  the  birds  that  are  not  sitting  go  off,  perhaps  twenty  or  thirty
miles,  to  the  great  mud  flats,  where  they  collect  abundance  of  food,  with
which  they  return  the  moment  the  tide  begins  to  flow.  As  the  birds  of
this  genus  feed  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  the  White  Ibis  attends  the
tides  at  whatever  hour  they  may  be.  Some  of  those  which  bred  on  Sandy
Key  would  go  to  the  keys  next  the  Atlantic,  more  than  forty  miles  dis-
tant, while  others  made  for  the  Ever  Glades ; but  they  never  went  off
singly.  They  rose  with  common  accord  from  the  breeding-ground,  form-
ing themselves  into  long  lines,  often  a mile  in  extent,  and  soon  disappear-
ed from  view.  Soon  after  the  turn  of  the  tide  we  saw  them  approaching
in  the  same  oi’der.  Not  a note  could  you  have  heard  on  those  occasions ;
yet  if  you  disturb  them  when  far  from  their  nests,  they  utter  loud  hoarse
cries  resembling  the  syllables  hunk,  hunk,  hunk,  either  while  on  the  ground
or  as  they  fly  off.

The  flight  of  the  White  Ibis  is  rapid  and  protracted.  Like  all  other
species  of  the  genus,  these  birds  pass  through  the  air  with  alternate  flap-
pings and  sailings ; and  I have  thought  that  the  use  of  either  mode  de-
pended upon  the  leader  of  the  flock,  for,  with  the  most  perfect  regularity,
each  individual  follows  the  motion  of  that  preceding  it,  so  that  a constant
appearance  of  regular  undulations  is  produced  through  the  whole  line.
If  one  is  shot  at  this  time,  the  whole  line  is  immediately  broken  up,  and  for
a few  minutes  all  is  disorder ; but  as  they  continue  their  course,  they
soon  resume  their  former  arrangement.  The  wounded  bird  never  at-
tempts to  bite  or  to  defend  itself  in  any  manner,  although,  if  only  winged,
it  runs  off  with  more  speed  than  is  pleasant  to  its  pursuer.

At  other  times  the  White  Ibis,  like  the  Red  and  the  Wood  Ibises,
rises  to  an  immense  height  in  the  air,  where  it  performs  beautiful  evolu-
tions. After  they  have  thus,  as  it  were,  amused  theiuselves  for  some
time,  they  glide  down  with  astonishing  speed,  and  alight  either  on  trees
or  on  the  ground.  Should  the  sun  be  shining,  they  appear  in  their  full
beauty,  and  the  glossy  black  tips  of  their  wings  form  a fine  contrast  with
the  yellowish-white  of  the  rest  of  their  plumage.

This  species  is  as  fond  of  resorting  to  the  ponds,  bayous,  or  lakes  that
are  met  with  in  the  woods,  as  the  Wood  Ibis  itself.  I have  found  it


176


WHITE  IBIS.


breeding  there  at  a distance  of  more  than  three  hundred  miles  from  the
sea,  and  remaining  in  the  midst  of  the  thickest  forests  until  driven  off  to
warmer  latitudes  by  the  approach  of  winter.  This  is  the  case  in  the
State  of  ^Mississippi,  not  far  from  Natchez,  and  in  all  the  swampy  forests
around  Bayou  Sara  and  Pointe  Coupee,  as  well  as  the  interior  of  the
Floridas.  When  disturbed  in  such  places,  these  Ibises  fly  at  once  to  the
tops  of  the  tallest  trees,  emitting  their  hoarse  hu7ik,  and  watch  your  mo-
tions with  so  much  care  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  get  within  shot
of  them.

The  manner  in  which  this  bird  searches  for  its  food  is  very  curious-
The  Woodcock  and  the  Snipe,  it  is  true,  are  probers  as  well  as  it,  but
their  task  requires  less  ingenuity  than  is  exercised  by  the  White  or  the
Red  Ibis.  It  is  also  true  that  the  White  Ibis  frequently  seizes  on  small
crabs,  slugs  and  snails,  and  even  at  times  on  flying  insects ; but  its  usual
mode  of  procuring  food  is  a strong  proof  that  cunning  enters  as  a princi-
pal ingredient  in  its  instinct.  The  Cray-fish  often  burrows  to  the  depth
of  three  or  four  feet  in  dry  weather,  for  before  it  can  be  comfortable  it
must  reach  the  water.  This  is  generally  the  case  during  the  prolonged
heats  of  summer,  at  which  time  the  White  Ibis  is  most  pushed  for  food.
The  bird,  to  procure  the  Cray-fish,  walks  with  remarkable  care  towards
the  mounds  of  mud  which  the  latter  throws  up  while  forming  its  hole,  and
breaks  up  the  upper  part  of  the  fabric,  dropping  the  fragments  into  the
deep  cavity  that  has  been  made  by  the  animal.  Then  the  Ibis  retires  a
single  step,  and  patiently  waits  the  result.  The  Cray-fish,  incommoded
by  the  load  of  earth,  instantly  sets  to  work  anew,  and  at  last  reaches  the
entrance  of  its  burrow ; but  the  moment  it  comes  in  sight,  the  Ibis  seizes
it  with  his  bill.

Whilst  at  Indian  Key,  I observed  an  immense  quantity  of  beautiful
tree  snails,  of  a pyramidal  or  shortly  conical  form,  some  pure  white,
others  curiously  marked  with  spiral  lines  of  bright  red,  yellow  and  black.
They  were  crawling  vigorously  on  every  branch  of  each  bush  where
there  was  not  a nest  of  the  White  Ibis;  but  wherever  that  bird  had
fixed  its  habitation,  not  a live  snail  was  to  be  seen,  although  hundreds
lay  dead  beneath.  Was  this  caused  by  the  corrosive  quality  of  the  bird’s
ordure  ?

There  is  a curious  though  not  altogether  general  difference  between
the  sexes  of  this  species  as  to  the  plumage : — the  male  has  five  of  its


WHITE  IBIS.


177


primaries  tipped  with  glossy  black  for  several  inches,  while  the  female,
which  is  very  little  smaller  than  the  male,  has  only  four  marked  in  this
manner.  On  examining  more  than  a hundred  individuals  of  each  sex.  I
found  only  four  exceptions,  which  occurred  in  females  that  were  very  old
birds,  and  which,  as  happens  in  some  other  species,  might  perhaps  have
been  undergoing  the  curious  change  exhibited  by  ducks,  pheasants,  and
some  other  birds,  the  females  of  which  when  old  sometimes  assume  the
livery  of  the  males.

Much,  as  you  are  aware,  good  Reader,  has  been  said  respecting  the
“ oil  bags”  of  birds.  I dislike  controversy,  simply  because  I never  saw
the  least  indications  of  it  in  the  ways  of  the  Almighty  Creator.  Should
I err,  forgive  me,  but  my  opinion  is,  that  these  organs  were  not  made
without  an  object.  Why  should  they  consist  of  matter  so  conveniently
placed,  and  so  disposed  as  to  issue  under  the  least  pressure,  through  aper-
tures in  the  form  of  well  defined  tubes  ? The  White  Ibis,  as  well  as  the
Wood  Ibis,  and  all  the  other  species  of  this  genus,  when  in  full  health,
has  these  oil  bags  of  great  size,  and,  if  my  eyes  have  not  deceived  me,
makes  great  use  of  their  contents.  Should  you  feel  anxious  to  satisfy
yourself  on  this  subject,  I request  of  you  to  keep  some  Ibises  alive  for
several  weeks,  as  I have  done,  and  you  will  have  an  opportunity  of  judg-
ing. And  again,  tell  me  if  the  fat  contained  in  these  bags  is  not  the  very
best  lipsalve  that  can  be  procured.

When  any  species  of  Ibis  with  which  I am  acquainted  falls  into  the
water  on  being  wounded,  it  swims  tolerably  well ; but  I have  never  ob-
served any  taking  to  the  water  and  swimming  either  by  choice  or  to  escape
pursuit.  While  in  the  company  of  Mr  Joseph  Mason,  a young  man  who
was  for  some  time  employed  by  me,  and  who  has  drawn  plants  to  some  of
my  birds,  although  not  so  successfully  as  my  amiable  friend  Miss  Martin,
or  George  Lehman,  who  finish  those  they  draw  as  beautifully  as  my  learn-
ed and  valued  friend  William  Macgillivray  of  Edinburgh  does  his
faithful  drawings  of  birds,  I chanced  one  morning  to  be  on  the  look-out  for
White  Ibises,  in  a delightful  swamp  not  many  miles  from  Bayou  Sara.  It
was  in  the  end  of  summer,  and  all  around  was  pure  and  calm  as  the  clear
sky,  the  bright  azure  of  which  was  reflected  by  the  lake  before  us.  The
trees  had  already  exchanged  the  verdure  of  their  foliage  for  more  mellow
tints  of  diversified  hue  ; the  mast  dropped  from  the  boughs ; some  of  the
Warblers  had  begun  to  think  of  removing  farther  south  ; the  Night  Hawk,
in  company  with  the  Chimney  Swallow,  was  passing  swiftly  towards  the


VOL.  III.


M


178


WHITE  IBIS.


land  of  their  winter  residence,  and  the  Ibises  had  all  departed  for  the
Florida  coasts,  excepting  a few  of  the  white  species,  one  of  which  we  at
length  espied.  It  was  perched  about  fifty  yards  from  us  towards  the
centre  of  the  pool,  and  as  the  report  of  one  of  our  guns  echoed  among  the
tall  cypresses,  down  to  the  water,  broken-winged,  it  fell.  The  exertions
which  it  made  to  reach  the  shore  seemed  to  awaken  the  half-torpid  alli-
gators that  lay  in  the  deep  mud  at  the  bottom  of  the  pool.  One  shewed
his  head  above  the  water,  then  a second  and  a third.  All  gave  chase  to
the  poor  wounded  bird,  which,  on  seeing  its  dreaded  and  deadly  foes,
made  double  speed  towards  the  very  spot  where  we  stood.  I was  sur-
prised to  see  how  much  faster  the  bird  swam  than  the  reptiles,  who,  with
jaws  widely  opened,  urged  their  heavy  bodies  through  the  water.  The
Ibis  was  now  within  a few  yards  of  us.  It  was  the  alligator’s  last  chance.
Springing  forward  as  it  were,  he  raised  his  body  almost  out  of  the  water ;
his  jaws  nearly  touched  the  terrified  bird ; when  pulling  three  triggers  at
once,  we  lodged  the  contents  of  our  guns  in  the  throat  of  the  monster.
Thrashing  furiously  with  his  tail,  and  rolling  his  body  in  agony,  the  alli-
gator at  last  sunk  to  the  mud  ; and  the  Ibis,  as  if  in  gratitude,  walked  to
our  very  feet,  and  there  lying  down,  surrendered  itself  to  us.  I kept  this
bird  until  the  succeeding  spring,  and  by  care  and  good  nursing,  had  the
pleasure  of  seeing  its  broken  wing  perfectly  mended,  when,  after  its  long
captivity,  I restored  it  to  liberty,  in  the  midst  of  its  loved  swamps  and
woods.

The  young  bird  of  this  species  which  I kept  alive  for  some  time,  fed
freely,  after  a few  days  captivity,  on  soaked  Indian  corn  meal,  but  evinced
great  pleasure  when  cray-fishes  were  offered  to  it.  On  seizing  one,  it  beat
it  sideways  on  the  ground,  until  the  claws  and  legs  were  broken  off,  after
which  it  swallowed  the  body  whole.  It  was  fond  of  lying  on  its  side  in
the  sun  for  an  hour  or  so  at  a time,  pluming  its  body  and  nursing  the
sore  wing.  It  walked  lightly  and  very  gracefully,  though  not  so  much
so  as  the  Herons.  It  did  not  molest  its  companions,  and  became  very
gentle  and  tame,  following  those  who  fed  it  like  a common  fowl.

The  Creoles  of  Louisiana  call  this  species  “ Bee  croche^''  and  also
“ Petit  Flaman^''  although  it  is  also  generally  known  by  the  name  of
“ Spanish  Curlew.”  The  flesh,  which,  as  well  as  the  skin,  is  of  a dull
orange  colour,  is  extremely  fishy,  although  the  birds  are  often  sold  in
our  southernmost  markets,  and  are  frequently  eaten  by  the  Indians.

The  White  Ibis  has  been  shot  eastward  as  far  as  New  Jersey  Of


WHITE  IBIS.


179


this  I have  been  made  aware  by  my  generous  friend  Edward  Harris,
Esq.  I never  saw  one  farther  up  the  Mississippi  than  Memphis.


Tantalus  albus,  Unn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  242 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  lOo.

White  Ibis,  Tantalus  albus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  43.  pi.  C6.  fig.  3 —
Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  86.

Ibis  alba,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  312.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  very  long,  slender,  deeper  than  broad,  compressed,  tapering,  ar-
cuate, obtuse  at  the  tip.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  arched  in
its  whole  feigth,  the  ridge  convex,  broader  towards  the  end,  the  sides  at
the  base  nearly  erect,  towards  the  end  very  convex  and  narrow,  the  ridge
separated  in  its  whole  length  from  the  sides  by  a deep  narrow  groove,  the
edges  inflected  and  sharp.  Nostrils  basal,  dorsal,  linear,  direct.  Lower
mandible  nearly  equal  to  upper,  its  angle  very  narrow,  and  protracted  in
the  form  of  a groove  to  the  tip,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp,  but
strong.

Head  small,  compressed  ; neck  long  and  slender  ; body  slender,  deeper
than  broad;  wings  rather  large.  Feet  very  long,  slender;  tibiae  long,
bare  about  half  their  length,  and  covered  all  round  with  hexagonal  scales;
tarsi  long,  slender,  anteriorly  covered  with  numerous  broad  scutella,  the
rest  with  hexagonal  scales;  toes  slender,  the  first  much  smaller,  the  third
longest,  the  fourth  considerably  shorter,  the  second  very  little  shorter  than
the  fourth,  all  covered  above  with  numerous  scutella,  laterally  with  an-
gular scales,  beneath  flattened  with  thick  soft  margins ; the  anterior
connected  at  the  base  by  membranes,  of  which  the  outer  is  longer ;
claws  small,  arched,  compressed,  obtuse,  the  middle  one  with  a sharp  thin
edge.

Head  and  throat  bare  to  beyond  the  eyes,  as  are  the  tibim  nearly  half
way  up.  Plumage  in  general  soft,  unglossed,  the  feathers  rather  blended,
those  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow  and  more  blended.  Wings  long,
ample,  some  of  the  secondaries  as  long  as  the  longest  primary  when  the
wings  are  closed ; third  quill  longest,  but  second  and  fourth  almost  as
long,  first  longer  than  fifth  ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded.  Tail  short,
slightly  emarginate  and  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bare  parts  of  the  head  light  orange-red ; bill  the  same,  but  towards
the  tip  dusky.  Iris  of  a fine  pearly  blue.  Legs  and  toes  paler  than  the


180


WHITE  IBIS.


bill ; claws  dusky,  tipped  with  horn  colour.  Plumage  pure  white,  ex-
cepting the  ends  of  from  three  to  five  of  the  outer  primaries,  which  are
deep  black,  with  blue  and  green  reflexions.

Length  to  end  of  tail  24 1 inches,  to  end  of  wings  27,  to  end  of  claws
31| ; extent  of  wings  40  ; wing  from  flexure  12^;  tail  4| ; bill  along
the  back  5j,  along  the  edge  5| ; bare  space  of  tibia  1|,  tarsus  3j,  middle
toe  2|,  its  claw  Weight  2 lb.

The  adults  vary  considerably  in  size,  and  remarkably  in  the  length
of  the  bill.  The  extent  of  the  bare  space  on  the  head  varies  according
to  age.  In  the  breeding  season  the  bill  and  legs  are  bright  carmine  ;
during  the  rest  of  the  year  paler.

Young  bird  killed  in  September.  Plate  CCXXII.  Fig.  2.

In  its  first  plumage  this  species  is  of  a dull  brown  colour  all  over,  ex-
cepting the  rump,  which  is  whitish,  and  the  tail,  which  is  tinged  with
grey.

After  the  first  moult,  the  bill  is  pale  yellowish-orange,  toward  the
base  greenish  ; the  naked  parts  of  the  head  are  pale  orange-yellow,  in-
clining to  flesh-colour ; the  eye  dark  brown ; the  feet  pale  blue.  The
plumage  is  of  a dull  olivaceous  brown,  the  quills  darker,  the  tail  ra-
ther lighter,  the  hind  part  of  the  back  white,  the  breast  and  abdomen
white.

The  Crayfish  represented  in  the  plate  will  be  found  described  in  the
article  entitled  “ the  White  Perch  and  its  favourite  bait.”


( 1»1  )


THE  AMERICAN  OYSTER-CATCHER.

HuEmatopus  palliatus,  Temm.

PLATE  CCXXIII.  Male.

Our  Oyster-Catcher  has  a very  extensive  range.  It  spends  the  win-
ter along  the  coast  from  Maryland  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  being  then
abundant  on  the  shores  of  the  Floridas,  may  be  considered  a constant
resident  in  the  United  States.  At  the  approach  of  spring,  it  removes  to-
ward the  Middle  States,  where,  as  well  as  in  North  Carolina,  it  breeds.  It
seems  scarcer  between  Long  Island  and  Portland  in  Maine,  where  you
again  see  it,  and  whence  it  occurs  all  the  way  to  Labrador,  in  which  coun-
try I found  that  several  were  breeding  in  the  month  of  July.  Unless  in
winter,  when  these  birds  assemble  in  parties  of  twenty-five  or  thirty  indivi-
duals, they  are  seldom  met  with  in  greater  numbers  than  from  one  to
four  pairs,  with  their  families,  which  appear  to  remain  with  the  parent
birds  until  the  following  spring.  It  is  never  found  inland,  nor  even  far
up  our  largest  rivers,  but  is  fond  of  remaining  at  all  times  on  the  sandy
beaches  and  rocky  shores  of  our  salt-water  bays  or  marshes.  In  Labra-
dor, I met  with  it  farther  from  the  open  sea  than^in  any  other  part,  yet
always  near  salt-water.  I have  never  met  with  any  other  species  on  the
coasts  of  North  America.

Shy,  vigilant,  and  ever  on  the  alert,  the  Oyster-Catcher  walks  with  a
certain  appearance  of  dignity,  greatly  enhanced  by  its  handsome  plumage
and  remarkable  bill.  If  you  stop  to  watch  it,  that  instant  it  sounds  a
loud  shrill  note  of  alarm ; and  should  you  advance  farther  towards  it,
when  it  has  neither  nest  nor  young,  off  it  flies  quite  out  of  sight.  Few
birds,  indeed,  are  more  difficult  to  be  approached,  and  the  only  means  of
studying  its  habits  I found  to  be  the  use  of  an  excellent  telescope,  with
which  I could  trace  its  motions  when  at  the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a
mile,  and  pursuing  its  avocations  without  apprehension  of  danger.  In
this  manner  I have  seen  it  probe  the  sand  to  the  full  length  of  its  bill,
knock  off  limpets  from  the  rocks  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  using  its  wea-
pon sideways  and  insinuating  it  between  the  rock  and  the  shell  like  a
chisel,  seize  the  bodies  of  gaping  oysters  on  what  are  called  in  the  South-
ern States  and  the  Floridas  “ Racoon  oyster  beds,”  and  at  other  times


182


AMERICAN  OYSTER-CATCHER.


take  up  a “ razor-handle”  or  solen,  and  lash  it  against  the  sands  until  the
shell  was  broken  and  the  contents  swallowed.  Now  and  then  they  seem
to  suck  the  sea-urchins,  driving  in  the  mouth,  and  introducing  their  biU
by  the  aperture,  without  breaking  the  shell ; again  they  are  seen  wading
up  to  their  bodies  from  one  place  to  another,  seizing  on  shrimps  and
other  Crustacea,  and  even  swimming  for  a few  yards,  should  this  be
necessary  to  enable  them  to  remove  from  one  bank  to  another  without
flying.  Small  crabs,  fiddlers,  and  sea-worms,  are  also  caught  by  it,  the
shells  of  which  in  a broken  state  I have  found  in  its  gizzard  in  greater  or
less  quantity.  Frequently,  while  on  wet  sea-beaches,  it  pats  the  sand,  to
force  out  the  insects ; and  in  one  instance  I saw  an  individual  run  from
the  water  to  the  dry  sand,  with  a small  flounder  in  its  bill,  which  it  after-
wards devoured.

This  bird  forms  no  regular  nest,  but  is  contented  with  scratching  the
dry  sand  above  high-water  mark,  so  as  to  form  a slight  hollow,  in  which
it  deposits  its  eggs.  On  the  coast  of  Labrador,  and  in  the  ^ay  of
Fundy,  it  lays  its  eggs  on  the  bare  rock.  When  the  eggs  are  on  sand,
it  seldom  sits  on  them  during  the  heat  of  the  sun ; but  in  Labrador,  it
was  found  sitting  as  closely  as  any  other  bird.  Here,  then,  is  another
instance  of  the  extraordinary  difference  of  habit  in  the  same  bird  under  dif-
ferent circumstances.  It  struck  me  so  much  that  had  I not  procured  a
specimen  in  Labrador,  and  another  in  our  Middle  Districts,  during  the
breeding  season,  and  found  them  on  the  closest  examination  to  be  the
same,  I should  perhaps  have  thought  the  birds  different.  Everywhere,
however,  I observed  that  this  bird  is  fond  of  places  covered  with  broken
shells  and  drifted  sea- weeds  or  grasses,  as  a place  of  security  for  its  eggs,
and  where,  in  fact,  it  is  no  very  easy  matter  to  discover  them.  The  eggs
are  two  or  three,  measure  two  inches  and  one-eighth  in  length,  by  an  inch
and  a half  in  breadth,  and  are  of  the  form  of  those  of  a common  hen.
They  are  of  a pale  cream  colour,  spotted  with  irregular  marks  of  brown-
ish-black, and  others  of  a paler  tint,  pretty  equally  dispersed  all  over.
The  birds,  even  when  not  sitting  on  them,  are  so  very  anxious  about  them,
that  on  the  least  appearance  of  an  enemy,  they  scream  out  loudly,  and  if
you  approach  the  nest,  fly  over  and  around  you,  although  always  at  a
considerable  distance.  When  you  meet  with  the  young,  v.  Inch  run  as
soon  as  they  are  hatched,  the  old  birds  manifest  the  greatest  anxiety.
They  run  before  you,  or  fly  around  you,  with  great  swiftness,  and  emit
peculiar  notes,  which  at  once  induce  their  little  ones  to  squat  among  the


AMERICAN  OYSTER-CATCHER.


18S


sand  and  broken  shells,  where,  on  account  of  their  dull  greyish-colour,  it
is  very  difficult  to  see  them  unless  you  pass  within  a foot  or  two  of  them,
when  they  run  off  emitting  a plaintive  note,  which  renders  the  parents
doubly  angry.  Their  shape  is  now  almost  round,  and  the  streaks  of
their  back  and  rump,  as  well  as  the  curved  points  of  their  bills,  might  in-
duce you  to  believe  them  to  be  any  thing  but  the  young  of  an  Oyster-
Catcher.  I have  caught  some,  which  I thought  were  more  than  a month
old,  and  yet  were  unable  to  fly,  although  full  feathered.  They  appeared
weakened  by  their  fatness,  and  were  overtaken  by  running  after  them  on  the
sands.  There  were  no  parent  birds  near  or  in  sight  of  them  ; yet  I much
doubt  if  they  procured  their  own  food  at  this  period,  and  have  more  rea-
son to  believe  that,  like  some  other  species  of  birds,  they  were  visited  and
supplied  with  food  at  particular  hours  of  the  day  or  of  the  night,  as  is  the
case  with  Herons  and  Ibises,  for  the  Oyster-Catcher  is  scarcely  nocturnal.

By  the  beginning  of  October  these  birds  return  to  the  south.  I saw
them  at  Labrador  until  the  11th  of  August,  but  cannot  say  at  what  period
they  leave  that  country.  When  wounded  while  wading  or  on  the  shore,
they  make  for  the  water,  on  which  they  float  buoyantly  and  move  with  ease.

The  flight  of  the  American  Oyster-catcher  is  powerful,  swift,  elegant
at  times,  and  greatly  protracted.  While  they  are  on  wing,  their  beau-
ties are  as  effectually  displayed  as  those  of  the  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker
of  our  woods,  the  colours  of  which  are  somewhat  similar.  The  transpa-
rent white  of  their  wings  contrasts  with  their  jetty  tips,  and  is  enriched
by  the  coral  hue  of  the  bill,  while  the  beautiful  white  of  their  lower  parts
has  a very  pleasing  effect.  Their  loud  cries,  too,  of  wheep,  wheep,  xolieeop,
which  sound  in  your  ears,  are  quite  different  from  any  you  have  heard;  and
as  they  perform  their  various  evolutions,  all  charming  in  themselves,  you
cannot,  if  unacquainted  with  the  bird,  refrain  from  asking  what  it  is  ?
Now  wheeling  with  wonderful  impetuosity,  they  pass  within  a hundred
yards  of  you,  and  suddenly  checking  their  flight  return,  not  low  over
the  waters  as  before,  but  high  in  the  air.  Again,  they  form  their  ranks
in  a broad  front,  and  again,  as  if  suddenly  alarmed  by  the  report  of  a
distant  gun,  they  close  pell-mell,  and  dip  towards  the  sands  or  the  waters.
Shoot  one  at  such  a moment,  and  you  may  expect  to  kill  another ; but
as  this  is  done,  the  wary  birds,  as  if  suddenly  become  aware  of  your  in-
tentions, form  themselves  into  a straggling  line,  and  before  a minute  has
elapsed,  far  beyond  reach,  and  fading  on  the  view,  are  the  remaining
Oyster- catchers.


184


AMERICAN  OYSTER-CATCHER.


The  gullet  of  this  species  is  capable  of  being  considerably  distended.
When  your  finger  is  introduced  into  it,  it  passes  with  ease  into  a sort  of
crop,  where  the  food  is  apparently  prepai’ed  before  entering  the  gizzard,
which  is  rather  muscular.  How  this  bird  disposes  of  the  hard  particles
of  shells,  pebbles,  and  other  matters,  with  which  its  food  is  mixed,  is  be-
yond my  comprehension,  and  one  which  I gladly  leave  for  your  solution.
Their  flesh  is  dark,  tough,  and  unfit  for  eating,  unless  in  cases  of  extreme
necessity.

The  females  and  young  are  dark  olive-brown  above,  like  the  males,
but  of  a browner  shade.  I have  represented  a male  bird.  I have  never
met  with  the  European  Oyster-catcher,  Hamatopus  Ostralegus,  in  any
part  of  the  United  States,  and,  although  I cannot  of  course  aver  that  it
does  not  occur  there,  I believe  that  the  American  or  Mantled  Oyster-
catcher  has  been  confounded  with  it  by  Wilson  and  others.  Indeed,
the  figure  given  by  Wilson  resembles  that  of  the  European  bird,  but
his  description  of  the  female  and  young  almost  agrees  with  the  present
species,  the  dimensions  also  being  nearly  the  same.


H.*matopus  palliatus,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  iL  p.  532.

Mantled  Oyster-catcher,  H.«matopus  palliatus,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  iL
p.  15.

Plate  CCXXIII.  Male  in  June.

Bill  long,  slender  but  strong,  straight,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,
towards  the  end  extremely  compressed,  terminating  in  a very  thin  wedge-
shaped  point.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  at  the  base  straight
and  slightly  sloping,  convex  beyond  the  nostrils,  then  straight  and  slop-
ing to  the  point,  the  ridge  broad  and  flattened  as  far  as  the  prominence,
afterwards  extremely  narrow,  the  sides  sloping  at  the  base,  perpendicular
towards  the  end,  the  edges  rather  sharp.  Nasal  groove  basal,  long;  nos-
trils basal,  in  the  middle  of  the  groove,  linear,  direct,  placed  nearer  the
margin  than  the  dorsal  line,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  straight,  the
dorsal  line  at  the  base  sloping  upwards,  at  one-third  of  the  length  of  the
bill  bulging,  then  straightish  and  slightly  ascending,  the  tip  narrower
than  that  of  the  upper  mandible,  the  sides  at  the  base  sloping  upwards,
and  having  a shallow  groove,  towards  the  end  becoming  perpendicular.
The  bill  differs  from  that  of  the  Hamatopus  Ostralegus  in  being  much
deeper  at  the  bulging  part,  much  more  attenuated  towards  the  point,  and
proportionally  longer.


AMERICAN  OYSTER-CATCHER.


185


Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  the  forehead  rounded.  Neck  rather
long.  Body  stout,  compact,  deeper  than  broad.  Wings  long.  Feet  of
moderate  length,  rather  stout ; tibia  bare  for  a fourth  of  its  length,  and,
like  the  slightly  compressed  tarsus,  covered  all  round  with  hexagonal
scales ; toes  rather  short  and  fleshy,  the  hind  toe  wanting,  the  second  a
little  shorter  than  the  fourth,  the  third  much  longer,  all  scaly  at  the  base
above,  scutellate  towards  the  end,  flattened  and  broad  beneath,  with  thick
margins,  which  are  covered  with  prominent  thick  scales,  and  connected
at  the  base  by  short  webs  of  which  the  outer  is  longer ; claws  small,  blunt,
rather  compressed,  that  of  the  middle  toe  largest,  and  with  a dilated  thin
inner  edge.

Plumage  of  the  head  and  neck  short,  blended,  of  the  back  compact,
and  slightly  glossed,  of  the  lower  parts  close  and  rather  blended,  the  fea^
thers  in  general  incurved,  broad,  and  rounded.  Wings  long,  acute ;
primaries  rather  narrow  and  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  second  slight-
ly shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded,
the  inner  much  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  rounded  of  twelve
rather  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  vermilion,  lighter  at  the  base.  Edges  of  eyelids  vermilion ; iris
bright  yellow.  Feet  very  pale  flesh-colour;  claws  brownish-black.  Head
and  neck  dull  black  tinged  with  bluish-grey;  lower  eyelid  white;  the
bases  of  the  feathers  on  the  chin  white.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper
parts  is  light  greyish-brown,  tinged  with  olive,  and  in  certain  lights  with
faint  reddish-purple  reflections  ; the  edge  of  the  wing,  the  tips  of  the  se-
condary coverts,  the  secondary  quills,  excepting  the  inner  elongated  ones,
pure  white ; as  are  the  breast,  sides,  under  wing-coverts,  abdomen,  sides
of  the  rump,  the  upper  and  the  lower  tail-coverts.  Basal  half  of  the  tail
white,  the  rest  greyish-brown,  like  the  back.

Length  to  end  of  tail  17|,  to  end  of  claws  19|;  wing  from  flexure
10^,  tail  ; extent  of  wings  36 ; bill  along  the  back  3|  ; along  the
edge  3| ; bill  at  the  base  at  the  deepest  part  in  the  middle  ; naked
part  of  tibia  1 ; tarsus  2^;  middle  toe  its  claw  Weight  1 lb.
4|  oz.

The  bill  varies  considerably  in  length  and  depth.  Individuals  vary
in  length  from  17  to  18  inches.


The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male.


( 186  )


THE  KITTIWAKE  GULL.

Larus  tridactylvs,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXXIV.  Adult  in  Summer,  and  Young  in  Winter.

This  beautiful  Gull  ranges,  during  the  autumnal  and  winter  months,
along  the  whole  of  our  extensive  coasts.  I have  procured  it  from  the
mouth  of  the  Mississippi  to  the  coast  of  Maine,  and  have  traced  it  from
the  latter  district  to  Labrador.  Yet  I never  saw  it  on  any  of  our  great
lakes  or  rivers,  nor  in  any  part  of  the  interior.  From  New  York  to  East-
port  it  is  extremely  abundant,  and  many  breed  on  the  Island  of  Grand
Manan,  off  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.

As  we  approached  the  famous  Gannet  Rock  of  the  Gulf  of  St  Law-
rence, the  wind  suddenly  rose  to  a gale  ; but  as  I was  exceedingly  anxious
that  a landing  should  be  effected  on  the  island,  every  exertion  was  made
to  enable  me  to  accomplish  my  purpose.  The  whale  boat  was  manned.
Thomas  Lincoln  and  my  son  leaped  into  it,  accompanied  by  young
CooLEDGE.  Urged  by  strong  pulls,  the  buoyant  boat  advanced  towards
the  grim  rock.  For  nearly  an  hour  it  became  hidden  from  my  sight ; but
now  and  then  the  report  of  a gun  brought  intimation  that  all  was  as  yet
safe ; and  at  length  I had  the  great  pleasure  of  seeing  it  advancing  to-
wards the  Ripley,  which  stood  off  and  on,  shivering  as  it  were  under  the
heavy  blast.  My  eye  fixed  to  the  telescope,  watched  every  movement  of
the  boat,  as  with  fear  I saw  it  tossed  from  billow  to  billow,  this  moment
a glimpse  of  her  keel  appearing  over  the  edge  of  a wave,  the  next  a foot
of  her  stem  only  seeming  to  float  on  the  waters.  “ Pull  steadily  on,  my
good  lads,”  at  last  came  on  my  ear,  when,  by  a heavy  surge,  the  floating
shell  was  driven  back  some  twenty  yards,  as  I thought,  and  the  ivave,
foaming  with  wrath,  broke  over  her.  Breathless  and  exhausted,  the  crew
at  length  came  within  reach  of  a line,  as  the  boat  was  dangerously  plung-
ing,  when  by  good  luck  the  rope  was  thrown  across  her,  and  in  a few  mo-
ments she  lay  snug  under  our  lee.  How  happy  was  I when  I again  saw
my  son,  my  young  companions,  and  the  sailors,  on  the  deck  of  the  Ripley.
Quickly  was  the  whaler  hauled  on  board,  and  with  joy  we  saw  our  vessel
fly  off  like  a Kittiwake  before  the  gale.

When  the  anxiety  was  over,  inquiries  were  made  as  to  the  success  of  the


KITTIWAKE  GULL.


187


adventurous  party.  Several  nests  of  the  Kittiwake  and  many  of  its  eggs
had  been  brought  safe  on  board.  Notes  had  been  taken  on  the  spot,  and
the  result  of  the  expedition  was  as  follows : — The  nests  were  found  placed
on  some  ledge  of  the  huge  rock,  so  small  as  barely  to  admit  their  breadth,
which  was  about  a foot.  They  were  placed  where  no  other  bird  than  the
Guillemot  would  have  ventured  to  drop  its  egg,  or  the  Raven  to  fix  his
nest.  Yet  on  that  narrow  platform  the  Kittiwake  sat  on  its  three  eggs,
as  unconcerned  as  if  in  a meadow.  The  nests  were  altogether  composed
of  sea^weeds  called  “ eel-grass,”  and  coarse  grasses,  probably  procured  on
the  top  of  the  rock,  or  stolen  from  the  nest  of  some  unwary  Solan  Goose.
Their  inner  surface  was  quite  flat,  although  some  of  the  nests  were  many
inches  in  thickness,  and  looked  as  if  they  had  been  increased  in  bulk  year
after  year.  The  sitting  birds  remained  on  their  eggs  with  uncommon
pertinacity,  seldom  indeed  flying  off,  but  merely  moving  aside.  The
male  birds,  or  those  that  had  no  eggs,  on  the  contrary,  were  extremely
clamorous,  flew  around  the  party  in  great  concern,  and  shewed  much  cou-
rage. The  eggs  are  of  a light  olive-green  colour,  marked  with  numerous
irregular  spots  of  dark  brown.  Their  average  length  is  two  inches  and  a
quarter,  their  greatest  breadth  one  inch  and  seven-eighths.  No  other
species  of  Gull  was  seen  about  the  rock ; and  indeed  I have  regularly  ob-
served that  each  species  of  this  genus  breeds  far  apart,  although  at  all
other  seasons  it  may  associate  with  others.

The  young  remain  a considerable  time  in  the  nest  or  about  it,  when
room  is  afforded.  Their  bills  and  feet  are  now  quite  black,  the  eye  dark,
and  they  do  not  change  these  colours  until  the  second  spring  after  their
birth,  when  the  bill  is  dull  yellow,  the  legs  and  feet  of  a greenish  flesh-
colour,  and  these  parts  gradually  improve  in  their  tints  until  they  acquire
the  appearance  represented  in  the  plate.  This  species  raises  only  one
brood  in  the  season,  and  old  and  young  leave  the  coast  of  Labrador  at
the  first  appearance  of  winter,  or  when  the  Ivory  Gull  reaches  that  coun-
try. This,  however,  I know  only  from  hearsay,  having  received  the  in-
formation from  a settler  at  Bras  d’Or,  who  has  lived  there  many  years,
and  must  know  something  of  both  species,  as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  salt-
ing  young  Kittiwakes  for  winter  provisions,  along  with  those  of  other  spe-
cies, and  of  shooting  the  Ivory  Gull  when  it  arrived  over  his  harbour  in
the  month  of  December.

The  Kittiwake  is  on  land  the  most  awkward  of  its  tribe ; and,  although
it  walks  often  on  the  rocks,  its  gait  manifests  a waddling  gaucherie;  but


188


KITTIVV  AKE  GULL.


on  the  water,  or  in  the  air,  few  birds  surpass  it  in  buoyancy,  grace,  and
ease  of  motion.  Bearing  up  against  the  heaviest  gale,  it  passes  from  one
trough  of  the  sea  to  another,  as  if  anxious  to  rest  for  an  instant  under  the
lee  of  the  billows ; yet  as  these  are  seen  to  rear  their  curling  crests,  the
Gull  is  already  several  feet  above  them,  and  preparing  to  plunge  into  the
next  hollow.  While  in  our  harbour,  and  during  fine  weather,  they  seemed
to  play  with  their  companions  of  other  species.  Now  with  a spiral  curve,
they  descend  toward  the  water,  support  themselves  by  beats  of  their  wings,
decline  their  heads,  and  pick  up  a young  herring  or  some  bit  of  garbage,
when  away  they  fly,  chased  perhaps  by  several  others  anxious  to  rob  them
of  the  prize.  Noon  has  arrived.  High  above  the  mast-head  of  our  tall-
est man-of-war,  the  Kittiwakes  float  gracefully  in  wide  circles,  until  all,
as  if  fatigued,  sail  downward  again  with  common  accord  towards  the
transparent  deep,  and,  alighting  close  to  each  other,  seem  to  ride  safely  at
anchor.  There  they  now  occupy  themselves  in  cleaning  and  arranging
their  beautiful  plumage.

The  food  of  this  species  consists  of  small  fish,  sea  insects,  and  small
bivalves,  most  of  which  they  procure  while  on  wing,  even  those  left  dry
by  the  tide.  Unlike  the  larger  species,  they  do  not  take  up  shell-fish  to
break  them  by  letting  them  fall  on  the  rocks ; at  least  I never  saw  them
do  so.  Their  principal  enemies  are  different  species  of  Lestris,  especially
that  beautiful  one  named  the  L.  parasiticus.  This  tormentor  follows  the
Kittiwake  to  the  very  waters  around  the  Gulf  of  Florida  during  the
winter.  There  with  astonishing  swiftness,  and  an  audacity  scarcely  to  be
surpassed,  it  gives  chase  to  the  Gull,  overtakes  it,  and  forces  it  to  alight
on  the  water,  or  to  disgorge  the  fish  which  it  has  just  swallowed.

The  two  represented  in  the  plate  were  drawn  at  Boston,  at  the  ap-
proach of  spring,  when  the  old  birds  had  already  assumed  the  pure  white
of  the  head.  This  species  was  so  abundant  on  several  of  the  islands  of
the  Bay  of  Boston,  that  several  basketfuls  of  them  were  procured  in  the
course  of  a few  excursions.  When  one  fell  to  the  water,  the  rest  would
hover  about  and  around  the  boat,  until  many  were  shot  from  a flock.
The  case  was  the  same,  while  we  were  in  some  of  the  harbours  of  Labra-
dor.


KITTIWAKE  GULL.


189


Labus  teidactylus,  Lath.  lud.  Ornith.  voL  ii.  p.  81? — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  359 — Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  423.

Kittiwake  Gull,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  298.


Adult  in  Summer.  CCXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  strong,  nearly  straight,  compressed.  Up-
per mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  and  slightly  declinate,
until  towards  the  end,  when  it  is  decurved,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides
slightly  convex,  the  edges  a little  inflected,  straight,  towards  the  end
declinate  and  arched,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  narrow,  rather
long ; nostril  in  its  fore  part,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,  wider  ante-
riorly, open,  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  a slight  prominence
at  the  end  of  the  angle,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  then
nearly  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and
inflected.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  anteriorly  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate
length.  Body  rather  full.  Wings  long.  Feet  of  moderate  length  rather
strong;  tibia  bare  below;  tarsus  somewhat  compressed,  covered  before
and  behind  with  numerous  broad  scutella,  the  sides  reticulated ; hind  toe
rudimentary,  with  a minute  knob  in  place  of  the  claw  ; the  fore  toes
rather  long  and  slender,  the  fourth  longer  than  the  second,  all  scutellate
above,  and  connected  by  reticulated  entire  membranes,  the  lateral  toes
margined  externally  with  a narrow  membrane.  Claws  small,  compressed,
slightly  arched,  rather  obtuse.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  very  soft  and  blended,  on  the
back  somewhat  compact.  Wings  very  long,  rather  broad,  acute,  the  first
quill  longest,  the  other  primaries  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  broad
and  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  narrow.  Tail  of  moderate  length,
even,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  pale  greenish-yellow.  Edges  of  eyelids  crimson ; iris  i-eddish-
brown.  Feet  black.  The  head,  neck,  rump,  tail,  and  lower  parts  gene-
rally are  pure  white.  The  back  and  upper  surface  of  the  wings  light
pearl-grey.  The  first  five  quills  are  black  at  the  end,  the  first  on  its  outer
web  also,  the  fifth  with  a small  white  tip,  the  tips  of  all  the  other  quilhs
more  or  less  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18  inches,  to  end  of  wings  20,  to  end  of  claws  17 ;
extent  of  wings  36^  ; vring  from  flexure  12,  tail  7 ; bill  along  the  back  1^,


190


KITTIWAKE  GULL.


along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2^®^  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  1^,  its
claw  /g.  Weight  lb.

Young  bird  in  January.  Plate  CCXXIV.  Fig.  2.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Edges  of  eyelids  and  iris  as  in  the  adult.  The
hind  head  and  neck  are  bluish-grey,  and  before  the  eye  there  is  a semi-
lunar blackish  mark,  the  tips  of  the  auriculars  also  dark  grey.  Forehead,
sides  of  the  head,  throat,  and  lower  parts,  white,  as  is  the  rump.  Tail
white,  with  a broad  terminal  band  of  black,  the  outer  feather  having  only
a spot  on  the  inner  web.  The  mantle  is  bluish-grey,  but  a broad  band
of  black  crosses  the  lower  part  of  the  hind  neck,  and  the  larger  wing-
coverts  are  of  the  same  colour  towards  the  end.  The  primary  quills  are
black,  more  or  less  margined  with  white  internally.

Length  to  end  of  tail  17  inches,  to  end  of  wings  19,  to  end  of  claws  17 ;
extent  of  wings  S6^%.  Weight  14<^  oz.


( 19J-  )


THE  KILDEER  PLOVER

ChARADBIUS  VOCIFERUS,  WiLS.

PLATE  CCXV.  Male  and  Female.

Reader,  suppose  yourself  wandering  over  some  extensive  prairie,  far
beyond  the  western  shores  of  the  Mississippi.  While  your  wearied  limbs
and  drooping  spirits  remind  you  of  the  necessity  of  repose  and  food,  you
see  the  moon’s  silvery  rays  glitter  on  the  dews  that  have  already  clothed  the
tall  grass  around  you.  Your  footsteps,  be  they  ever  so  light,  strike  the
ear  of  the  watchful  Kildeer,  who,  with  a velocity  scarcely  surpassed  by
that  of  any  other  bird,  comes  up,  and  is  now  passing  and  repassing  swiftly
around  you.  His  clear  notes  indicate  his  alarm,  and  seem  to  demand  why
you  are  there.  To  see  him  is  now  impossible,  for  a cloud  has  shrouded
the  moon  ; but  on  your  left  and  right,  before  and  behind,  his  continued
vociferations  intimate  how  glad  he  would  be  to  see  you  depart  from  his
beloved  hunting-grounds.  Nay,  be  not  surprised  if  he  should  follow  you
until  his  eyes,  meeting  the  glaring  light  of  a woodsman  traveller,  he  will
wheel  off  and  bid  you  adieu.

The  Kildeer’s  large  eyes  seem  to  be  given'it  to  enable  it  to  feed  by
night  as  well  as  by  day.  At  any  time  after  the  breeding  season,  this
species  moves  in  loose  flocks,  seldom  exceeding  ten  or  fifteen  individuals,
which  disperse  over  the  space  of  an  acre  or  two  of  ground.  Yet  some  one
of  them  always  acts  as  a sentinel,  for  standing  erect  to  the  full  stretch  of
its  legs,  it  carefully  watches  all  the  moving  objects  around,  as  far  as  its
eye  can  reach.  Cows,  horses,  or  sheep  are  none  of  its  enemies,  and  among
them  it  will  seek  for  food ; but  let  a man,  or  a dog,  or  any  other  animal
bent  on  destruction,  shew  himself,  and  that  instant  the  bird  runs  swiftly
with  a querulous  note,  and  should  any  of  these  his  enemies  evince  the
least  disposition  to  molest  it,  its  beautiful  wings  and  tail  are  spread,  and
away  it  goes,  cheerily  calling  to  its  companions  to  follow.

The  Kildeer  is  by  most  people  called  a “ noisy  bird  and  restless.”
Now  to  me  it  is  any  thing  but  this,  unless  indeed  when  it  is  disturbed  by
the  approach  or  appearance  of  its  enemies,  more  particularly  man,  of
whom  indeed  few  wild  birds  are  fond.  Watch  them  from  under  some


192


KILDEER  PLOVER.


cover  that  completely  conceals  you,  and  you  will  see  them  peaceably  and
silently  follow  their  avocations  for  hours.  In  this  respect  the  Kildeer
resembles  _ the  Lapwing  of  Europe,  which  is  also  called  a restless  and
noisy  bird,  because  men  and  dogs  are  ever  in  pursuit  of  the  poor  thing,
which  after  all  its  vigilance  often  falls  a prey  to  the  sportsman,  who  con-
demns it  merely  because  it  endeavours  to  draw  him  from  its  nest  or  young.
During  winter,  when  undisturbed,  the  Kildeer  is  in  fact  an  unusually  silent
bird.  In  Louisiana,  where  it  breeds  and  resides  at  all  seasons,  it  has  ob-
tained the  name  of  “ Piallard,”  so  strongly  rooted  are  old  prejudices.

The  Kildeer,  or  more  properly  “ Kildee,”  so  named  on  account  of  its
note,  which  may  be  imitated  by  the  syllables  kildee,  Mldee,  dee,  dee,  dee,
appear  in  much  greater  numbers  in  the  interior  than  along  the  coast.
Few  are  seen  in  the  State  of  Maine ; none,  I believe,  in  Nova  Scotia,  any
more  than  in  Newfoundland  or  Labrador.  Inland,  however,  these  birds
remove  to  a great  distance  north.  Unless  during  winter,  in  fact,  this
species  is  not  wont  to  approach  the  shores  of  the  sea,  but  prefers  the
newly  ploughed  fields,  the  banks  of  clear  rivers,  or  the  elevated  worn-
out  grounds  of  the  interior.  Few  winter  to  the  east  of  Boston,  while  du-
ring the  cold  season  they  abound  in  the  Southern  States,  although  thou-
sands spend  the  most  rigorous  months  in  the  Western  Country.  In  the
Floridas,  Georgia,  and  South  Carolina,  you  find  them  dispersed  through
the  sugar,  cotton  and  rice  fields  ; and  now  they  are  so  gentle  and  so  silent,
that  you  can  hardly  conceive  why  they  should  be  called  noisy  birds.
Around  the  pools,  upon  the  marshes,  and  along  the  oyster-beds  at  low
tides,  as  well  as  on  the  extensive  mud  -flats,  you  will  then  meet  with  them
diligently  searching  for  food,  and  not  neglecting  to  watch  you  with  dis-
trust. Even  in  the  corn-fields  and  in  company  with  Doves  and  Grakles,
or  by  the  side  of  some  strolling  Partridge,  you  may  now  and  then  spy
the  Kildeer.  At  this  period  I have  sometimes  got  so  near  to  it  that  I
could  clearly  see  the  pale  red  margin  of  its  beautiful  eye.  The  bird
would  perhaps  run  a few  steps,  when  suddenly  checking  its  course,  it  would
stand  still,  erect  and  rigid.  Should  I level  my  gun  in  jest,  he  would  that
instant  fly  off  low  over  the  ground,  removing  to  the  distance  of  a hundred
yards,  alight  running  as  it  were,  advance  twenty  or  thirty  steps  more,
and  then  stand  still.  I would  now  again  approach  it  as  before-  Never
try  it  the  third  time.  Reader,  the  Kildeer  will  denounce  you  as  an  enemy.
It  will  stretch  its  wings,  fly  across  a river  or  field,  and  leave  you  to  amuse
yourself  as  you  mav.  Many  a time  have  I been  thus  treated.


KILDEER  PLOVER,


193


The  flight  of  the  Kildeer  is  strong  and  rapid,  and  is  at  times  pro-
tracted to  a great  distance.  It  skims  quite  low  over  the  ground,  or  plays
at  a great  height  in  the  air,  particularly  during  the  love  season,  when
you  may  see  these  birds  performing  all  sorts  of  evolutions  on  wing.  On
the  ground  their  speed  is  such  that  it  has  become  proverbial,  and  to  “ run
like  a Kildee,”  is  to  move  with  the  utmost  possible  agility.  Their  ordi-
nary posture  when  standing,  might  be  called  stiflP,  were  they  not  so  beau-
tiful in  form  and  colouring.  When  pursued  over  a large  space,  they
are  able  to  lead  you  from  one  spot  to  another  more  than  twenty  times  in
the  course  of  an  hour ; and  the  more  you  follow  them,  the  more  shy  do
they  become,  until  wearied  and  hungry,  as  the  fox  said  of  the  grapes,
you  will  probably  begin  to  think  them  poor  and  insipid  after  all.

Now  you  see  the  Kildee  wading  in  the  water,  and  observe  how  it
splashes  it  about.  Down  it  lays  itself,  and  with  fluttering  wings,  seems
to  enjoy  the  sight  of  the  drops  trickling  over  its  silky  back.  Now  drip-
ping and  almost  soaked  to  the  skin,  it  retires  to  the  warm  earth,  to  dry
its  plumage  and  clear  it  of  insects.

This  species  breeds  in  Louisiana  about  the  beginning  of  April ; in  the
Middle  States  a full  month  later,  as  well  as  in  the  Western  Country  and
farther  north.  Not  one,  however,  has  ever  been  found  breeding  in  the
low  lands  of  South  Carolina,  although  these  birds  remain  there  until  the
beginning  of  May.  The  nests  are  various,  some  being  merely  a hollow
scooped  in  the  bare  ground,  while  at  other  times  the  Kildee  searches  for
a place  on  the  edge  of  a pond,  forms  a hollow,  and  constructs  a nest  of
grass,  at  the  foot  of  a thick  bunch  of  plants.  Now  and  then  small
pebbles  and  fragments  of  shells  are  raised  in  the  form  ^of  a rim  around
the  eggs,  on  which  the  sitting  bird  is  seen  as  if  elevated  two  or  three
inches.  Wilson  saw  nests  of  this  kind  ; so  have  I ; and  the  circumstance
appeared  as  strange  to  me  as  that  of  the  birds  not  breeding  in  the  low
lands  of  the  Carolinas.  The  eggs  are  almost  always  four,  pyi'iform,  well
pointed  at  the  small  end,  an  inch  and  five-eighths  in  length,  an  inch  and
one  eighth  in  diameter  at  the  broadest  part,  and  of  a deep  cream  colour,
pretty  generally  marked  all  over  with  small  irregular  blotches  of  purplish-
brown  and  black.  The  young,  as  soon  as  hatched,  run  about.  At  this
period,  or  during  incubation,  the  parents,  who  sit  alternately  on  the  eggs,
never  leaving  them  to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  are  extremely  clamorous  at
sight  of  an  enemy.  The  female  droops  her  wings,  emits  her  plaintive
notes,  and  endeavours  bv  every  means  she  can  devise  to  draw  you  from


VOL.  m.


N


194


KILDEER  PLOVER.


the  nest  or  young.  The  male  dashes  over  you  in  the  air,  in  the  man-
ner of  the  European  Lapwing,  and  vociferates  all  the  remonstrances  of
an  angry  parent  whose  family  is  endangered.  If  you  cannot  find  pity
for  the  poor  birds  at  such  a time,  you  may  take  up  their  eggs  and  see  their
distress ; but  if  you  be  at  all  so  tender-hearted  as  I would  wish  you  to
be,  it  will  be  quite  unnecessary  for  me  to  recommend  mercy  !

Few  Plovers  with  which  I am  acquainted,  acquire  their  full  plumage
sooner  than  this  species.  Before  December  you  can  observe  no  difference
between  the  young  birds  and  their  parents ; nay  by  this  time,  like  most
other  species,  the  former  are  as  fully  able  to  fly  as  at  any  other  period.

While  I was  residing  in  Pennsylvania,  the  son  of  my  tenant  the  mil-
ler was  in  the  habit  of  catching  newly-hatched  birds  of  every  sort,  to
bait  his  fish-hooks.  I had  rather  peremptorily  remonstrated  against  this
barbarous  practice,  although,  I believe,  without  effect.  One  morning  I
met  him  returning  from  the  shores  of  the  Perkioming  Creek,  with  his  hat
full  of  young  Kildees.  He  endeavoured  to  avoid  me,  but  I made  direct-
ly up  to  him,  peeped  into  his  hat  and  saw  the  birds.  On  this  I begged
of  him  to  go  back  and  restore  the  poor  things  to  their  parents,  which  he
reluctantly  did.  Never  had  I felt  more  happy  than  I did  when  I saw
the  young  Plovers  run  off  and  hide  under  cover  of  the  stones.

The  Kildee  seems  to  be  remarkably  attached  to  certain  localities  at
particular  periods.  Whilst  at  General  Hernandez’s  in  East  Florida,  I
accidentally  wounded  one  near  a barn  on  the  plantation  of  my  accomplish-
ed host.  Yet  it  returned  to  the  same  spot  for  the  ten  days  that  I re-
mained there,  although  it  always  flew  off'  when  I approached  it.

The  food  of  this  species  consists  of  earth-worms,  grass-hoppers,
crickets,  and  coleopterous  insects,  as  well  as  small  Crustacea,  whether  of
salt  or  fresh  water,  and  snails.  Now  and  then  they  may  be  seen  thrust-
ing their  bills  into  the  mud  about  oysters,  in  search  of  some  other  food.
During  autumn,  they  run  about  the  old  fields  and  catch  an  insect  which
the  Blue  Bird  has  been  watching  with  anxious  care  from  the  top  of  a
withering  mullein  stalk.  They  run  briskly  after  the  ploughman,  to  pick
up  the  worms  that  have  been  turned  out  of  their  burrows.  Now  stand-
ing on  the  grassy  meadow,  after  a shower,  you  see  them  patting  the  moist
ground,  to  force  out  its  inhabitants.  During  winter,  you  meet  with  them
on  elevated  ground,  or  along  the  margins  of  the  rivers ; but  wherever
you  observe  one  about  to  pick  up  its  food,  you  clearly  see  its  body  mov-
ing in  a see-saw  manner  on  the  joints  of  the  legs,  until  the  former  being


KILDEER  PLOVER.


195


so  placed  that  the  bill  can  reach  the  ground,  the  object  is  seized,  and  the
usual  horizontal  position  is  resumed.

The  flesh  of  the  Kildee  is  generally  indifferent,  unless  in  early  autumn,
when  the  young  birds  of  that  season  are  fat,  juicy  and  tender.  At  all
seasons  of  the  year,  the  Kildee  is  however  shot  by  inexperienced  sports-
men, and  many  of  these  birds  are  offered  for  sale  in  our  markets.  Little
difference  is  observed  at  any  period  in  the  plumage  of  the  adult  birds.


Charadrius  vociferus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  253 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.

p.  742 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States  p.  297- — Swains.

and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  368.

Kildeer  Plover,  Charadrius  vociferus,  Wits.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  73.
pi.  59.  fig.  6. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  22.

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCXXV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  straight,  somewhat  cylindrical.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight  for  two-thirds  of  its  length,  then
bulging  a little  and  curving  to  the  tip,  which  is  rather  acute,  the  sides
flat  and  sloping  at  the  base,  convex  towards  the  end,  where  the  edges  are
sharp  and  inclinate.  Nasal  groove  extended  along  two-thirds  of  the
mandible,  filled  with  a bare  membrane  ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  in  the  lower
part  of  the  membrane,  open,  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  long,  narrow,  but  rounded,  the  sides  at  the  base  sloping  outwards
and  flat,  the  dorsal  line  ascending  and  slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp
and  involute  towards  the  narrow  tip.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  rather  compressed,  the  forehead
rounded.  Eyes  large.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  ovate,  rather  slender.
Wings  long.  Feet  long,  slender;  tibia  bare  a considerable  way  above
the  joint ; tarsus  rather  compressed,  covered  all  round  with  reticulated
hexagonal  scales ; toes  slender ; the  hind  toe  wanting ; third  or  middle
toe  longest,  outer  toe  considerably  longer  than  inner,  all  scutellate  above
and  marginate,  the  outer  connected  with  the  middle  toe  by  a membrane
as  far  as  the  second  joint ; claws  small,  compressed,  slender  but  obtuse  at
the  end,  the  inner  edge  of  the  middle  claw  slightly  dilated.

Plumage  soft  and  blended ; the  feathers  rounded,  those  of  the  back
somewhat  distinct.  Wings  long  and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,
the  first  longest,  the  second  a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ;
inner  secondaries  tapering  and  elongated,  so  as  nearly  to  equal  the  longest

N 2


196


KILDEER  PLOVER.


primaries.  Tail  rather  long,  much  rounded  or  graduated,  of  twelve  rather
broad  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Edges  of  eyelids  bright  red  ; iris  dark  brown.  Feet
light  greyish-blue,  the  hind  part  of  the  tarsus  pale  flesh  colour.  Upper
part  of  the  head,  the  back,  the  smaller  wing-coverts,  and  the  secondary
quills,  yellowish-brown.  Lower  parts  white.  A brown  bar  over  the
lower  part  of  the  forehead,  and  passing  under  the  eye  to  the  occiput ;
over  this  a white  band  on  the  forehead,  surmounted  by  a brownish-black
band  between  the  eyes ; behind  the  eyes  also  a short  white  band,  ending
in  light  red.  The  middle  of  the  neck  is  encircled  with  a broad  brownish-
black  collar,  and  on  its  lower  part  anteriorly  between  the  wings  is  a nar-
rower band  of  the  same  colour.  Primaries  brownish-black,  each  with  a
white  mark,  linear  on  the  outer,  enlarging  on  the  inner  quills.  Seconda-
ries, excepting  the  inner,  white,  but  most  of  them  with  a large  patch  of
blackish-brown  towards  the  end ; their  tips  and  those  of  most  of  the  pri-
maries white,  as  are  those  of  the  primary  and  secondary  coverts.  Rump
and  upper  tail-coverts  bright  yellowish-red.  Tail-feathers  of  the  same
colour  at  the  base,  the  middle  feathers  brown,  all  with  a broad  subtermi-
nal band  of  black,  the  tips  white,  those  of  the  four  middle  feathers  pale
reddish  ; the  outer  feather  on  each  side  white,  with  three  black  bands  on
the  inner  web.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10  inches,  to  end  of  wings  9,  to  end  of  claws  9| ;
extent  of  wings  20 ; wing  from  flexure  ; tail  4 ; bill  along  the  back
along  the  edge  tarsus  1/g  ; middle  toe  its  claw  Weight
5|  ounces.

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  CCXXV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  Male.


( 197  )


THE  WHITE  PERCH  AND  ITS  FAVOURITE

BAIT.

No  sooner  have  the  overflowing  waters  of  early  spring  subsided  within
their  banks,  and  the  temperature  become  pleasant,  than  the  trees  of  our
woods  are  seen  to  unfold  their  buds  and  blossoms,  and  the  White  Perch,
which  during  the  winter  has  lived  in  the  ocean,  rushes  up  our  streams,
to  seek  the  well-known  haunts  in  which  it  last  year  deposited  its  spawn.
With  unabatinff  vigour  it  ascends  the  turbulent  current  of  the  Missis-
sippi,  of  which,  however,  the  waters  are  too  muddy  to  suit  its  habits ; and
glad  no  doubt  is  it  to  enter  one  of  the  numberless  tributaries  whose  limpid
waters  are  poured  into  the  mighty  river.  Of  these  subsidiary  waters
the  Ohio  is  one  in  whose  pure  stream  the  White  Perch  seems  to  delight ;
and  towards  its  head  springs  the  fish  advances  in  numerous  shoals,  follow-
ing the  banks  with  easy  progress.  Over  many  a pebbly  or  gravelly  bar
does  it  seek  its  food.  Here  the  crawling  mussel  it  crunches  and  devours ;
there,  with  the  speed  of  an  arrow,  it  darts  upon  the  minnow ; again,  at
the  edge  of  a shelving  rock,  or  by  the  side  of  a stone,  it  secures  a cray-
fish. No  impure  food  will  “ the  Growler”  touch  ; therefore,  reader,  never
make  use  of  such  to  allure  it,  otherwise  not  only  will  your  time  be  lost,
but  you  will  not  enjoy  the  gratification  of  tasting  this  delicious  fish.
Should  you  have  no  experience  in  fishing  for  perch,  I would  recommend
to  you  to  watch  the  men  you  see  on  that  shore,  for  they  are  excellent
anglers.

Smooth  are  the  waters,  clear  is  the  sky,  and  gently  does  the  stream
move, — perhaps  its  velocity  does  not  exceed  a mile  in  the  hour.  Silence
reigns  around  you.  See,  each  fisher  has  a basket  or  calabash,  containing
many  a live  cray  ; and  each  line,  as  thick  as  a crow  quill,  measures  scarce
a furlong.  At  one  end  two  perch  hooks  are  so  fastened  that  they  cannot
interfere  with  each  other.  A few  inches  below  the  reaching  point  of  the
farthest  hook,  the  sinker,  perhaps  a quarter  of  a pound  in  weight,  having
a hole  bored  through  its  length,  is  passed  upon  the  line,  and  there  secured
by  a stout  knot  at  its  lower  extremity.  The  other  end  of  the  line  is  fas-
tened ashore.  The  tackle,  you  observe,  is  carefully  coiled  on  the  sand  at
the  fisher’s  feet.  Now  on  each  hook  he  fixes  a cray-fish,  piercing  the  shell
beneath  the  tail,  and  forcing  the  keen  weapon  to  reach  the  very  head  of


198


WHITE  PERCH  AND  ITS  FAVOURITE  BAIT.


the  suffering  creature,  while  all  its  legs  are  left  at  liberty  to  move.  Now,
each  man,  holding  his  line  a yard  or  so  from  the  hooks,  whirls  it  several
times  overhead,  and  sends  it  off  to  its  full  length  directly  across  the
stream.  No  sooner  has  it  reached  the  gravelly  bed,  than  gently  urged
by  the  current,  it  rolls  over  and  over,  until  it  is  nearly  in  the  line  of  the
water.  Before  this,  however,  I see  that  several  of  the  men  have  had  a
bite,  and  that  by  a short  jerk  they  have  hooked  the  fish.  Hand  over
hand  they  haul  in  their  lines.  Poor  perch,  it  is  useless  labour  for  thee  to
flounce  and  splash  in  that  manner,  for  no  pity  will  be  shewn  thee,  and
thou  shalt  be  dashed  on  the  sand,  and  left  there  to  quiver  in  the  agonies
of  death.  The  lines  are  within  a few  yards  of  being  in.  I see  the  fish
gasping  on  its  side.  Ah  ! there  are  two  on  this  line,  both  good  ; on  most
of  the  others  there  is  one  ; but  I see  some  of  the  lines  have  been  robbed
by  some  cunning  inhabitant  of  the  water.  What  beautiful  fishes  these
perches  are  ! so  silvery  beneath,  so  deeply  coloured  above  ! What  a fine
eye  too  ! But,  friend,  I cannot  endure  their  gaspings.  Pray  put  them
on  this  short  line,  and  place  them  in  the  water  beside  you,  until  you  pre-
pare to  go  home.  In  a few  hours  each  fisher  has  obtained  as  many  a,s  he
wishes.  He  rolls  up  his  line,  fastens  five  or  six  perches  on  each  side  of
his  saddle,  mounts  his  horse,  and  merrily  \vends  his  way.

In  this  manner  the  White  Perch  is  caught  along  the  sandy  banks  of
the  Ohio,  from  its  mouth  to  its  source.  In  many  parts  above  Louisville
some  fishers  prefer  using  the  trot-line,  which,  however,  ought  to  be  placed
upon,  or  very  little  above,  the  bottom  of  the  stream.  When  this  kind  of
line  is  employed,  its  hooks  are  more  frequently  baited  with  mussels  than
with  cray-fish,  the  latter  being  perhaps  not  so  easily  procured  there  as  far-
ther down  the  stream.  Great  numbers  of  perches  are  also  caught  in  seines,
especially  during  a transient  rise  of  the  water.  Few  persons  fish  for  them
with  the  pole,  as  they  generally  prefer  following  the  edges  of  the  sand-
bars next  to  deep  water.  Like  all  others  of  its  tribe,  the  White  Perch
is  fond  of  depositing  its  spawn  on  gravelly  or  sandy  beds,  but  rarely  at  a
depth  of  less  than  four  or  five  feet.  These  beds  are  round,  and  have  an
elevated  margin  formed  of  the  sand  removed  from  their  centre,  which  is
scooped  out  for  two  or  three  inches.  The  fish,  although  it  generally  re-
mains for  some  days  over  its  treasure,  is  by  no  means  so  careful  of  it  as
the  little  sunny,  but  starts  off*  at  the  least  appearance  of  danger.  I have
more  than  once  taken  considerable  pleasure  in  floating  over  their  beds,
when  the  water  was  sufficiently  clear  to  admit  of  mv  seeing  both  the  fish


WHITE  PERCH  AND  ITS  FAVOURITE  BAIT.


199


and  its  place  of  deposit ; but  I observed  that  if  the  sun  was  shining,  the
very  sight  of  the  boat’s  shadow  drove  the  perches  away.  I am  of  opinion
that  most  of  them  return  to  the  sea  about  the  beginning  of  November ;
but  of  this  I am  not  certain.

The  usual  length  of  this  fish,  which  on  the  Ohio  is  called  the  White
Perch,  and  in  the  State  of  New  Y ork  the  Growler,  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty
inches.  I have,  however,  seen  some  considerably  larger.  The  weight
varies  from  a pound  and  a half  to  four,  and  even  six  pounds.  For  the
first  six  weeks  of  their  arrival  in  fresh  water  streams  they  are  in  season  ;
the  flesh  is  then  white  and  firm,  and  affords  excellent  eating ; but  during
the  heats  of  summer,  they  become  poor,  and  are  seldom  very  good.  Now
and  then,  in  the  latter  days  of  September,  I have  eaten  some  that  tasted
as  well  as  in  spring.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  habits  of  this  fish  is
that  from  which  it  has  received  the  name  of  Growler.  When  poised  in
the  water,  close  to  the  bottom  of  a boat,  it  emits  a rough  croaking  noise,
somewhat  resembling  a groan.  Whenever  this  sound  is  heard  under  a
boat,  if  the  least  disturbance  is  made  by  knocking  on  the  gunwale  or  bot-
tom, it  at  once  ceases;  but  is  renewed  when  every  thing  is  quiet.  It  is
seldom  heard,  however,  unless  in  fine  calm  weather.

The  White  Perch  bites  at  the  hook  with  considerable  care,  and  very
frequently  takes  off*  the  bait  without  being  caught.  Indeed,  it  requires  a
good  deal  of  dexterity  to  hook  it,  for  if  this  is  not  done  the  first  time  it
touches  the  bait,  you  rarely  succeed  afterwards ; and  I have  seen  young
hands  at  the  game,  who,  in  the  course  of  a morning,  seldom  caught  more
than  one  or  two,  although  they  lost  perhaps  twenty  crays.  But,  now  that
I have  afforded  you  some  information  respecting  the  habits  of  the  White
Perch,  allow  me  to  say  a few  words  on  the  subject  of  its  favourite  bait.

The  Cray  is  certainly  not  a fish,  although  usually  so  styled  ; but  as
every  one  is  acquainted  with  its  form  and  nature,  I shall  not  infiict  on
you  any  disquisition  regarding  it.  It  is  a handsome  crustaceous  animal
certainly,  and  its  whole  tribe  I consider  as  dainties  of  the  first  order.  To
me  “ Ecrevisses^''  whether  of  fresh  or  of  salt  water,  stripped  of  their  coats,
and  blended  into  a soup  or  a “ gombo,”  have  always  been  most  welcome.
Boiled  or  roasted  too,  they  are  excellent  in  my  estimation,  and  mayhap  in
yours.  The  Crayfish,  of  which  I here  more  particularly  speak — for  I
shall  not  deprive  them  of  their  caudal  appendage,  lest,  like  a basha  with-
out his  tail,  they  might  .seem  of  less  consequence — are  found  most  abun-


200


WHITE  PERCH  AND  ITS  FAVOURITE  BAIT.


dantly  swimming,  crawling  at  the  bottom  or  on  shore,  or  working  at  their
muddy  burrows,  in  all  the  southern  parts  of  the  Union.  If  I mistake
not,  we  have  two  species  at  least,  one  more  an  inhabitant  of  rocky  stream-
lets than  the  other,  and  that  one  by  far  the  best,  though  the  other  is  good
too.  Both  species  swim  by  means  of  rapid  strokes  of  the  tail,  which  pro-
pel them  backwards  to  a considerable  distance  at  each  repetition.  All
that  I regret  concerning  these  animals  is,  that  they  are  absolutely  little
aquatic  vultures — or,  if  you  please,  Crustacea  with  vulturine  habits —
for  they  feed  on  every  thing  impure  that  comes  in  their  way,  when  they
cannot  obtain  fresh  aliment.  However  this  may  be,  the  Grays  somehow
fall  in  with  this  sort  of  food,  and  any  person  may  catch  as  many  as  he  may
wish,  by  fastening  a piece  of  flesh  to  a line,  allowing  it  to  remain  under
water  for  a while,  and  drawing  it  up  with  care,  when,  with  the  aid  of  a
hand-net,  he  may  bring  it  ashore  with  a few  I But  although  this  is  a
good  method  of  procuring  Cray-fish,  it  answers  only  for  those  that  live
in  running  waters.  The  form  of  these  is  delicate,  their  colour  a light
olive,  and  their  motions  in  the  water  are  very  lively.  The  others  are
larger,  of  a dark  greenish-brown,  less  active  in  the  water  than  on  land,
although  they  ai’e  most  truly  amphibious.  The  first  conceal  themselves
beneath  shelving  rocks,  stones,  or  water-plants ; the  others  form  a deep
burrow  in  the  damp  earth,  depositing  the  materials  drawn  up,  as  a man
would  do  in  digging  a well.  The  manner  in  which  they  dispose  of  the
mud  you  may  see  by  glancing  at  the  plate  of  the  White  Ibis,  in  my
third  volum.e  of  Illustrations,  where  also  you  will  find  a tolerable  portrait
of  one  of  these  creatures.

According  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  the  burrows  of  this  Crayfish
are  more  or  less  deep.  Indeed,  this  also  depends  partly  on  the  increasing
dryness  of  the  soil,  when,  influenced  by  the  heat  of  summer,  as  well  as
on  the  texture  of  the  substratum.  Thus,  in  some  places,  where  the  Cray
can  reach  the  water  after  working  a few  inches,  it  rests  contented  during
the  day,  but  crawls  out  for  food  at  night.  Should  it,  however,  be  left
dry,  it  renews  its  labour ; and  thus  while  one  burrow  may  be  only  five  or
six  inches  deep,  another  may  be  two  or  three  feet,  and  a third  even  more.
They  are  easily  procured  when  thus  lodged  in  shallow  holes ; but  when
the  burrow  is  deep,  a thread  is  used,  with  a small  piece  of  flesh  fastened
to  it.  The  Cray  eagerly  seizes  the  bait,  and  is  gently  drawn  up,  and
thrown  to  a distance,  when  he  becomes  an  easy  prey.  You  have  read  of
the  method  used  by  the  White  Ibis  in  procuring  Grays ; and  I leave  you


WHITE  PERCH  AND  ITS  FAVOURITE  BAIT.


201


to  judge  whether  the  bird  or  the  man  is  the  best  fisher.  This  species  is
most  abundant  round  the  borders  of  the  stagnant  lakes,  bayous,  or  ponds
of  the  Southern  Districts;  and  I have  seen  them  caught  even  in  the
streets  of  the  suburbs  of  New  Orleans,  after  a heavy  shower.  They  be-
come a great  pest  by  perforating  embankments  of  all  sorts,  and  many  are
the  maledictions  that  are  uttered  against  them  both  by  millers  and  plant-
ers, nay  even  by  the  overseers  of  the  levees  along  the  banks  of  the  Mis-
sissippi. But  they  are  curious  creatures,  formed  no  doubt  for  useful  pur-
poses, and  as  such  they  are  worthy  of  your  notice.


( 202  )


rv

THE  WHOOPING  CRANE.

GrUS  AMERICANA,  TeMM.

PLATE  CCXXVI.  Male.

The  variegated  foliage  of  the  woods  indicates  that  the  latter  days  of
October  have  arrived ; gloomy  clouds  spread  over  the  heavens ; the  fierce
blasts  of  the  north,  as  if  glad  to  escape  from  the  dreary  regions  of  their
nativity,  sport  in  dreadful  revelry  among  the  forests  and  glades.  Showers
of  sleet  and  snow  descend  at  intervals,  and  the  careful  husbandman  ga-
thers his  flocks,  to  drive  them  to  a place  of  shelter.  The  traveller  gladly
accepts  the  welcome  of  the  forester,  and  as  he  seats  himself  by  the  blaz-
ing fire,  looks  with  pleasure  on  the  spinning  wheels  of  the  industrious  in-
mates. The  lumberer  prepares  to  set  out  on  his  long  voyage,  the  trapper
seeks  the  retreats  of  the  industrious  beaver,  and  the  red  Indian  is  making
arrangements  for  his  winter  hunts.  The  Ducks  and  Geese  have  already
reached  the  waters  of  the  western  ponds ; here  a Swan  or  two  is  seen
following  in  their  train,  and  as  the  observer  of  nature  stands  watching
the  appearances  and  events  of  this  season  of  change,  he  hears  from  on
high  the  notes  of  the  swiftly  travelling  but  unseen  Whooping  Crane.
Suddenly  the  turbid  atmosphere  clears,  and  now  he  can  perceive  tlie
passing  birds.  Gradually  they  descend,  dress  their  extended  lines,  and
prepare  to  alight  on  the  earth.  With  necks  outstretched,  and  long  bony
legs  extended  behind,  they  proceed  supported  by  wings  white  as  the  snow
but  tipped  with  jet,  until  arriving  over  the  great  savannah  they  wheel
their  circling  flight,  and  slowly  approach  the  ground,  on  which  with  half-
closed  wings,  and  outstretched  feet  they  alight,  running  along  for  a few
steps  to  break  the  force  of  their  descent.

Reader,  see  the  majestic  bird  shake  its  feathers,  and  again  arrange
them  in  order.  Pi'oud  of  its  beautiful  form,  and  prouder  still  of  its
power  of  flight,  it  stalks  over  the  withering  grasses  with  all  the  majesty
of  a gallant  chief.  With  long  and  measured  steps  he  moves  along,  his
head  erect,  his  eye  glistening  with  delight.  His  great  journey  is  accom-
plished, and  being  well  acquainted  with  a country  which  has  often  been
visited  by  him,  he  at  once  commences  his  winter  avocations.


WHOOPING  CRANE.


203


The  Whooping  Crane  reaches  the  Western  Country  about  the  mid-
dle of  October,  or  the  beginning  of  November,  in  flocks  of  twenty  or
thirty  individuals,  sometimes  of  twice  or  thrice  that  number,  the  young
by  themselves,  but  closely  followed  by  their  parents.  They  spread  from
Illinois  over  Kentucky,  and  all  the  intermediate  States,  until  they  reach
the  Carolinas  on  the  southern  coast,  the  Floridas,  Louisiana,  and  the
countries  bordering  on  Mexico,  in  all  of  which  they  spend  the  winter,
seldom  returning  northward  until  about  the  middle  of  April,  or  towards
the  beginning  of  May.  They  are  seen  on  the  edges  of  large  ponds  sup-
plied with  rank  herbage,  on  fields  or  savannahs,  now  in  swampy  woods,
and  again  on  extensive  marshes.  The  interior  of  the  country,  and  the
neighbourhood  of  the  sea  shores,  suit  them  equally  Avell,  so  long  as  the
temperature  is’ sufficiently  high.  In  the  Middle  States,  it  is  very  seldom
indeed  that  they  are  seen ; and  to  the  eastward  of  these  countries  they  are
unknown ; for  all  their  migrations  are  performed  far  inland,  and  thus
they  leave  and  return  to  the  northern  retreats  where,  it  is  said,  they  breed
and  spend  the  summer.  While  migrating  they  appear  to  travel  both  by
night  and  by  day,  and  I have  frequently  heard  them  at  the  former,  and
seen  them  at  the  latter  time,  as  they  were  proceeding  toward  their  desti-
nation. Whether  the  weather  be  calm  or  tempestuous,  it  makes  no  dif-
ference to  them,  their  power  of  flight  being  such  as  to  render  them  re-
gardless of  the  winds.  Nay  I have  observed  them  urging  their  way  du-
ring very  heavy  gales,  shifting  from  high  to  low  in  the  air  with  remark-
able dexterity.  The  members  of  a flock  sometimes  arrange  themselves  in
the  form  of  an  acute-angled  triangle ; sometimes  they  move  in  a long
line ; again  they  mingle  together  without  order,  or  form  an  extended
front ; but  in  whatever  maimer  they  advance,  each  bird  sounds  his  loud
note  in  succession,  and  on  all  occasions  of  alarm  these  birds  manifest  the
same  habit.  While  with  us  they  are  also  always  met  with  in  flocks
But  now.  Reader,  allow  me  to  refer  to  my  journals,  whence  I shall  ex-
tract some  circumstances  relative  to  this  majestic  bird,  which  I hope  you
will  find  not  uninteresting.

Louisville^  State  of  Kentucky,  March  1810. — I had  the  gratification
of  taking  Alexander  Wilson  to  some  ponds  within  a few  miles  of
town,  and  of  shewing  him  many  birds  of  this  species,  of  which  he  had
not  previously  seen  any  other  than  stuffed  specimens.  I told  him  that
the  white  birds  were  the  adults,  and  that  the  grey  ones  were  the  young.
Wilson,  in  his  article  on  the  Whooping  Crane,  has  alluded  to  this,  but,


204


WHOOPING  CRANE.


as  on  other  occasions,  has  not  informed  his  readers  whence  the  informa-
tion came.

Henderson,  November  1810. — The  Sand  Hill  Crane  arrived  at  the
Long  Pond  on  the  28th  of  last  month.  I saw  two  flocks  of  young  ones
there,  and  one  of  adults  on  the  Slim  Pond.  Both  old  and  young  imme-
diately set  to  digging  through  the  mud,  the  rains  having  scarcely  begun  to
cover  those  places  with  water,  for  during  summer  they  become  almost  dry.
The  birds  work  very  assiduously  with  their  bills,  and  succeed  in  uncover-
ing the  large  roots  of  the  great  w'ater-lily,  which  often  run  to  a depth  of
two  or  three  feet.  Several  cranes  are  seen  in  the  same  hole,  tugging  at
roots  and  other  substances,  until  they  reach  the  object  of  their  desire,
which  they  greedily  devour.  While  thus  engaged,  they  are  easily  ap-
proached ; for  if  their  heads  are  bent  down  they  cannot  see  you,  and  un-
til they  raise  themselves  again,  to  take  notice  of  what  may  be  going  on
around  the  place,  you  may  advance  so  as  to  get  within  shot.  While  I
watched  them  at  this  v/ork,  they  were  perfectly  silent ; and  as  I lay  con-
cealed behind  a large  cypress  tree,  within  thirty  paces  of  a flock,  thus
buried,  as  it  were,  in  the  great  holes  they  had  formed,  so  as  to  put  me  in
mind  of  a parcel  of  hogs  or  bears  at  their  wallowing  spots,  I could  plainly
see  the  colour  of  their  eyes,  which  is  brown  in  the  young,  and  yellow  in
the  adult.  After  observing  them  as  long  as  I wished,  I whistled,  on  which
they  all  at  once  raised  their  heads  to  see  what  the  matter  might  be.  I
had  so  fair  an  opportunity  that  I could  not  resist  the  temptation,  espe-
cially as  several  of  the  birds  had  their  necks  so  close  together  that  I felt
confident  I must  kill  more  than  one  of  them.  Accordingly,  just  as  their
last  croaking  notes  were  heard,  and  I saw  them  preparing  to  set  to  work
again,  I fired.  Only  two  flew  up,  to  my  surprise.  They  came  down  the
pond  towards  me,  and  my  next  shot  brought  them  to  the  ground.  On
walking  to  the  hole,  I found  that  I had  disabled  seven  in  all.  Those
which  were  in  different  holes  farther  off,  all  flew  away,  uttering  loud  cries,
and  did  not  return  that  afternoon.  In  the  course  of  a week  these  birds
turned  up  the  earth,  and  dug  holes  all  over  the  dry  parts  of  the  ponds.
As  soon  as  heavy  rains  fill  the  pools,  the  Cranes  abandon  them,  and  resort
to  other  places.

Natchez,  November  1821. — The  Sand-hill  Cranes  now  resort  to  the
fields,  in  which  corn,  pease,  and  sweet  potatoes  have  been  planted,  as  well
as  to  the  cotton  plantations.  They  feed  on  the  grains  and  pease,  dig  up
the  potatoes,  which  they  devour  with  remarkable  greediness ; and  in  the


WHOOPING  CRANE.


205


wet  fields  seize  on  water  insects,  toads  and  frogs,  but  never,  I believe,
on  fishes.

Bayou  Sara,  April  12.  1822. — The  Sand-hill  Cranes  have  left  all  the
fields,  and  removed  to  the  swamps  and  inner  lakes.  I saw  some  catching
young  bull- frogs,  water-lizards,  and  water-snakes,  as  well  as  very  small
alligators.  One  struck  at  a young  snapping  turtle,  which,  however,  es-
caped. The  Wood  Ibises  and  these  birds  do  not  agree  together  ; the  lat-
ter chase  the  former  up  to  their  bellies  in  the  water.

April  16. — I saw  nine  beautiful  adult  birds  apparently  in  perfect
plumage.  They  were  round  a fallen  log,  about  twenty  yards  from  the
water,  all  very  busily  occupied  in  killing  a band  of  young  alligators,  which
had  probably  endeavoured  to  save  themselves  from  the  attacks  of  the
Cranes  by  crawling  beneath  the  sides  of  the  log.  I shot  at  them  without
much  effect,  for,  although  I believe  I wounded  two  of  them,  they  all  flew
off.  On  going  up  to  the  log,  I found  several  young  alligators,  measuring
from  seven  to  eight  inches  in  length,  apparently  dead,  with  their  heads
sadly  bruised  as  if  by  a powerful  blow.  This  led  me  to  think  that  they
kill  a number  of  animals  before  they  feed  upon  them,  as  the  Wood  Ibis
is  wont  to  do.  This  afternoon  I saw  four  of  these  young  Cranes  tearing
up  the  ground  in  search  of  cray-fish.  One  caught  a butterfly  as  it  was
fluttering  near,  and  instantly  swallowed  it.

This  species  feeds  only  during  the  day.  Besides  the  objects  which  I
have  already  mentioned,  it  now  and  then  swallows  a mole  or  a meadow-
mouse,  and  not  unfrequently,  I think,  snakes  of  considerable  length.  T
opened  one  that  had  a garter-snake,  more  than  fifteen  inches  long,  in  its
stomach.

The  wariness  of  this  species  is  so  remarkable,  that  it  takes  all  the  cun-
ning and  care  of  an  Indian  hunter  to  approach  it  at  times,  especially  in
the  case  of  an  old  bird.  The  acuteness  of  their  sight  and  hearing  is  quite
wonderful.  If  they  perceive  a man  approaching,  even  at  the  distance  of
a quarter  of  a mile,  they  are  sure  to  take  to  wing.  Should  you  acciden-
tally tread  on  a stick  and  break  it,  or  suddenly  cock  your  gun,  all  the
birds  in  the  flock  raise  their  heads  and  emit  a cry.  Shut  the  gate  of  a
field  after  you,  and  from  that  moment  they  all  watch  your  motions.  To
attempt  to  crawl  towards  them,  even  among  long  grass,  after  such  an  in-
timation, would  be  useless ; and  unless  you  lie  in  wait  for  them,  and  be
careful  to  maintain  a perfect  silence,  or  may  have  the  cover  of  some  large
trees,  heaps  of  brushwood,  or  fallen  logs,  you  may  as  well  stay  at  home.


20G


WHOOPING  CRANE.


They  generally  see  you  long  before  you  perceive  them,  and  so  long  as
they  are  aware  that  you  have  not  observed  them,  they  remain  silent ; but
the  moment  that,  by  some  inadvertency,  you  disclose  to  them  your  sense
of  their  presence,  some  of  them  sound  an  alarm.  For  my  part,  Reader,
I would  as  soon  undertake  to  catch  a deer  by  fair  running,  as  to  shoot  a
Sand-hill  Crane  that  had  observed  me.  Sometimes,  indeed,  towards  the
approach  of  spring,  when  they  are  ready  to  depart  for  their  breeding
grounds,  the  voice  of  one  will  startle  and  urge  to  flight  all  within  a mile
of  the  spot.  When  this  happens,  all  the  birds  around  join  into  a great
flock,  gradually  rise  in  a spiral  manner,  ascend  to  a vast  height,  and  sail
off  in  a straight  course.

When  wounded,  these  birds  cannot  be  approached  without  caution,  as
their  powerful  bill  is  capable  of  inflicting  a severe  wound.  Knowing  this
as  I do,  I would  counsel  any  sportsman  not  to  leave  his  gun  behind,
while  pursuing  a wounded  Crane.  One  afternoon  in  winter,  as  I was
descending  the  Mississippi,  on  my  way  to  Natchez,  I saw  several  Cranes
standing  on  a large  sand-bar.  The  sight  of  these  beautiful  birds  excited
in  me  a desire  to  procure  some  of  them.  Accordingly,  taking  a rifle  and
some  ammunition,  I left  the  flat-bottomed  boat  in  a canoe,  and  told  the
men  to  watch  for  me,  as  the  current  was  rapid  at  that  place,  the  river
being  there  narrowed  by  the  sand-bar.  I soon  paddled  myself  to  the
shore,  and  having  observed,  that,  by  good  management,  I might  approach
the  Cranes  under  cover  of  a huge  stranded  tree,  I landed  opposite  to  it,
drew  up  my  canoe,  and  laying  myself  flat  on  the  sand,  crawled  the  best
way  I could,  pushing  my  gun  before  me.  On  reaching  the  log,  I cau-
tiously raised  my  head  opposite  to  a large  branch,  and  saw  the  birds  at  a
distance  somewhat  short  of  a hundred  yards.  I took,  as  I thought,  an
excellent  aim,  although  my  anxiety  to  shew  the  boatmen  how  good  a
marksman  I was  i-endered  it  less  sure  than  it  might  otherwise  have  been.
I fired,  when  all  the  birds  instantly  flew  off  greatly  alarmed,  excepting
one  which  leaped  into  the  air,  but  immediately  came  down  again,  and
walked  leisurely  away  with  a drooping  pinion.  As  I rose  on  my  feet,  it
saw  me,  I believe,  for  the  first  time,  cried  out  lustily,  and  ran  oflp  with
the  speed  of  an  ostrich.  I left  my  rifle  unloaded,  and  in  great  haste  pur-
sued the  wounded  bird,  which  doubtless  would  have  escaped  had  it  not
made  towards  a pile  of  drift  wood,  where  I overtook  it.  As  I approached
it,  panting  and  almost  exhausted,  it  immediately  raised  itself  to  the  full
stretch  of  its  body,  legs,  and  neck,  ruffled  its  feathers,  shook  them,  and


WHOOPING  CRANE.


207


advanced  towards  me  with  open  bill,  and  eyes  glancing  with  anger.  I
cannot  tell  you  whether  it  was  from  feeling  almost  exhausted  with  the
fatigue  of  the  chase ; but,  however  it  was,  I felt  unwilling  to  encounter
my  antagonist,  and  keeping  my  eye  on  him,  moved  backwards.  The  far-
ther I removed,  the  more  he  advanced,  until  at  length  I fairly  turned  my
back  to  him,  and  took  to  my  heels,  retreating  with  fully  more  speed  than
I had  pursued.  He  followed,  and  I was  glad  to  reach  the  river,  into
which  I plunged  up  to  the  neck,  calling  out  to  my  boatmen,  who  came
up  as  fast  as  they  could.  The  Crane  stood  looking  angrily  on  me  all  the
while,  immersed  up  to  his  belly  in  the  water,  and  only  a few  yards  dis-
tant, now  and  then  making  thrusts  at  me  with  his  bill.  There  he  stood
until  the  people  came  up ; and  highly  delighted  they  were  with  my  situa-
tion. However,  the  battle  was  soon  over,  for,  on  landing,  some  of  them
struck  the  winged  warrior  on  the  neck  with  an  oar,  and  we  carried  him
on  board.

While  in  the  Floridas,  I saw  only  a few  of  these  birds  alive,  but  many
which  had  been  shot  by  the  Spaniards  and  Indians,  for  the  sake  of  their
flesh  and  beautiful  feathers,  of  which  latter  they  make  fans  and  fly-
brushes.  None  of  these  birds  remain  there  during  summer;  and  Wil-
liam Bartram,  when  speaking  of  this  species,  must  have  mistaken  the
Wood  Ibis  for  it.

The  young  are  considerably  more  numerous  than  the  old  white  birds  ;
and  this  circumstance  has  probably  led  to  the  belief  among  naturalists
that  the  former  constitute  a distinct  species,  to  which  the  name  of  Canada
Crane,  Grus  canadensis,  has  been  given.  This,  however,  I hope,  I shall
be  able  to  clear  up  to  your  satisfaction.  In  the  mean  time,  I shall  con-
tinue my  remarks.

According  to  circumstances,  this  species  roosts  either  on  the  ground
or  on  high  trees.  In  the  latter  case,  they  leave  their  feeding-ground
about  an  hour  before  sun-set,  and  going  off  in  silence,  proceed  towards
the  interior  of  high  land  forests,  where  they  alight  on  the  largest  branches
of  lofty  trees,  six  or  seven  settling  on  the  same  branch.  For  half  an
hour  or  so,  they  usually  dress  their  plumage,  standing  erect : but  after-
wards they  crouch  in  the  manner  of  Wild  Turkeys.  In  this  situation
they  are  sometimes  shot  by  moonlight.  Those  which  resort  to  planta-
tions, situated  in  the  vicinity  of  large  marshes,  covered  with  tall  grasses,
cat’s  tails,  and  other  plants,  spend  the  night  on  some  hillock,  standing  on
one  leg,  the  other  being  drawn  under  the  body,  whilst  the  head  is  thrust


20S


WHOOPING  CRANK.


beneath  the  broad  feathers  of  the  shoulder.  In  returning  towards  the
feeding  grounds,  they  all  emit  their  usual  note,  but  in  a very  low  under-
tone, leaving  their  roost  at  an  earlier  or  later  hour,  according  to  the  state
of  the  weather.  When  it  is  cold  and  clear,  they  start  very  early  ; but
when  warm  and  rainy,  not  until  late  in  the  morning.  Their  motions  to-
ward night  are  determined  by  the  same  circumstances.  They  rise  easily
from  the  ground  after  running  a few  steps,  fly  low  for  thirty  or  forty
yards,  then  rise  in  circles,  crossing  each  other  in  their  windings,  like  Vul-
tures, Ibises,  and  some  other  birds.  If  startled  or  shot  at,  they  utter
loud  and  piercing  cries.  These  cries,  which  I cannot  compare  to  the
sounds  of  any  instrument  known  to  me,  I have  heard  at  the  distance  of
three  miles,  at  the  approach  of  spring,  when  the  males  were  paying  their
addresses  to  the  females,  or  fighting  among  themselves.  They  may  be  in
some  degree  represented  by  the  syllables  kewrr,  Icewrr,  kewrooh  ; and
strange  and  uncouth  as  they  are,  they  have  always  sounded  delightful  in
my  ear.

In  December  1833,  I sent  my  son  to  Spring  Island,  on  the  coast  of
Georgia,  to  which  these  birds  are  in  the  habit  of  resorting  every  w'inter.
Mr  Hammond,  the  proprietor  of  this  island,  treated  him  with  all  the  hos-
pitality for  which  the  southern  planters  are  celebrated.  The  Cranes,
which  were  plentiful,  resorted  to  the  sweet  potato  fields,  digging  up  their
produce  as  expertly  as  a troop  of  negroes.  They  walked  carefully  over
the  little  heaps,  probed  them  in  various  parts  in  the  manner  of  Wood-
cocks or  Snipes,  and  whenever  they  hit  upon  a potato,  removed  the  soil,
took  out  the  root,  and  devoured  it  in  rather  small  pieces.  In  this  manner
they  would  search  over  the  whole  field,  which  was  two  miles  in  length,  and
rather  more  than  a quarter  of  a mile  in  breadth,  gleaning  all  the  potatoes
that  had. escaped  the  gatherers.  They  were  so  shy,  however,  that  not-
withstanding all  the  endeavours  of  my  son,  who  is  a good  hand  at  getting
in  upon  game,  as  well  as  a good  shot,  he  only  killed  a young  one,  which
was  evidently  of  that  year’s  brood,  it  being  yet  almost  reddish-brown,  the
long  feathers  of  the  rump  just  beginning  to  shew,  and  the  head  yet  cover-
ed with  hairlike  feathers  to  the  mandible,  and  merely  shewing  between
them  the  wrinkled  skin  so  conspicuous  in  the  old  birds.  The  specimen
procured  on  Spring  Island  was  carefully  examined  and  described,  and
the  skin  is  now  in  the  British  Museum  in  London.  Its  flesh  was  tender
and  juicy,  of  a colour  resembling  that  of  young  venison,  and  afforded  ex-
cellent eating.  This  I have  alwavs  found  to  be  the  case  with  young


WHOOPING  CRANE.


209


birds  of  this  species,  so  long  as  they  are  in  their  brown  livery,  and  even
when  they  have  begun  to  be  patched  with  white ; but  in  old  birds  the
flesh  becomes  very  dark,  tough  and  unfit  for  the  table,  although  the
Seminole  Indians  shoot  them  on  all  occasions  for  food.

In  captivity  the  Whooping  Crane  becomes  extremely  gentle,  and  feeds
freely  on  grain  and  other  vegetable  substances.  A Mr  Magwood,  re-
siding near  Charleston,  in  South  Carolina,  kept  one  for  some  time  feed-
ing it  on  maize.  It  accidentally  wounded  one  of  its  feet  on  the  shell  of
an  oyster,  and,  although  the  greatest  care  was  taken  of  it,  died  after  lin-
gering some  weeks.  Having  myself  kept  one  alive,  I will  give  you  an  ac-
count of  its  habits.

It  was  nearly  full-grown  when  I obtained  it,  and  its  plumage  was
changing  from  greyish-brown  to  white.  Its  figure  you  will  see  in  the
plate  to  which  this  article  refers.  I received  it  as  a present  from  Captain
Clack  of  the  United  States  Navy,  commander  of  the  Erie  sloop  of  war.
It  had  been  wounded  in  the  wing,  on  the  coast  of  Florida,  but  the  frac-
tured limb  had  been  amputated  and  soon  healed.  During  a voyage  of
three  months,  it  became  very  gentle,  and  was  a great  favourite  with  the
sailors.  I placed  it  in  a yard,  in  company  with  a beautiful  Snow  Goose.
This  was  at  Boston.  It  was  so  gentle  as  to  suffer  me  to  caress  it  with
the  hand,  and  was  extremely  fond  of  searching  for  worms  and  grubs
about  the  wood  pile,  probing  every  hole  it  saw  with  as  much  care  and
dexterity  as  an  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker.  It  also  watched  with  all  the
patience  of  a cat  the  motions  of  some  mice  which  had  burrows  near  the
same  spot,  killed  them  with  a single  blow,  and  swallowed  them  entire,  one
after  another,  until  they  were  extirpated.  I fed  it  on  corn  and  garbage
from  the  kitchen,  to  which  were  added  bits  of  bread  and  cheese,  as  well
as  some  apples.  It  would  pick  up  the  straws  intended  to  keep  its  feet
from  being  soiled,  and  arrange  them  round  its  body,  as  if  intent  on  form.*
ing  a nest.  For  hours  at  a time,  it  would  stand  resting  on  one  foot  in  a very
graceful  posture  ; but  what  appeared  to  me  very  curious  was,  that  it  had
a favourite  leg  for  this  purpose  ; and  in  fact  none  of  my  family  ever  found
it  standing  on  the  other,  although  it  is  probable  that  this  happened  in
consequence  of  the  mutilation  of  the  wing,  the  leg  employed  being  that
of  the  injured  side.  The  stump  of  its  amputated  wing  appeared  to  be
a constant  source  of  trouble,  particularly  at  the  approach  of  the  win-
ter : it  would  dress  the  feathers  about  it,  and  cover  it  with  so  much  care,
that  I really  felt  for  the  poor  fellow.  When  the  weather  became  intense-

o


VOL.  III.


210


WHOOPING  CRANE.


ly  cold,  it  regularly  retired  at  the  approach  of  night  under  a covered  pas-
sage, where  it  spent  the  hours  of  darkness  ; but  it  always  repaired  to  this
place  with  marked  reluctance,  and  never  until  all  was  quiet  and  nearly  dark,
and  it  came  out,  even  when  the  snow  lay  deep  on  the  ground,  at  the  first  ap-
pearance of  day.  Now  and  then  it  would  take  a run,  extend  its  only  wing,
and,  uttering  a loud  cry,  leap  several  times  in  the  air,  as  if  anxious  to  re-
turn to  its  haunts.  At  other  times  it  would  look  upwards,  cry  aloud  as
if  calling  to  some  acquaintance  passing  high  in  the  air,  and  again  use  its
ordinary  note  whenever  its  companion  the  Snow  Goose  sent  forth  her  own
signals.  It  seldom  swallowed  its  food  without  first  carrying  it  to  the
water,  and  dipping  it  several  times,  and  now  and  then  it  would  walk
many  yards  for  that  express  purpose.  Although  the  winter  was  severe,
the  thermometer  some  mornings  standing  as  low  as  10°,  the  bird  fattened
and  looked  extremely  well.  So  strong  was  the  natural  suspicion  of  this
bird,  that  I frequently  saw  it  approach  some  cabbage  leaves  with  mea-
sured steps,  look  at  each  sideways  before  it  would  touch  one  of  them,
and  after  all,  if  it  by  accident  tossed  the  leaf  into  the  air  when  attempt-
ing to  break  it  to  pieces,  it  would  run  off  as  if  some  dreaded  enemy  were
at  hand

The  trachea  of  this  bird,  of  which  you  will  find  a notice  at  p.  213,
confirms  my  opinion  that  the  Canada  Crane  and  the  Whooping  Crane  are
merely  the  same  species  in  different  states  of  plumage,  or  in  other  words,
at  different  ages  ; and,  in  truth,  the  differences  are  not  greater  than  those
exhibited  by  many  other  birds,  both  aquatic  and  terrestrial.  In  illus-
tration of  this  subject  I might  adduce  Ibises,  Herons,  Divers,  and  Grebes;
but  this  is  quite  unnecessary.

In  reading  the  accounts  given  of  the  Canada  Crane  of  authors,  I find
no  description  of  its  manner  of  breeding.  In  the  Fauna  Boreali- Ameri-
cana of  Mr  SwAiNsoN  and  Dr  Richardson,  the  eggs  of  both  are  describ-
ed, and  in  Nuttadl’s  Manual  those  of  the  Whooping  Crane  also;  but
in  these  works  the  account  given  of  the  birds  and  of  their  eggs  is  such,
that  one  might  even,  from  comparing  the  descriptions,  suppose  them  to  be
of  the  same  species.  I have  never  had  the  satisfaction  of  finding  any  of
the  breeding-places  of  the  Whooping  Crane  ; but  I well  know  that  many
birds  breed  long  before  they  have  attained  their  full  plumage.  The  sup-
posed new  species  of  Heron  described  under  the  name  of  Ardea  Pealii,
by  my  excellent  friend  Prince  Charles  Bonaparte,  breeds  as  the  White-
headed  Eagle  sometimes  does,  the  immature  bird  in  a snow-white  dress,


WHOOPING  CRANE.


211


the  adult  in  purple  and  greyish-blue  plumage.  The  young  of  Ardea
ccendea  were  for  some  time  considered  to  form  a distinct  species,  they
being  white  also,  then  blue  and  white,  and  finally  dark  blue.  But  the
most  remarkable  instance  of  change  of  plumage  in  the  Traders  is  ex-
hibited in  the  Scarlet  Ibis.  My  humble  opinion  is,  that  unless  in  cases
where  birds  are  at  first  of  one  colour,  and  that  colour  remains  ever  after,
little  dependence  can  be  placed  on  the  tints  of  the  plumage  as  a specific
character.

On  looking  over  my  notes,  I find  that  I have  omitted  to  inform  you
that  the  extraordinary  strength  of  the  thighs,  legs,  and  feet  of  the
Whooping  Crane,  tends  greatly  to  make  it  more  terrestrial  than  the
Herons ; and  that  the  great  size  of  their  nostrils,  which  so  much  resem.
ble  those  of  the  Vultures,  is  well  adapted  to  keep  the  inner  parts  of  the
organ  from  the  damp  earth  and  other  matters  with  which  they  are  so  of-
ten in  contact,  while  searching  in  the  ground  or  mud  for  roots  and  other
vegetable  substances,  on  which  the  bird  principally  feeds.  I am  con-
vinced also,  that  this  species  does  not  attain  its  full  size  or  perfect  plu-
mage until  it  is  four  or  five  years  old.  The  beauty  of  the  plumage  may
be  improved  in  brilliancy  during  the  breeding-season  by  a greater  bright-
ness in  the  colour  of  the  bill,  as  in  the  Booby  Gannet  and  White  Ibis,  as
well  as  in  the  redness  of  the  fleshy  parts  of  the  head.

The  measurements  of  the  adult  bird  of  my  plate,  drawn  at  New  Or-
leans, in  the  month  of  April,  were  as  follows : — Length  from  tip  of  bill
to  end  of  claws,  5 feet  5 inches  ; to  end  of  tail,  4 feet  6 inches  ; the  droop-
ing feathers  1 foot  beyond  ; alar  extent  7 feet  8 inches;  length  of  wing
22  inches;  naked  part  of  thigh  5 inches;  tarsus  inches;  length  of
middle  toe  4;|,  of  its  claw  |.

The  measurements  of  the  specimen  kept  at  Boston : — Length  from
tip  of  bill  to  end  of  tail,  3 feet  9 inches ; to  end  of  claws,  4 feet  6 inches ;
tarsus  8 inches  ; naked  part  of  thigh  3^.  The  elongated  inner  secon-
daries equalled  the  tail.  The  weight  was  9 lb.  14|  oz.

Measurements  of  that  killed  on  Spring  Island ; — Length  4 feet  4^
inches,  the  claws  being  7 inches  beyond  the  tail,  so  that  the  length  from
the  tip  of  the  bill  to  the  end  of  the  tail  was  3 feet  9i  inches ; alar  extent
5 feet  8 inches.  Weight  8f  lb.

In  the  Museum  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  there  is  a specimen
of  still  smaller  size.

My  friend  John  Bachman,  in  a note  addressed  to  me,  says,  “ I

o 2 •


saw


212


WHOOPING  CRANE.


a pair  of  tame  birds  of  this  species,  which,  as  they  advanced  in  age,
changed  their  colours  from  grey  to  white.”


Grus  Americana,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  302

Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  372.

■Whoopino  Crane,  Ardea  Americana,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  20.  pL  64.
fig.  3.  Adult.

Grus  canadensis.  Brown  Crane,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.
p.  373.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXVI.

Bill  long,  straight,  rather  slender,  but  strong,  compressed,  pointed.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight,  a little  concave  at
the  middle,  slightly  declinate  toward  the  tip,  the  ridge  flat  and  rather
broad  as  far  as  the  middle,  the  sides  sloping,  towards  the  end  convex,
with  a wide  groove  filled  by  a soft  membrane,  and  extending  nearly  two-
thirds  of  its  length,  the  edges  sharp  but  thick  for  two-thirds  of  its  length,
and  very  slightly  serrated.  Nostrils  lateral,  placed  at  about  a third  of  the
length  of  the  bill  from  its  base,  oblongj  large,  pervious.  Lower  mandible
with  the  angle  narrow  and  very  long,  the  sides  perpendicular  at  the  base,
the  edges  straight  and  sharp.

Head  small,  compressed.  Eyes  of  moderate  size.  Neck  very  long.
Body  rather  slender.  Feet  very  long;  tibia  long,  bare  to  a large  extent,
and  covered  with  transverse  series  of  rectangular  scales  ; tarsus  very  long,
rather  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous  oblique  scutella,
posteriorly  with  large,  and  laterally  with  small  scales ; toes  rather  small ;
the  first  very  small,  secoud  and  fourth  nearly  equal,  third  considerably
longer,  the  third  and  fourth  connected  at  the  base  by  a web  of  consider-
able size,  all  marginate,  covered  above  with  numerous  narrow  scutella,
beneath  broad,  flattened,  and  granulate ; claws  of  moderate  size,  strong,
considerably  curved,  rather  compressed,  that  of  hind  toe  much  smaller,
second  and  third  largest,  the  latter  with  a groove  on  its  inner  edge.

Fore  and  upper  part  of  head  to  the  occiput  papillar,  and  covered  only
with  small  hairs,  as  are  the  sides  of  the  head.  The  plumage  in  general
is  soft,  but  distinctly  imbricated  ; the  feathers  rounded,  those  of  the  neck
short.  Wings  ample ; the  second  primary  longest,  third  and  fourth  nearly
as  long,  first  longer  than  fifth  ; inner  secondaries  and  their  coverts  curved
downwards,*  forming  a beautiful  bunch  of  loosely  barbed  featliers.  Tail
short,  rounded,  of  twelve  broad  rounded  feathers.


WHOOPING  CRANE.


213


Bill  dusky,  towards  the  base  yellow.  Iris  yellow.  Bare  part  of  head
carmine,  with  the  hairs  black.  Feet  black.  The  plumage  is  pure  white,
excepting  the  alula,  primaries,  and  primary  coverts,  which  are  brownish-
black.

Length  to  end  of  tail  54  inches ; to  end  of  wings  53,  to  end  of  claws  65;
extent  of  wings  92 ; wing  from  flexure  22^  ; tail  7 ; bill  along  the  ridge
5j^j,  along  the  edge  of  the  lower  mandible  5j'*2,  bare  part  of  tibia  5 ;
tarsus  11;^;  middle  toe  4j,  its  claw  |.

The  Young  after  its  first  autumnal  moult  has  the  sides  of  the  head
feathered  behind  the  eye,  and  beneath  to  the  base  of  the  lower  mandible ;
the  curved  secondaries  and  their  coverts  are  tapering  and  elongated,  but
not  nearly  so  much  developed  as  in  the  old  birds.  The  skin  of  the  head
is  red ; the  bill  brownish-black,  as  are  the  feet.  Chin  and  sides  of  the
head  greyish-white.  The  plumage  generally  is  bluish-grey,  but  the  fea-
thers are  largely  tipped  and  margined  with  yellowish- brown  ; the  primary
quills  and  their  coverts  dark  brown  towards  the  end ; but  with  brownish-
white  shafts  ; the  abdomen  pure  greyish-blue.

As  the  bird  advances  in  age,  the  yellowish-brown  disappears,  and  the
general  colour  of  the  plumage  becomes  pure  bluish-grey,  which  ultimately
changes  to  white.

The  trachea,  which  is  13  inches  long  to  its  entrance  between  the  crura
of  the  furcula,  passes  into  a cavity  in  the  sternum,  where  it  curves  so  as
to  describe  two-thirds  of  a circle,  returns  on  the  right  side,  and  enters
the  thorax  by  curving  backwards.  The  cavity  in  the  sternum  is  2 inches
long,  with  an  equal  depth,  and  a breadth  of  f inch.  The  ridge  of  the  keel
is  at  its  fore  part  | in  breadth,  and  contracts  to  ^ inch  at  its  junction  with
the  angle  of  the  furcula,  which  is  continuous  with  it.  The  gizzard  is  of
moderate  size ; the  intestine,  which  is  thin  and  small,  measures  5 feet  in
length.  Boston  specimen.


( 214  )


THE  PINTAIL  DUCK.

Anus  acuta,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXXVII.  Male  and  Female.

The  first  observation  that  I made  on  arriving  at  Labrador,  was  that
no  species  of  Ducks,  excepting  those  which  were  entirely  or  chiefly  ocea-
nic, seemed  to  resort  to  that  coast,  and  I left  the  country  with  the  same
impression.  We  saw  no  Mallards,  Teals,  Widgeons,  or  Wood  Ducks
there ; nor  any  species  of  Merganser,  excepting  the  Red-breasted,  which  is
a marine  bird.  The  Pintail  Duck,  then,  was  not  seen  in  the  parts  of  that
country  which  I visited ; nor  was  it  known  in  Newfoundland,  on  the
Magdeleine  Islands,  or  in  the  British  province  of  Nova  Scotia,  at  least
along  its  Atlantic  boundaries.  In  Kentucky  and  the  whole  of  the  West-
ern Country,  where  it  is  extremely  abundant  in  early  autumn,  during
winter,  and  up  to  a very  advanced  period  in  spring,  you  meet  with  it
wherever  its  usual  food  is  found.  It  follows  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi
to  New  Orleans,  is  seen  westward  in  the  prairies  of  Oppelousas,  and  ex-
tends to  the  eastward  as  far  as  Massachusetts,  beyond  which,  like  the
Mallard,  it  is  very  seldom  seen.  Indeed,  this  species  is  at  all  times  rare
on  the  sea  coast  of  America,  and  must  therefore  be  considered  as  an  in-
land bird.

The  Pintail,  which,  in  the  United  States,  is  better  known  by  the  name
of  Sprigtail,  arrives  on  the  western  waters  early  in  October,  sometimes
even  about  the  middle  of  September,  the  period  of  its  arrival  depending
on  the  state  of  the  weather,  or  the  appearance  of  other  species,  with  which
it  keeps  company.  Their  plumage  is  in  fine  condition  when  they  arrive;
their  tail-feathers  are  then  as  long  as  at  any  other  period,  and  the  whole
apparel  of  the  adult  birds  is  as  perfect  as  in  the  breeding  season.

On  the  water,  few  birds  exhibit  more  graceful  motions  than  the  Pin-
tail Duck.  Its  delicately  slender  neck,  the  beautiful  form  of  its  body,
and  its  pointed  tail,  which  it  always  carries  highly  raised,  distinguish  it
from  the  other  species  with  which  it  may  associate.  There  seems  also  a
kind  of  natural  modesty  in  it  which  you  do  not  find  in  other  ducks,  and
its  notes,  which  are  often  heard,  are  soft  and  pleasant.  That  these  notes
should  ever  have  been  compared  to  those  of  the  Mallard,  appears  to  me


PINTAIL  DUCK.


215


very  strange ; — so  strange  that  I am  tempted  to  believe  that  they  who
say  so  must  have  mistaken  Mallards  for  Pintails.

Whilst  with  us,  the  Pintail  is  found  in  company  with  the  Baldpate
or  American  Widgeon,  the  Blue-winged  Teal,  and  the  Mallard,  more  fre-
quently on  ponds  than  on  streams,  although  it  sometimes  resorts  to  the
latter,  when  their  shores  are  overhung  with  beech-trees  loaded  with  their
nutritious  fruits,  of  which  this  species  is  extremely  fond,  and  in  search  of
which  they  even  ramble  to  a short  distance  into  the  woods.  Were  this
duck  to  feed  entirely  on  beech-nuts,  I have  no  doubt  that  its  flesh  would
be  excellent.  It  feeds  on  tadpoles  in  spring,  and  leeches  in  autumn,
while,  during  winter,  a dead  mouse,  should  it  come  in  its  way,  is  swallowed
with  as  much  avidity  as  by  a Mallard.  To  these  articles  of  food  it  adds
insects  of  all  kinds,  and,  in  fact,  it  is  by  no  means  an  inexpert  fly-catcher.

The  Pintails  are  less  shy  in  the  Western  Country  than  most  species  of
their  family,  and  in  this  respect  they  resemble  the  Blue-winged  Teals,
which  in  fact  might  be  called  stupid  birds  with  as  much  propriety  as
many  others.  They  swim  rather  deeply,  keep  close  together,  and  raise
the  hind  part  of  the  body  like  the  Mallards ; and  on  the  water,  on  land,
or  on  the  wing,  several  may  generally  be  killed  at  a shot.  A friend  of
mine  killed  nineteen  with  two  shots  of  his  double-barrelled  gun.  They
are  scarcely  nocturnal,  but  rest  much  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  basking  in
the  sunshine  whilst  on  the  water,  whenever  they  can  indulge  in  this  luxury.
While  on  ponds,  they  feed  along  the  most  shallow  parts,  or  by  the  edges ;
and  if  you  take  my  advice,  you  will  never  shoot  at  them  while  their  heads
are  at  the  bottom,  and  their  feet  kicking  above  water.  I have  several
times,  for  diversion,  done  so,  but  in  no  instance  did  I damage  a single
individual.  But  when  they  raise  their  heads,  you  may  commit  great
havock  amon<T  them.

O

During  heavy  rains  in  winter,  or  after  them,  the  Pintails  are  fond  of
alighting  on  our  broad  prairies,  corn-fields  and  meadows ; and  in  almost
every  puddle  you  may  then  find  them  busily  engaged.  They  move  over
the  ground  as  swiftly  as  Wood  Ducks,  still  carrying  their  tail  erect,  un-
less when  seizing  an  insect  that  is  on  wing  or  resting  on  a blade  of  grass.

I knew  a particular  spot  in  a corn-field,  not  many  miles  from  Bayou  Sara
in  Louisiana,  where,  even  after  a shower,  I was  sure  to  meet  with  this  species,
and  where  I could  always  have  produced  a good  number,  had  I thought
them  likely  to  be  prized  at  the  dinner-table.  While  I was  at  General  Her-
NA.N'JUEz’s  in  Florida,  the  Pintails  were  very  numerous.  They  alighted


216


PINTAIL  DUCK.


everywhere,  and  I shot  a few  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  that  they  were  of  the
same  species  as  those  I had  been  accustomed  to  see.  On  one  occasion  I
shot  at  a large  flock  swimming  on  a shallow  pond  in  a large  savannah,
and  wounded  several,  which  I was  surprised  to  see  diving  very  expertly
as  I waded  out  for  them,  this  species  being  by  no  means  addicted  to  that
practice.  Those  which  I have  now  and  then  wounded,  while  in  a boat
and  in  deep  water,  soon  gave  up  diving,  and  surrendered,  without  ex-
hibiting any  of  those  feats  of  cunning  performed  by  other  species.

The  flight  of  the  Pintails  is  very  rapid,  greatly  protracted,  and  almost
noiseless.  They  arrive  in  the  Western  Country  mostly  in  the  dusk  of
evening,  and  alight  without  much  circumspection  wherever  they  find
water.  They  remain  at  night  in  the  ponds  where  they  feed,  and  continue
there  generally  unless  much  disturbed.  On  such  occasions  they  keep  in
the  middle  of  the  water,  to.  avoid  their  land  enemies;  but  the  Virginian
and  Barred  Owls  not  unfrequently  surprise  them,  and  force  them  to  rise
or  make  towards  the  shore,  when  they  fall  a prey  to  the  nocturnal  ma-
rauders. In  the  Middle  States,  they  are  highly  esteemed  for  the  table.
There  they  arrive  later  and  retire  sooner  towards  their  breeding-places,
than  in  the  country  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains.


Anas  acuta,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  202 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  864

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  383.

Pintail  Duck,  Anas  acuta,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  viii.  p.  72.  pi.  68.  fig.  3. —
Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  386.

Anas  caudacuta.  Pintail  Duck,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.
p.  441.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  de-
pressed towards  the  end,  the  frontal  angles  short  and  obtuse.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  at  first  sloping,  then  concave,  towards  the
curved  unguis  nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  flat  at  the  base,  then
broadly  convex,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  soft,  with  about  fifty  internal
lamellae ; unguis  small,  somewhat  triangular,  curved  abruptly  at  the  broad
end.  Nostrils  subbasal,  lateral,  rather  small,  oval,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  flattish,  its  angle  very  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  very
short,  slightly  convex,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  soft,  with  about  sixty
lamellae.


PINTAIL  DUCK.


217


Head  of  moderate  size,  compressed,  the  forehead  rounded.  Neck
rather  long  and  slender.  Body  full  and  depressed.  Wings  rather  small.
Feet  very  short,  placed  rather  far  back ; tarsus  very  short,  compressed,
at  its  lower  part  anteriorly  with  two  series  of  scutella,  the  rest  covered
with  reticulated  angular  scales.  Toes  obliquely  scutellate  above ; first
very  small,  free,  with  a narrow  membrane  beneath  ; third  longest ; fourth
a little  shorter,  their  connecting  webs  entire,  reticulated,  at  the  edge  pec-
tinate ; claws  small,  curved,  compressed,  acute,  the  hind  one  smaller  and
more  curved,  that  of  the  third  toe  with  an  inner  sharp  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  short,
on  the  hind  head  and  neck  elongated.  Wings  narrow,  of  moderate
length,  acute,  the  first  quill  longest,  the  second  nearly  equal,  the  rest
rapidly  graduated  ; outer  secondaries  broad  and  rounded  ; inner  elongat-
ed and  tapering,  as  are  their  coats,  and  the  scapulars ; first  quill  serrated
on  the  outer  edge,  somewhat  like  that  of  an  Owl.  Tail  of  moderate
length,  tapering,  of  fourteen  tapering  feathers,  of  which  the  two  middle
project  far  beyond  the  rest.

Bill  black,  the  sides  of  upper  mandible  light  blue.  Iris  bi'own.'  Feet
greyish-blue  ; claws  black.  Head,  throat,  and  upper  part  of  neck  ante-
riorly greenish-brown,  faintly  margined  behind  with  purplish-red  ; a small
part  of  hind  neck  dark  green  ; the  rest,  and  the  upper  parts  in  general
beautifully  undulated  with  very  narrow  bars  of  brownish-black  and  yel-
lowish-white, smaller  wing-coverts,  alula,  and  primary  quills  grey,  the
latter  dark-brown  towards  the  end ; speculum  of  a coppery  red,  chang-
ing to  dull  green,  edged  anteriorly  with  light  brownish-red,  posteriorly
with  white ; the  inner  secondaries,  and  the  scapulars,  black  and  green,
with  broad  grey  margins.  Upper  tail-coverts  cream-coloured,  the  outer
webs  blackish  and  green ; tail  light  grey,  the  middle  feathers  dark  brown,
glossed  with  green.  On  each  side  of  the  neck  is  an  oblique  band  of
white,  of  which  colour  are  the  under  parts  in  general,  the  sides  however
undulated  like  the  back,  the  lateral  feathers  of  the  rump  cream-coloured,
the  lower  tail-coverts  black,  those  at  the  sides  edged  with  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  29  inches  ; extent  of  wings  36  ; bill  along  the
back  2^2,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2/^  ; tarsus  l^®j,  middle  toe
2,  its  claw  ^^2  ; wing  from  flexure  11,  tail  5^.  Weight  2 lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXVII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female,  which  is  much  smaller,  has  the  upper  parts  variegated


2!8


PINTAIL  DUCK.


with  brownish-black  and  light  yellowish-brown,  the  margin  of  the  fea-
thers, and  a mark  on  each  side  of  the  shaft  being  of  the  latter  colour  ; the
speculum  is  dusky  green,  margined  behind  with  white;  the  primary  quills
greyish-brown.  The  lower  parts  are  of  a light  brownish-yellow,  the
sides  variegated  with  brown,  the  bill  is  black,  the  iris  brown,  the  feet  light
bluish-grey.

Length  22^  inches,  extent  of  wings  34.  Weight  1 lb.  9 oz.


( 219  )


THE  GREEN-WINGED  TEAL.

Anas  Crecca,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXXVIII.  Mai.e  and  Female.

Nothing  can  be  more  pleasing  to  an  American  sportsman,  than  the
arrival  of  this  beautiful  little  duck  in  our  Southern  or  Western  States.
There,  in  the  month  of  September,  just  as  the  sun  sinks  beneath  the  hori-
zon, you  may  find  him  standing  on  some  mote  or  embankment  of  a rice-
field  in  Carolina,  or  a neck  of  land  between  two  large  ponds  in  Kentucky,
his  gun  loaded  with  number  four,  and  his  dog  lying  at  his  feet.  He  sees
advancing  from  afar,  at  a brisk  rate,  a small  dark  cloud,  which  he  has
some  minutes  ago  marked  and  pronounced  to  be  a flock  of  Green-winged
Teals.  Now  he  squats  on  his  haunches  ; his  dog  lies  close  ; and  ere  an-
other minute  has  elapsed,  right  over  his  head,  but  too  high  to  be  shot  at,
pass  the  winged  travellers.  Some  of  them  remember  the  place  well,  for
there  they  have  reposed  and  fed  before.  Now  they  wheel,  dash  irregu-
larly through  the  air,  sweep  in  a close  body  over  the  watery  fields,  and  in
their  course  pass  near  the  fatal  spot  where  the  gunner  anxiously  awaits.
Hark,  two  shots  in  rapid  succession  ! The  troop  is  in  disorder,  and  the  dog
dashes  through  the  water.  Here  and  there  lies  a Teal,  with  its  legs
quivering;  there,  one  is  whirling  round  in  the  agonies  of  death;  some,
which  are  only  winged,  quickly  and  in  silence  make  their  way  towards  a
hiding-place,  while  one,  with  a single  pellet  in  his  head,  rises  perpendi-
cularly with  uncertain  beats,  and  falls  with  a splash  on  the  water.  The
gunner  has  charged  his  tubes,  his  faithful  follower  has  brought  up  all
the  game,  and  the  frightened  Teals  have  dressed  their  ranks,  and  flying
now  high,  now  low,  seem  curious  to  see  the  place  where  their  companions
have  been  left.  Again  they  fly  over  the  dangerous  spot,  and  again  re-
ceive the  double  shower  of  shot.  Were  it  not  that  darkness  has  now  set
in,  the  carnage  might  continue  until  the  sportsman  should  no  longer  con-
sider the  thinned  flock  worthy  of  his  notice.  In  this  manner,  at  the  first
arrival  of  the  Green-winged  Teal  in  the  Western  Country,  I have  seen
upwards  of  six  dozen  shot  by  a single  gunner  in  the  course  of  one  day.

I have  often  thought  that  water-birds,  ducks  for  example,  like  land-
birds  which  migrate  in  flocks,  are  very  apt  to  pass  over  the  place  where


220


GREEN- WINGED  TEAL.


others  of  the  same  kind  had  been  before.  Pigeons,  Starlings,  Robins,
and  other  land-birds  are  often  observed  to  do  so;  while  Curlews,  Cormo-
rants, Plovers,  Ducks  and  Geese,  are  similar  in  this  respect.  The  first
object  in  view  with  such  species  is  to  remove  from  one  part  of  the  country
to  another,  as  every  one  knows ; and  as  to  reach  a place  of  safety  abun-
dantly supplied  with  food,  is  the  next  object,  you  may  perhaps  join  me  in
concluding,  that,  to  the  spot  or  district  in  which  birds  have  once  been
and  spent  a season,  they  are  ever  afterwards  inclined  to  return.  Well,
the  Green- wings  are  known  to  follow  each  other  in  flocks,  sometimes  con-
sisting of  a few  families,  sometimes  of  many  hundred  individuals,  parti-
cularly in  autumn,  when  old  and  young  leave  the  north  to  avoid  the
rigours  of  its  dreaiy  winter.  In  spring,  again,  many  species  both  of  land
and  water  birds  perform  their  migrations,  either  singly  or  in  smaller
groups,  the  males  departing  before  the  females,  and  in  some  cases  the
young  keeping  by  themselves,  an  arrangement  perhaps  intended  for  the
greater  dispersion  of  the  species.

In  Louisiana,  the  Green-winged  Teal  is  named  Sarcelle  d'hiver,  while
the  Blue-winged  species  bears  the  name  of  Sarcelle  d'ete,  although  the  lat-
ter remains  only  some  weeks  in  that  country  after  the  departure  of  the
former.  Its  general  name,  however,  is  the  “ Green-wing;”  and  a poor
name  in  my  opinion  it  is,  for  the  bird  has  not  more  green  on  its  wings
than  several  other  species  have.  Indeed,  very  many  birds  are  strangely
named,  not  less  in  pure  Latin,  than  in  English,  French,  and  Dutch  ; and
very  many  are  every  year  receiving  names  still  stranger  than  those  they
bore.  For  my  part,  I am  at  present  a kind  of  conservative,  and  adhere
to  the  old  system  until  I see  the  mud  raised  up  by  the  waders  subside,
when  I may  probe  my  way  with  more  chance  of  success.

The  Green- winged  Teal  is  a fresh-water  bird,  being  rarely  met  with
in  marine  bays,  creeks,  or  lagoons,  where,  however,  it  may  sometimes
spend  a few  days.  It  is  accordingly  enabled  to  feed  with  its  body  half-
immersed,  in  the  manner  of  the  Mallard  and  several  other  species,  for
which  purpose  it  is  furnished  with  a comparatively  long  neck.  Its  food
consists  principally  of  the  seeds  of  grasses,  which  are  collected  either  when
floating  or  when  still  adhering  to  their  stalks,  small  acorns,  fallen  grapes
or  berries,  as  well  as  aquatic  insects,  worms,  and  small  snails.  I have
never  found  water  lizards,  leeches,  fishes,  or  even  tadpoles  in  their  giz-
zards. The  food  of  this  hir'd  being  thus  more  select  than  that  of  most
other  Ducks,  its  flesh  is  delicious,  probably  the  best  of  any  of  its  tribe :


GREEN-WINGED  TEAL.


221


and  I would  readily  agree  with  any  epicure  in  saying,  that  when  it  has
fed  on  wild  oats  at  Green  Bay,  or  on  soaked  rice  in  the  fields  of  Georgia
and  the  Carolinas,  for  a few  weeks  after  its  arrival  in  those  countries,  it
is  much  superior  to  the  Canvass-back  in  tenderness,  juiciness,  and  flavour.
Indeed,  the  Green-wing  is  as  much  superior  to  the  Canvass-back,  as  the
European  Quail  is  to  the  Capercailie,  or  the  Sora  of  the  Delaware  to  the
Scolopaceous  Curlew  of  the  Florida  Ever  Glades.

On  land,  the  Green-wing  moves  with  more  ease  and  grace  than  any
other  species  with  which  I am  acquainted,  excepting  our  beautiful  Wood
Duck.  It  can  run  at  a good  rate,  without  entangling  its  webbed  feet,  as
many  others  do ; and  in  this,  too,  there  is  a marked  difference  between
fresh-water  and  salt-water  Ducks,  as  one  may  very  readily  perceive.  On
the  water,  also,  it  moves  with  great  ease,  at  times  with  considerable  ra-
pidity, and  when  not  severely  wounded,  is  able  to  dive  in  a very  credit-
able manner.  On  wing  it  has  no  rivals  among  Ducks.  Our  two  smaller
Mergansers,  however,  are  swifter,  although  they  exhibit  none  of  the
graceful  movements  every  now  and  then  shewn  by  the  Green-wings,  when
coursing  in  the  air  over  and  around  a pond,  a river,  or  a large  wet  sa-
vannah. They  rise  from  the  water  at  a single  spring,  and  so  swiftly  too,
that  none  but  an  expert  marksman  need  attempt  to  shoot  them,  if  when
starting  they  are  many  yards  distant.  While  feeding,  they  proceed  in
a close  body  along  the  shores,  or  wherever  the  water  is  so  shallow  that
they  can  reach  the  bottom  with  ease.  In  savannahs  or  watery  fields
intersected  by  dry  jridges,  they  remove  from  one  pool  to  another  on
foot,  unless  the  distance  is  considerable ; and  in  effecting  the  transit,  they
run  so  huddled  together,  as  to  enable  a gunner  to  make  great  havock
among  them.  When  the  cravings  of  hunger  are  satisfied,  they  retire  to
some  clean  part  of  the  shore,  or  a sandbar,  where  they  rest  in  perfect  har-
mony, each  individual  composing  its  dress,  and  afterwards,  with  wings
slightly  drooping,  placing  its  breast  to  the  sun.  There  they  remain  for
an  hour  or  more  at  a time,  some  sound  asleep,  some  dosing,  but  rarely
without  a trusty  sentinel  watching  over  their  safety.  In  this  manner  they
spend  the  winter  months  in  the  Southern  and  Western  Countries.  There,
indeed,  they  are  far' more  abundant  than  in  our  eastern  districts,  just  be-
cause the  climate  is  milder,  the  human  population  more  dispersed,  and
the  damp  fields,  meadows,  and  savannahs  more  abundant.

The  migrations  of  this  species  are  performed  more  over  the  land  than
along  the  borders  of  the  sea ; and  it  is  probable  that  its  principal  breed.


GREEN-WINGED  TEAL,


•2l>2

ing-places  are  in  the  interior  of  the  fur  countries ; as  it  has  been  met  there
by  Sir  Edwaud  Parry,  Sir  James  Ross,  Dr  Richardson,  and  other
intrepid  travellers.  Some,  however,  remain  on  our  great  lakes,  and  I
have  seen  individuals  breeding  on  the  banks  of  the  Wabash,  in  Illinois,
where  I found  a female  with  young,  all  of  which  I obtained.  It  was  not
far  above  Vincennes,  and  in  the  month  of  July.  On  Lakes  Erie  and
Michigan,  nests  containing  eggs  have  also  been  found ; but  these  may
have  been  cases  in  which  the  birds  were  unable  to  proceed  farther  north,
on  account  of  wounds  or  other  circumstances,  or  because  of  the  early  pe-
riod at  which  they  might  have  paired  before  the  general  departure  of  the
flocks,  a cause  of  detention  more  common  in  migratory  birds  than  people
seem  to  be  aware  of.  These  opportunities,  few  as  they  were,  have  ena-
bled me  to  see  the  kinds  of  places  in  which  the  nests  were  found,  the
structure  of  the  nest,  the  number,  size,  and  colour  of  the  eggs ; so  that  I
have  in  so  far  been  qualified  to  draw  a comparison  between  our  Green-
winged Teal  and  that  of  Europe.

The  Green-wings  leave  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Orleans  in  the  end
of  February  ; but  in  the  Carolinas  they  remain  until  late  in  March,  at
which  time  also  they  depart  from  all  the  places  between  the  Atlantic  and
the  States  of  Kentucky,  Indiana,  &c.  Farther  eastward  I have  seen  this
species  as  late  as  the  9th  of  May,  when  I shot  a few  not  far  from  Phila-
delphia. As  you  advance  farther  along  our  coast,  you  find  it  more  rare ;
and  scarcely  any  are  met  with  near  the  shores  of  the  British  provinces.
In  Newfoundland  and  Labrador,  it  is  never  seen.  Its  migrations  south-
ward, I am  satisfied,  extend  beyond  the  United  States  ^ but  their  ex-
treme limits  are  unknown  to  me.  I have  seldom  seen  it  associate  with
other  species,  although  I have  frequently  observed  individuals  on  a pond
or  river  not  far  from  other  Ducks.  It  is  more  shy  than  the  Blue-winged
Teal,  but  less  so  than  most  of  our  other  fresh-Water  Ducks.  Its  voice
is  seldom  heard  during  winter,  except  when  a flock  is  passing  over  an
other  that  has  alighted,  when  a few  of  the  males  call  to  the  voyagers,  as
if  to  invite  them  to  join  them.  Before  they  depart,  however,  they  be-
come noisy.  Combats  take  place  among  the  males  ; the  females  are  seen
coquetting  around  them,  and  most  of  the  birds  are  paired  before  they
leave  us.

In  the  few  instances  in  which  I found  the  nest  of  this  bird,  and  they
were  only  three,  it  was  not  placed  nearer  the  water  than  five  or  six  yards,
and  I should  not  have  discovered  it  had  I not  first  seen  the  birds  swim-


GREEN-WINGED  TEAL.


223


ming  or  washing  themselves  near  the  spot.  By  watching  them  carefully
I discovered  their  landing  places,  and  on  going  up  found  a path  formed,
in  a direct  line  among  the  rushes.  In  two  cases  I came  so  near  the  nest,
as  almost  to  touch  the  sitting  bird  as  it  rose  affrighted.  While  it  flew
round  me,  and  then  alighted  on  the  water,  I viewed  the  nest,  with  per-
haps more  interest  than  I have  felt  on  most  occasions  of  a like  nature.
On  a scanty  bed  of  the  bird’s  own  down  and  feathers,  supported  by  ano-
ther of  grasses,  intermixed  with  mud  and  stalks  of  the  plants  around,
raised  to  the  height  of  four  or  five  inches,  I found  seven  eggs  in  one,
nine  in  another,  and  only  five  in  a third.  They  were  all  found  in  the
month  of  July,  and  not  far  from  Green  Bay.  The  average  measurement
of  the  eggs  was  an  inch  and  three  quarters  by  an  inch  and  three-eighths.
They  were  much  rounded,  of  a dull  yellowish  colour,  indistinctly  marked
with  a deeper  tint,  as  if  soiled.  In  one  of  the  nests  only  the  eggs  were
fresh.  I took  two  of  them,  which  I afterwards  ate.  Having  planted  a
stick  as  a mark  of  recognition,  I visited  the  nest  three  days  in  succession,
but  found  that  the  bird  had  abandoned  it ; while  those  of  the  other  two
nests,  which  were  not  more  than  about  a hundred  yards  distant,  and
whose  eggs  I had  handled  quite  as  much,  although  I took  none  away,
continued  to  sit.  No  male  birds  were  to  be  seen  during  my  stay  in  that
neighbourhood.  I concluded  that  although  the  eggs  may  be  touched  or
even  handled  and  lifted  from  the  nest,  yet  if  they  were  all  replaced,  the
bird  did  not  take  umbrage ; but  that  should  any  of  them  be  missed,
some  strong  feeling  urged  her  to  abandon  the  rest.  Again  I thought
that  as  incubation  had  just  commencTed  with  this  bird,  she  cared  less
about  her  eggs  than  the  other  two  whose  eggs  contained  chicks.

Having  met  with  the  young  of  this  species  only  once,  at  a time  when
I was  less  aware  of  the  nece:sity  of  noting  observations  in  writing,  I am
unwilling  to  speak  of  their  colours  from  recollection.  All  I can  say  is
that  I had  great  trouble  in  catching  four  of  them,  so  cunningly  did  they
hide  in  the  grass,  and  so  expert  were  they  at  diving.


2‘24


GREEN- WINGED  TEAL.


Anas  Crecca,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  204 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  872

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  386.

Anas  Crecca,  var.  American  Teal,  Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  443.

Green-winged  Teal,  Anas  Crecca,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  101.  pi.  70.
fig.  4.

American  Teal,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  400.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  almost  as  long  as  the  head,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  de-
pressed towards  the  end,  its  breadth  nearly  equal  in  its  whole  length,
being  however  a little  enlarged  towards  the  rounded  tip.  Upper  man-
dible with  the  dorsal  line  at  first  sloping,  then  concave,  towards  the  ends
nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  flat  at  the  base,  then  broadly  convex,
the  sides  convex,  the  edges  soft,  with  about  fifty-five  lamellm.  Nostrils
subbasal,  near  the  ridge,  rather  small,  elliptical,  pervious.  Lower  man-
dible flattish,  with  the  angle  very  long  and  rather,  narrow,  the  dorsal  line
very  short,  straight,  the  sides  perpendicular  with  about  130  lamellae.

Head  of  moderate  size,  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate  length,  rather
slender.  Body  full,  depressed.  Wings  rather  small.  Feet  short,  placed
rather  far  back ; tarsus  short,  compressed,  at  its  lower  part  anteriorly  with
two  series  of  scutella,  the  rest  covered  with  reticulated  angular  scales.
Toes  scutellate  above  ; first  toe  very  small,  free,  with  a narrow  membrane
beneath  ; third  longest ; fourth  a little  shorter  ; the  anterior  toes  united
by  reticulated  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  deeply  sinuate ; claws  small,
curved,  compressed,  acute,  the  hind  one  smaller  and  more  curved,  that  of
the  third  toe  largest,  and  with  an  inner  sharp  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  of  the  middle  of  the  head
and  upper  part  of  hind  neck,  very  narrow,  elongated,  with  soft  filamen-
tous disunited  bands,  of  the  rest  of  the  head  and  upper  part  of  neck  very
short,  of  the  back  and  lower  parts  in  general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings
of  moderate  length,  narrow,  acute ; primaries  strong,  curved,  tapering,
second  longest,  first  scarcely  shorter ; secondaries  broad,  rather  pointed,
the  inner  elongated  and  tapering,  as  are  the  scapulars.  Tail  short,  round
ed  and  acuminate,  of  sixteen  acuminate  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  brown.  Feet  light  bluish-grey.  Head  and  upper
part  of  the  neck  chestnut-brown ; a broad  band,  narrowing  backwards,
from  the  eye  down  the  back  of  the  neck,  deep  shining  green,  edged  witli


GREEN-WINGED  TEAL.


223


black  below,  under  which  is  a white  line,  which  before  the  eye  meets  an-
other that  curves  forward  and  downward  to  the  angle  of  the  mouth ; chin
brownish-black,  as  are  the  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible.
Upper  parts  and  flanks  beautifully  undulated,  with  narrow  brownish-black
and  white  bars ; anterior  to  the  wings  is  a short  broad  transverse  band  of
white.  Wings  brownish-grey ; the  speculum  in  its  lower  half  velvet-
black,  the  upper  bright  green,  changing  to  purple,  and  edged  above  with
black,  behind  margined  with  white,  before  with  reddish-white.  Tail
brownish-grey,  the  feathers  margined  with  paler ; the  upper  coverts  brown-
ish-black, edged  with  light  yellowish-grey.  Lower  part  of  neck  anteriorly
barred  as  behind ; breast  yellowish-white,  spotted  with  black,  its  lower
part  white  ; abdomen  white,  faintly  barred  with  grey ; a patch  of  black
under  the  tail,  the  lateral  tail-coverts  cream  coloured,  the  larger  black,
with  broad  white  margins  and  tips.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14|  inches,  to  end  of  claws  15;^;  extent  of
wings  24  ; wing  from  flexure  7^  ; tail  ; bill  along  the  back  1 along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1 ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  1 its  claw

Weight  10  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  wants  the  elongated  crest,  and  differs  greatly  in  colouring.
The  head  and  neck  are  streaked  with  dark  brown  and  light  red,  the  fore
neck  whitish  ; the  upper  parts  mottled  with  dark  brown,  the  anterior  fea-
thers barred,  the  posterior  margined  with  yellowish-white.  The  wings  are
nearly  as  in  the  male,  but  the  green  of  the  speculum  is  less  extensive  ; the
lower  part  of  the  fore  neck  is  tinged  with  yellowish-red,  and  mottled  with
dark  brown,  as  are  the  sides  ; the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13 J ; to  end  of  claws  1:^  ; extent  of  wings  22^.
Weight  10  oz.

The  differences  between  the  American  and  European  specimens  are  so
small  that  I can  find  no  good  reason  for  considering  the  birds  of  the  two
continents  distinct.  The  American  Teal  has  a white  band  before  the
wing,  which  the  European  bird  has  not,  while  the  latter  has  the  greater
part  of  the  outer  webs  of  most  of  the  scapulars  white,  there  being  none
of  that  colour  on  those  of  our  bird.  The  proportions  and  size  are  similar  ;
and  if  the  two  birds  are  really  distinct  species,  I do  not  know  upon  what
circumstances  specific  distinctions  are  to  be  founded.


VOL.  III.


p


( 22t>  )


THE  SCAUP  DUCK,

Fuligula  Marila,  Steph.

PLATE  CCXXIX.  Male  and  Female.

The  opinion,  derived  from  Wilson’s  account  of  the  Scaup  Duck,
that  it  is  met  with  only  along  our  sea  coasts,  in  bays,  or  in  the  mouths  of
rivers,  as  far  as  the  tide  extends,  is  incorrect.  Had  Wilson  resided  in
the  Western  Country,  or  seen  our  large  lakes  and  broad  rivers  during
late  autumn,  winter,  or  early  spring,  he  would  have  had  ample  opportu-
nities of  observing  thousands  of  this  species,  on  the  Ohio,  the  Missouri,
and  the  Mississippi,  from  Pittsburg  to  New  Orleans.  I have  shot  a good
number  of  Scaup  Ducks  on  all  these  rivers,  where  I have  observed  them
to  arrive  early  in  October,  and  whence  they  depart  between  the  1st  of
March  and  the  middle  of  April.  I have  not,  however,  seen  any  in  small
creeks,  lagoons,  or  ponds.  When  they  arrive  on  the  western  waters,  they
are  seen  in  flocks  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  individuals ; but  in  a few
weeks  these  flocks  are  joined  by  others,  for  which  reason  the  species  is
named  in  Kentucky  the  “ Flocking  Fowl.”  They  are,  however,  seldom
seen  close  together  while  on  the  water,  and  they  rarely  associate  with  other
birds.

The  Scaup  Duck  seems  to  float  less  lightly  than  it  really  does,  its
body  being  comparatively  flat.  It  moves  fast,  frequently  sipping  the
water,  as  if  to  ascertain  whether  its  favourite  food  be  in  it.  Then  turn-
ing its  head  and  glancing  on  either  side  to  assure  itself  of  security,  down
it  dives  with  all  the  agility  of  a Merganser,  and  remains  a considerable
time  below.  On  emerging,  it  shakes  its  head,  raises  the  hind  part  of  its
body,  opens  its  short  and  rather  curved  wings,  after  a few  flaps  replaces
them,  and  again  dives  in  search  of  food.  Should  any  person  appear  when
it  emerges,  it  swims  off  to  a considerable  distance,  watches  every  move-
ment of  the  intruder,  and  finally  either  returns  to  its  former  place,  or  flies
away.

These  birds  are  fond  of  large  eddies  below  projecting  points  of  land,
but  frequently  dive  in  search  of  food  at  a considerable  distance  from
them.  When  in  eddies  they  may  be  approached  and  shot  with  less  diffi-
culty than  Avhen  in  any  other  situation.  If  wounded  only,  they  are  not


SCAUP  DUCK.


227


easily  secured ; in  fact,  you  need  not  go  after  them,  for  by  diving,  flutter-
ing along  the  surface,  and  cutting  backward  and  forward,  they  generally
elude  pursuit.  Between  Louisville  and  Shippingport,  on  the  Kentucky
side  of  the  Ohio,  the  shores  are  from  ten  to  fifteen  feet  high,  and  rather
abrupt  when  the  waters  are  at  their  ordinary  level.  The  Scaup  Ducks
are  fond  of  diving  for  food  along  this  place,  and  there,  by  coming  directly
upon  them  unseen,  till  you  are  almost  over  them,  you  may  have  the  very
best  opportunities  of  procuring  them.  They  are  not  worth  shooting,
however,  unless  for  sport  or  examination,  for  their  flesh  is  generally  tough
and  rather  fishy  in  flavour.  Indeed  I know  none,  excepting  what  is  call-
ed an  Epicure,  who  could  relish  a Scaup  Duck.

They  appear  to  experience  some  difficulty  in  getting  on  wing,  and
assist  themselves  on  all  occasions,  either  by  meeting  the  current  or  front-
ing the  wind,  while  they  also  use  their  broad  feet  as  helps.  When  dan-
ger is  near,  they  frequently,  however,  prefer  diving,  which  they  find  as
effectual  a means  of  security  as  flying.  As  they  usually  feed  at  some
distance  from  each  other,  it  is  amusing  to  see  them  go  off,  as  they  emerge
from  the  water  in  succession,  and  to  watch  them  when  they  collect  again,
and  when,  after  flying  for  a long  time  in  circles,  now  high  then  low  over  the
water,  they  all  realight.  These  habits,  and  the  toughness  of  their  sinewy
bodies,  render  it  rather  difficult  to  shoot  them.  Although  flat-billed,  they
dive  to  a considerable  depth,  and  when  they  have  reached  the  bottom,  no
doubt  furrow  the  mud,  in  the  manner  of  the  Shoveller  {^Anas  clypeata),
although  the  latter  performs  this  action  while  floating  on  the  surface,  with
its  head  and  neck  alone  submersed,  as  it  swims  over  the  shallows.

The  food  of  the  Scaup  Duck  I have  found  to  consist  of  small  fry,
crayfishes,  and  a mixture  of  such  grasses  as  here  and  there  grow  along
the  beds  of  our  rivers.  I never  found  any  portions  of  testaceous  mol-
lusca  in  the  gizzards  of  those  obtained  on  our  western  waters,  although
even  there  they  might  meet  with  abundance  of  these  animals.

When  these  birds  are  travelling,  their  flight  is  steady,  rather  labori-
ous, but  greatly  protracted.  The  whistling  of  their  wings  is  heard  at  a
considerable  distance  when  they  are  passing  over  head.  At  this  time
they  usually  move  in  a broad  front,  sometimes  in  a continuous  line.
When  disturbed,  they  fly  straight  forward  for  a while,  with  less  velocity
than  when  travelling,  and,  if  within  proper  distance,  are  easily  shot.  At
times  their  notes  are  shrill,  but  at  others  hoarse  and  guttural.  They  are

p2


228


SCAUP  DUCK.


however  rarely  heard  during  the  day,  and  indeed,  like  many  other  spe-
cies, these  birds  are  partly  nocturnal.

At  the  approach  of  spring  the  Drakes  pay  their  addresses  to  the  fe-
males, before  they  set  out  on  their  journey.  At  that  period  the  males
become  more  active  and  lively,  bowing  their  heads,  opening  their  broad
bills,  and  uttering  a kind  of  quack,  which  to  the  listener  seems  produced
by  wind  in  their  stomach,  but  notwithstanding  appears  to  delight  their
chosen  females.

The  Scaup  Duck  varies  materially  as  to  size  at  different  ages.  Some
wounded  individuals  which  I kept,  and  which  were  birds  of  the  first  year,
were  much  larger  and  heavier  at  the  end  of  a year ; and  I agree  with  my
learned  friend  Nutt  all,  that  specimens  may  be  procured  measuring
from  sixteen  and  a half  to  eighteen,  nineteen,  or  twenty  inches  in  length.

On  the  Atlantic  coast  I have  met  with  this  species  from  the  Gulf
of  Mexico  to  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and  my  friend  Thomas  Macculloch
has  told  me  that  they  are  not  unfrequent  at  Pictou  in  Nova  Scotia.  Far-
ther north  I saw  none  ; and  their  breeding  places  are  yet  unknown  to  me.


Anas  marila,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  196 — Lath.  Iiid.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  853.

Fuligula  marila,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  392.—
Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  453.

Scaup  Duck,  Anas  marila,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith,  vol.  viii.  p.  84.  pi.  69.  fig.  8

Nultall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  437.

Adult  Male.  CCXXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  enlarged  and
flattened  towards  the  end,  which  is  rounded,  the  frontal  angles  narrow
and  pointed.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  at  first  straight  and
declinate,  then  slightly  concave,  along  the'unguis  curved,  the  ridge  broad
at  the  base,  narrowed  at  the  middle,  enlarged  and  convex  towards  the
end,  the  sides  nearly  erect  at  the  base,  becoming  more  and  more  declinate
and  convex,  the  edges  curved  upwards,  with  about  forty  lamellae,  the
unguis  small  and  oblong.  Nostrils  submedial,  oblong,  rather  large,  per-
vious, near  the  ridge,  in  an  oblong  groove  with  a soft  membrane.  Lower
mandible  flat,  with  the  angle  very  long  and  rather  narrow,  the  dorsal
line  very  short  and  straight,  the  erect  edges  with  about  sixty  lamellae, —
on  the  upper  edge,  however,  the  lamellae  are  more  numerous, — the  unguis
broadly  elliptical.


SCAUP  DUCK.


229


Head  of  moderate  size.  Eyes  small.  Neck  of  moderate  length,  ra-
ther thick.  Body  comparatively  short,  compact,  and  depressed.  Wings
small.  Feet  very  short,  strong,  placed  rather  far  behind ; tarsus  very
short,  compressed,  anteriorly  with  a series  of  broad  scutella,  externally  of
which  is  another  of  smaller,  the  rest  reticulated  with  angular  scales.
Hind  toe  small,  with  a free  membrane  beneath  ; anterior  toes  double  the
length  of  the  tarsus,  united  by  reticulated  membranes  having  a sinus  at
their  free  margins,  the  outer  and  inner  with  loose  somewhat  lobed  margi-
nal membranes,  all  obliquely  scutellate  above,  the  third  and  fourth  about
equal  and  longest.  Claws  small,  that  of  first  toe  very  small  and  curved,
of  middle  toe  largest,  with  an  inner  thin  edge,  of  the  rest  very  slender
and  pointed.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  short  and
velvety,  those  of  the  hind  head  a little  elongated.  Wings  shortish,  narrow,
pointed ; primary  quills  curved,  strong,  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the
second  very  little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondary  broad
and  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  very  short,  much
rounded,  of  fourteen  feathers.

Bill  light  greyish-blue,  the  unguis  blackish.  Iris  yellow.  Feet  grey-
ish-blue, the  webs  and  claws  black.  The  head,  the  whole  neck,  and  the
fore  part  of  the  back  and  breast  black,  the  head  and  neck  glossed  with
purple  and  green,  the  rest  tinged  with  brown.  Hind  part  of  the  back,
rump,  abdomen,  and  upper  and  lower  tail-coverts  brownish-black.  Mid-
dle of  the  back,  scapulars,  inner  secondaries,  anterior  part  of  abdomen,
and  sides  greyish-white,  beautifully  marked  with  undulating  black  lines.
Middle  of  the  breast  white,  wings  light  brownish-grey.  Alula,  primaries
at  the  base  and  end,  and  the  greater  part  of  secondaries,  brownish-black  ;
the  speculum  on  the  latter  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  16^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  18;  extent  of  wings
29;  wing  from  flexure  8^;  tail  ; bill  along  the  back  l along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  2;  tarsus  1;^;  middle  toe  its  claw

Weight  1 lb.  6 oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  agrees  with  the  male  in  the  characters  of  the  plumage,  and
in  the  colours  of  the  bare  parts  ; but  those  of  the  former  differ  consider-
ably. The  head,  neck,  and  fore  part  of  the  back  and  breast,  are  umber
brown ; and  there  is  a broad  patch  of  white  along  the  fore  part  of  the


230


SCAUP  DUCK.


forehead.  The  upper  parts  in  general  are  brownish-black,  the  middle  of
the  back  and  the  scapulars  undulated  with  whitish  dots  and  bars.  The
primary  quills  are  greyish  in  the  middle,  and  the  speculum  is  white,  but
of  less  extent  than  in  the  male.  The  greater  part  of  the  breast  and  ab-
domen is  white  ; the  sides  and  parts  under  the  tail  umber  brown.

Length  16^  inches,  extent  of  wings  28.  Weight  1 lb.  6 oz.

The  males,  as  has  been  said,  vary  greatly  in  size,  but  in  adult  speci-
mens there  is  little  difference  in  colouring.  The  birds  figured  in  my  Il-
lustrations, and  described  above,  were  from  the  Mississippi ; but  others
seen  in  various  parts  presented  no  such  differences  as  to  indicate  perma-
nent varieties.


( )


THE  SANDERLING.

2'ringa  arenaria,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXXX.  Male  and  Female.

Although  the  Sanderling  extends  its  rambles  along  our  Atlantic
shores,  from  the  eastern  extremities  of  Maine  to  the  southernmost  Keys  of
the  Floridas,  it  is  only  an  autumnal  and  winter  visitor.  It  arrives  in  the
more  Eastern  Districts  about  the  1st  of  August,  on  the  sea-shores  of  New
York  and  New  Jersey  rarely  before  the  10th  of  August,  and  seldom  reaches
the  extensive  sand-banks  of  East  Florida  previous  to  the  month  of  Novem-
ber. Along  the  whole  of  this  extended  coast,  it  is  more  or  less  abundant,
sometimes  appearing  in  bands  composed  of  a few  individuals,  and  at  times
in  large  flocks,  but  generally  mingling  with  other  species  of  small  shore-
birds.  Thus  I have  seen  Turnstones  and  Knots  mixed  with  the  Sander-
lings,  but  in  such  cases  they  are  perhaps  wanderers,  which  have  not  suc-
ceeded in  meeting  with  companions  of  their  own  species,  that  associate
with  the  birds  of  which  I here  speak.

The  Sanderling  obtains  its  food  principally  by  probing  the  moist
sands  of  the  sea-shores  with  its  bill  held  in  an  oblique  position.  At  every
step  it  inserts  this  instrument  with  surprising  quickness,  to  a greater  or
less  depth,  according  to  the  softness  of  the  sand,  sometimes  introducing
it  a quarter  of  an  inch,  sometimes  to  the  base.  The  holes  thus  made
may  be  seen  on  the  borders  of  beaches,  when  the  tide  is  fast  receding,  in
rows  of  twenty,  thirty,  or  more ; in  certain  spots  less  numerous ; for  it
appears  that  when  a place  proves  unproductive  of  the  food  for  which  they
are  searching,  they  very  soon  take  to  their  wings  and  remove  to  another,
now  and  then  in  so  hurried  a manner  that  one  might  suppose  they  had
been  suddenly  frightened.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  of  those  which
I shot  while  thus  occupied,  were  slender  sea-worms,  about  an  inch  in
length,  together  with  minute  shell-fish  and  gravel.  At  other  times,  when
they  were  seen  following  the  receding  waves,  and  wading  up  to  the  belly
in  the  returning  waters,  I found  in  them  small  shrimps  and  other  Crus-
tacea.

In  their  flight  the  Sanderlings  do  not  perform  so  many  evolutions  as
Sandpipers  usually  display.  They  generally  alight  about  a hundred


232


SANDERLING.


yards  of  the  place  from  which  they  started,  and  run  for  a yard  or  so,
keeping  their  wings  partially  extended.  They  move  on  the  sand  with
great  activity,  running  so  as  to  keep  pace  with  a man  walking  at  a mode-
rate rate.  Their  flight  is  rapid  and  straighter  than  that  of  other  small
species,  and  when  on  wing  they  seldom  exhibit  each  surface  of  the  body
alternately,  as  many  others  are  wont  to  do.

I have  thought  that  the  migrations  of  this  bird  are  carried  on  under
night ; but  of  this  I am  by  no  means  certain,  although  I observed  some
small  flocks,  composed  of  a few  dozen  individuals,  crossing  the  Gulf  of
St  Lawrence,  at  a little  height  over  the  water,  in  the  month  of  June.
The  lateness  of  the  season  induced  me  to  hope  that  I might  find  some
nests  of  the  Sanderling  on  the  coast  of  Labrador  ; but  in  this  I was  dis-
appointed, although  some  young  birds  were  seen  at  Bras  d’Or,  in  little
parties  of  four  or  five  individuals.  This  was  early  in  August,  and  they
were  already  on  their  way  southward.

The  Sanderling  affords  good  eating,  especially  the  young,  and  the
sportsman  may  occasionally  kill  six  or  seven  at  a shot,  provided  he  fires
the  moment  the  flock  has  alighted,  for  immediately  after  the  birds  spread
abroad  in  search  of  food.

The  female  may  easily  be  distinguished  from  the  male,  by  her  su-
perior size ; but  in  the  colouring  of  birds  of  both  sexes,  I have  observed
as  much  difference  as  in  the  Turnstone.  Even  during  winter,  some  are
more  or  less  marked  with  black  and  brownish-red,  while  others,  which,
however,  I easily  ascertained  to  be  younger  birds,  were  of  an  almost  uni-
form light  grey  above,  each  feather  edged  with  dull  white ; but  in  all
those  which  I have  examined,  whether  old  birds  in  the  full  spring  or  sum-
mer dress,  in  which  I have  shot  some  in  May,  in  the  Middle  Districts,  or
young  birds  in  autumn  and  during  winter,  I have  seen  no  difference  in
the  colours  of  the  bill,  legs,  and  toes.  My  plate  of  this  species  represents
two  birds  in  winter  plumage,  which  were  obtained  in  East  Florida  in  the
month  of  December.  The  figure  of  a fine  male,  Avhich,  being  on  another
sheet  of  paper,  was  overlooked  during  my  absence  from  London,  you
will  find  in  Plate  CCLXXXV.  of  « The  Birds  of  America  "


SANDERLING.


233


Charadrius  Calidris,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  255 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  741,  in  Winter.

Charadrius  rubidus,  Ibid.  p.  740,  in  Summer.

Trikga  arenaria,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  320.

Calidris  arenaria,  Sanderi.ing,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.
p.  366.

Ruddy  Plover,  Charadrius  rubidus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  120.  pi.  63.
fig.  3 Summer  dress.

Sanderling  Plover,  Ibidem,  vol.  vii.  p.  68.  pi.  59.  fig.  4.  Winter  dress Nuttall,

Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  4.

Adult  Male  in  winter.  Plate  CCXXX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  straight,
flexible,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  rather  depressed  and  obtuse.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight,  slightly  sloping  to
beyond  the  middle,  the  ridge  convex,  towards  the  end  flattened,  at  the
point  convex  ; sides  sloping,  edges  rather  blunt  and  soft.  Nasal  groove
long ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  convex,  the  sides  sloping-
outwards,  towards  the  end  convex.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Eyes  rather  large.
Neck  of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  slender,  of  mode-
rate length  ; tibia  bare  a considerably  way  up ; tarsus  compressed,  ante-
riorly and  posteriorly  with  numerous  small  scutella ; hind  toe  wanting  ;
toes  of  moderate  length,  slender  ; inner  toe  shorter  than  outer,  middle  toe
considerably  longer,  all  scutellate  above  and  marginate,  with  prominent
papillae,  and  free ; claws  small,  slightly  curved,  extremely  compressed,
blunt.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  beneath,  slightly  distinct  above.  Wings
long  and  pointed ; primaries  tapering,  obtuse,  the  first  longest,  the  se-
cond a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  rather  short,
obliquely  rounded,  curved  inwards,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.
Tail  rather  short,  rounded,  of  twelve  feathers,  the  two  middle  ones  con-
siderably longer.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Iris  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage
above  is  ash-grey,  the  edges  paler ; the  lower  parts  pure  white.  Alula
and'primaries  brownish-black,  the  latter  with  more  or  less  white  on  their
outer  webs  or  along  the  shaft ; secondaries  white,  the  outer  with  a patch


234


SANDERLING


of  brownish-black  towards  the  end,  the  inner  ash-grey  ; primary  coverts
brownish-black,  tipped  with  white  ; secondary  coverts  greyish-brown,
broadly  tipped  with  white.  Middle  tail  feathers  greyish-brown,  their
shafts  white,  the  rest  of  a paler  tint  on  the  outer  webs,  white  on  the  inner,
the  lateral  almost  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  to  end  of  wings  to  end  of  claws  8^  ;
extent  of  wings  wing  from  flexure  ; tail  2^*^  ; bill  along  the

back  1 ; along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1 ; tarsus  1 ; middle  toe  |,

its  claw  Weight  If  oz.

Adult  Female  in  Winter.  Plate  CCXXX.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  Male.

In  its  summer  plumage,  this  species  differs  in  the  following  particu-
lars. The  bill,  feet,  and  iris,  are  as  described  above,  and  the  lower  parts
are  also  pure  white,  excepting  the  fore  part  and  sides  of  the  neck,  which,
as  well  as  the  upper  parts  of  the  head,  and  the  hind  neck,  are  pale  yellow-
ish-red, spotted  with  brownish-black.  The  back  is  similarly  marked,
the  spots  larger,  and  on  the  scapulars  disposed  in  bars ; the  tips  of  most
of  the  feathers  greyish-white,  the  wings  and  tail  are  as  in  winter.


( 235  )


A RACOON  HUNT  IN  KENTUCKY.

The  Racoon,  which  is  a cunning  and  crafty  animal,  is  found  in  all
our  woods,  so  that  its  name  is  familiar  to  every  child  in  the  Union.  The
propensity  which  it  evinces  to  capture  all  kinds  of  birds  accessible  to  it
in  its  nightly  prowlings,  for  the  purpose  of  feasting  on  their  flesh,  induces
me  to  endeavour  to  afford  you  some  idea  of  the  pleasure  which  our  west-
ern hunters  feel  in  procuring  it.  With  your  leave,  then,  Reader,  I will
take  you  to  a “ Coon  Hunt.”

A few  hours  ago  the  sun  went  down  far  beyond  the  “ far  west.”  The
woodland  choristers  have  disappeared,  the  matron  has  cradled  her  babe,
and  betaken  herself  to  the  spinning-wheel ; the  woodsman,  his  sons,  and
“ the  stranger”  are  chatting  before  a blazing  fire,  making  wise  reflections
on  past  events,  and  anticipating  those  that  are  to  come.  Autumn,  sal-
low and  sad,  prepares  to  bow  her  head  to  the  keen  blast  of  approaching
winter ; the  corn,  though  still  on  its  stalk,  has  lost  its  blades ; the  wood
pile  is  as  large  as  the  woodsman’s  cabin ; the  nights  have  become  chill,
and  each  new  morn  has  effected  a gradual  change  in  the  dews,  which  now
crust  the  withered  herbage  with  a coat  of  glittering  white.  The  sky  is
still  cloudless ; a thousand  twinkling  stars  reflect  their  light  from  the
tranquil  waters ; all  is  silent  and  calm  in  the  forest,  save  the  nightly
prowlers  that  roam  in  its  recesses.  In  the  cheerful  cabin  all  is  happiness ;
its  inmates  generously  strive  to  contribute  to  the  comfort  of  the  stranger
who  has  chanced  to  visit  them ; and,  as  racoons  are  abundant  in  the
neighbourhood,  they  propose  a hunt.  T he  offer  is  gladly  accepted.  The
industrious  woman  leaves  her  wheel,  for  she  has  listened  to  her  husband’s
talk ; now  she  approaches  the  fire,  takes  up  the  board  shovel,  stirs  the
embers,  produces  a basket  filled  with  sweet  potatoes,  arranges  its  contents
side  by  side  in  front  of  the  hearth,  and  covers  them  with  hot  ashes  and
glowing  coals.  All  this  she  does,  because  she  “ guesses”  that  hungry  sto-
machs wiU  be  calling  for  food  when  the  sport  is  over.  Ah  ! Reader,
what  “ homely  joys”  there  are  in  such  scenes,  and  how  you  would  enjoy
them  ! The  rich  may  produce  a better,  or  a more  sumptuous  meal ; but
his  feelings  can  never  be  like  those  of  the  poor  woodsman.  Poor  I ought
not  to  call  him,  for  nature  and  industry  bountifully  supply  all  his  wants  ;


206


RACOON  HUNT  IN  KENTUCKY.


the  woods  and  rivers  produce  his  chief  dainties,  and  his  toils  are  his  plea-
sures.

Now  mark  him ! the  bold  Kentuckian  is  on  his  feet ; his  sons  and
the  stranger  prepare  for  the  march.  Horns  and  rifles  are  in  requisition.
The  goodman  opens  the  wooden-hinged  door,  and  sends  forth  a blast
loud  enough  to  scare  a wolf.  The  racoons  scamper  away  from  the  corn-
fields, break  through  the  fences,  and  hie  to  the  woods.  The  hunter  has
taken  an  axe  from  the  wood-pile,  and  returning,  assures  us  that  the  night
is  clear,  and  that  we  shall  have  rare  sport.  He  blows  through  his  rifle,
to  ascertain  that  it  is  clear,  examines  his  flint,  and  thrusts  a feather  into
the  touch-hole.  To  a leathern  bag  swung  at  his  side  is  attached  a powder-
horn  ; his  sheathed  knife  is  there  also  ; below  hangs  a narrow  strip  of
home-spun  linen.  He  takes  from  his  bag  a bullet,  pulls  with  his  teeth
the  wooden  stopper  from  his  powder-horn,  lays  the  ball  on  one  hand,  and
with  the  other  pours  the  powder  upon  it  until  it  is  just  overtopped.
Raising  the  horn  to  his  mouth,  he  again  closes  it  with  the  stopper,  and
restores  it  to  its  place.  He  introduces  the  powder  into  the  tube ; springs
the  box  of  his  gun,  greases  the  “ patch”  over  with  some  melted  tallow,  or
damps  it ; then  places  it  on  the  honeycombed  muzzle  of  his  piece.  The
bullet  is  placed  on  the  patch  over  the  bore,  and  pressed  with  the  handle  of
the  knife,  which  now  trims  the  edges  of  the  linen.  The  elastic  hickory
rod,  held  with  both  hands,  smoothly  pushes  the  ball  to  its  bed : once,
twice,  thrice  has  it  rebounded.  The  rifle  leaps  as  it  were  into  the  hun-
ter’s arms,  the  feather  is  drawn  from  the  touch-hole,  the  powder  fills  the
pan,  which  is  closed.  “•  Now  I’m  ready,”  cries  the  woodsman.  His  com-
panions say  the  same.  Hardly  more  than  a minute  has  elapsed.  I wish.
Reader,  you  had  seen  this  fine  fellow — but  hark  ! the  dogs  are  bark-
ing.

All  is  now  bustle  within  and  without : a servant  lights  a torch,  and
off  we  march  to  the  woods.  “ Don’t  mind  the  boys,  my  dear  sir,”  says
tbe  woodsman,  “ follow  me  close,  for  the  ground  is  covered  with  logs,  and
the  grape  vines  hang  everywhere  across.”  “ Toby,  hold  up  the  light,
man,  or  we’ll  never  see  the  gulUes.”  “ Trail  your  gun,  sir,  as  General
Clark  used  to  say, — not  so,  but  this  way — that’s  it ; now  then,  no  dan-
ger you  see ; no  fear  of  snakes,  poor  things  ! They  are  stiff  enough.  I’ll
be  bound.  The  dogs  have  treed  one.  Toby,  you  old  fool,  why  don’t
you  turn  to  the  right — not  so  much  there — go  a-head,  and  give  us  light
—What’s  that  ? — Who’s  there  ? — Ah,  you  young  rascals  ! you’ve  played


RACOON  HUNT  IN  KENTUCKY.


237


us  a trick,  have  you.  It’s  all  well  enough,  but  now,  just  keep  behind,

or  I’ll” and  in  fact,  the  boys,  with  eyes  good  enough  to  see  in  the

dark,  although  not  quite  so  well  as  an  Owl’s,  had  cut  directly  across  the
dogs,  which  had  surprised  a racoon  on  the  ground  and  bayed  it,  until  the
lads  knocked  it  on  the  head.  “ Seek  him,  boys,”  cries  the  hunter. — The
dogs,  putting  their  noses  to  the  ground,  pushed  off  at  a good  rate.
“ Master,  they’re  making  for  the  creek,”  says  old  Toby.  On  towards  it
therefore  we  push.  What  woods,  to  be  sure  ! No  gentleman’s  park  this,
I assure  you.  Reader.  We  are  now  in  a low  flat ; the  soil  thinly  covers
the  hard  clay  ; nothing  but  beech  trees  hereabouts,  unless  now  and  then
a maple.  Hang  the  hmbs  ! say  I — hang  the  supple-jacks  too — here  I
am,  fast  by  the  neck — cut  it  with  your  knife.  My  knee  has  had  a tre-
mendous rub  against  a log — now,  my  foot  is  jammed  between  two  roots
— and  here  I stick.  “ Toby,  come  back — don’t  you  know  the  stranger
is  not  up  to  the  woods.  Halloo,  Toby,  Toby  !”  There  I stood  perfectly
shackled,  the  hunter  laughing  heartily,  and  the  lads  glad  of  an  opportu-
nity of  slipping  off.  Toby  arrived,  and  held  the  torch  near  the  ground,  on
which  the  hunter  cutting  one  of  the  roots  with  his  hatchet,  set  me  free.
“ Are  you  hurt.  Sir.?” — no,  not  in  the  least.  Off*  we  start  again.  The
boys  had  got  up  with  the  dogs,  which  were  haying  a Racoon  in  a small
puddle.  We  soon  joined  them  with  the  light.  “ Now,  stranger!  watch  and
see !”  The  Racoon  was  all  but  swimming,  and  yet  had  hold  of  the  bottom
of  the  pool  with  his  feet.  The  glare  of  the  lighted  torch  was  doubtless
distressing  to  him  ; his  coat  was  ruffled,  and  his  rounded  tail  seemed
thrice  its  ordinary  size,  his  eyes  shone  like  emeralds ; with  foaming  jaws
he  watched  the  dogs,  ready  to  seize  each  by  the  snout  if  it  came  within
reach.  They  kept  him  busy  for  several  minutes  ; the  water  became  thick
with  mud ; his  coat  now  hung  dripping,  and  his  draggled  tail  lay  floating
on  the  surface.  His  guttural  growlings,  in  place  of  intimidating  his  as-
sailants, excited  them  the  more ; and  they  very  unceremoniously  closed
upon  him,  curs  as  they  were,  and  without  the  breeding  of  gentle  dogs  !
One  seized  him  by  the  rump  and  tugged,  but  was  soon  forced  to  let  go ;
another  stuck  to  his  side,  but  soon  taking  a better  directed  bite  of  his
muzzle  than  another  dog  had  just  done  of  his  tail,  coon  made  him  yelp ;
and  pitiful  were  the  cries  of  luckless  Tyke.  The  Racoon  would  not
let  go,  but  in  the  mean  time  the  other  dogs  seized  him  fast,  and  worried
him  to  death,  yet  to  the  last  he  held  by  his  antagonist’s  snout.  Knocked
on  the  head  by  an  axe,  he  lay  gasping  his  last  breath,  and  the  heaving


238


RACOON  HUNT  IN  KENTUCKY.


of  his  chest  was  painful  to  see.  The  hunters  stood  gazing  at  him  in  the
pool,  while  all  around  was  by  the  flare  of  the  torch  rendered  trebly  dark
and  dismal.  It  was  a good  scene  for  a skilful  painter.

W e had  now  two  coons,  whose  furs  were  worth  two  quarters  of  a dol-
lar, and  whose  bodies,  which  I must  not  forget,  as  Toby  informed  us,
would  produce  two  more.  “ What  now,”  I asked — “ What  now,”  quoth
the  father,  “ why  go  after  more  to  be  sure.”  So  we  did,  the  dogs  ahead,
and  I far  behind.  In  a short  time  the  curs  treed  another,  and  when  we
came  up,  we  found  them  seated  on  their  haunches,  looking  upwards,  and
barking.  The  hunters  now  employed  their  axes,  and  sent  the  chips  about
at  such  a rate  that  one  of  them  coming  in  contact  with  my  cheek  marked
it  so,  that  a week  after  several  of  my  friends  asked  me  where,  in  the  name
of  wonder,  I had  got  that  black  eye.  At  length  the  tree  began  to  crack,
and  slowly  leaning  to  one  side,  the  heavy  mass  swung  rustling  through
the  air,  and  fell  to  the  earth  with  a crash.  It  was  not  one  coon  that  was
surprised  here,  but  three — aye  three  of  them,  one  of  which,  more  crafty
than  the  rest,  leaped  fairly  from  the  main  top  while  the  tree  was  stagger-
ing. The  other  two  stuck  to  the  hollow  of  a branch,  from  which  they
were  soon  driven  by  one  of  the  dogs.  Tyke  and  Lion  having  nosed  the
cunning  old  one,  scampered  after  him,  not  mouthing  like  the  well-trained
hounds  of  our  southern  fox  hunters,  but  yelling  like  furies.  The  hun-
ter’s sons  attacked  those  on  the  tree,  while  the  woodsman  and  I,  preceded
by  Toby,  made  after  the  other ; and  busy  enough  we  all  were.  Our
animal  was  of  extraordinary  size,  and  after  some  parley,  a rifle  ball  was
sent  through  his  brain.  He  reeled  once  only, — next  moment  he  lay  dead.
The  rest  were  dispatched  by  the  axe  and  the  club,  for  a shot  in  those  days
was  too  valuable  to  be  spent  when  it  could  be  saved.  It  could  procure
a deer,  and  therefore  was  worth  more  than  a coon’s  skin.

Now,  look  at  the  moon  ! how  full  and  clear  has  she  risen  on  the  Ra-
coon hunters  ! Now  is  the  time  for  sport ! Onward  we  go,  one  follow-
ing the  long  shadow  of  his  precursor.  The  twigs  are  no  impediment,
and  we  move  at  a brisker  pace,  as  we  return  to  the  hills.  What  a hue
and  cry  ! — here  are  the  dogs.  Overhead  and  all  around,  on  the  forks  of
each  tree,  the  hunter’s  keen  eye  searches  for  something  round,  which  is
likely  to  prove  a coiled  up  Racoon.  There’s  one  ! Between  me  and  the
moon  I spied  the  cunning  thing  crouched  in  silence.  After  taking  aim,
I raise  my  barrel  ever  so  little,  the  trigger  is  pressed ; down  falls  the  Ra-
coon to  the  ground.  Another  and  another  are  on  the  same  tree.  OflT


RACOON  HUNT  IN  KENTUCKY.


239


goes  a bullet,  then  a second  ; and  we  secure  the  prey.  “ Let  us  go  home,
stranger,”  says  the  woodsman ; and  contented  with  our  sport,  towards  his
cabin  we  trudge.  On  arriving  there,  we  find  a cheerful  fire.  Toby  stays
without,  prepares  the  game,  stretches  the  skins  on  a frame  of  cane,  and
washes  the  bodies.  The  table  is  already  set ; the  cake  and  the  potatoes
are  all  well  done ; four  bowls  of  butter-milk  are  ranged  in  order ; and
now  the  hunters  fall  to.

The  Racoon  is  a cunning  animal,  and  makes  a pleasant  pet.  Monkey-
like, it  is  quite  dexterous  in  the  use  of  its  fore  feet,  and  it  will  amble  after
its  master,  in  the  manner  of  a bear,  and  even  follow  him  into  the  street.
It  is  fond  of  eggs,  but  prefers  them  raw,  and  it  matters  not  whether  it  be
morning,  noon,  or  night,  when  it  finds  a dozen  in  the  pheasant’s  nest,  or
one  placed  in  your  pocket  to  please  him.  He  knows  the  habits  of  mussels
better  than  most  conchologists.  Being  an  expert  climber,  he  ascends  to
the  hole  of  the  woodpecker,  and  devours  the  young  birds.  He  knows,
too,  how  to  watch  the  soft-shelled  turtle’s  crawl,  and,  better  still,  how  to
dig  up  her  eggs.  Now  by  the  edge  of  the  pond,  grimalkin-like,  he  lies
seemingly  asleep,  until  the  summer-duck  comes  within  reach.  No  Negro
knows  better  when  the  corn  is  juicy  and  pleasant  to  eat ; and  although
squirrels  and  woodpeckers  know  this  too,  the  Racoon  is  found  in  the  corn-
field longer  in  the  season  than  any  of  them,  the  havock  he  commits  there
amounting  to  a tithe.  His  fur  is  good  in  winter,  and  many  think  his  flesh
good  also ; but  for  my  part  I prefer  a live  Racoon  to  a dead  one,  and
should  find  more  pleasure  in  hunting  one  than  in  eating  him.


( 240  )


THE  LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.

NuMENIUS  LONGIROSTRIS,  WiLS.

PLATE  CCXXXL  Male  and  Female.

The  Long-billed  Curlew  is  a constant  resident  in  the  southern  dis-
tricts of  the  United  States,  whereas  the  other  species  are  only  autumnal
and  winter  visitors.  It  is  well  known  by  the  inhabitants  of  Charleston
that  it  breeds  on  the  islands  on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina ; and  my
friend  the  Reverend  John  Bachman  has  been  at  their  breeding  grounds.
That  some  individuals  go  far  north  to  breed,  is  possible  enough,  but  we
have  no  authentic  account  of  such  an  occurrence,  although  many  supposi-
tions have  been  recorded.  All  that  I have  to  say  on  this  subject  is,  that
the  bird  in  question  is  quite  unknown  in  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  where,
notwithstanding  the  assertions  of  the  fishermen,  they  acknowledged  that
they  had  mistaken  Godwits  for  Curlews.  In  Newfoundland,  I met  with
a well-informed  English  gentleman,  who  had  resided  in  that  island'  up-
Avards  of  twenty  years,  and  described  the  Common  Curlew  of  Europe
with  accuracy,  but  who  assured  me  that  he  had  observed  only  two  species
of  Curlew  there,  one  about  the  size  of  the  Whimbrel — the  Numenius
hudsonicus,  the  other  smaller — the  N.  borealis,  and  that  only  in  August
and  the  beginning  of  September,  when  they  spend  a few  days  in  that
country,  feed  on  berries,  and  then  retire  southAvard.  Mr  Jones  of  Lab-
rador, and  his  brother-in-law,  who  is  a Scotch  gentleman,  a scholar,  and
a sportsman,  gave  me  the  same  account.  None  of  my  party  observed  an
individual  of  the  species  in  the  course  of  our  three  months’  stay  in  the
country,  although  we  saw  great  numbers  of  the  true  Esquimaux  Curlew,
N.  borealis.  Yet  I would  not  have  you  to  suppose  that  I do  not  give
credit  to  the  reports  of  some  travellers,  who  have  said  that  the  Long-billed
Curlew  is  found  in  the  fur  countries  during  summer.  This  may  be  true
enough  ; but  none  of  the  great  northern  travellers,  such  as  Richardson,
Ross,  Parry,  or  Franklin,  have  asserted  this  as  a fact.  Therefore  if
the  bird  of  which  I speak  has  been  seen  far  north,  it  was  in  all  probabi-
lity a feAv  stragglers  that  had  perhaps  been  enticed  to  follow  some  other
species.  I am  well  aware  of  the  propensity  it  has  to  ramble,  as  I have
shot  some  in  Missouri,  Indiana,  Kentucky,  Arkansas,  and  Mississippi ;


LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.


241


but  the  birds  thus  obtained  were  rare  in  those  districts,  where  the  species
only  appears  at  remote  periods  ; and  in  every  instance  of  the  kind  I have
found  the  individuals  much  less  shy  than  usual,  and  apparently  more  per-
plexed than  frightened  by  the  sight  of  man.

Until  my  learned  friend.  Prince  Charles  Bonaparte,  corrected  the
errors  which  had  been  made  respecting  the  Curlews  of  North  America,
hardly  one  of  these  birds  was  known  from  another  by  any  naturalist,
American  or  European.  To  Wilson,  however,  is  due  the  merit  of  having
first  pubhshed  an  account  of  the  Long-billed  Curlew  as  a species  distinct
from  the  Common  Curlew  of  Europe.

This  bird  is  the  largest  of  the  genus  found  in  North  America.  The
great  length  of  its  bill  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  distinguish  it  from  every
other.  The  bill,  however,  in  all  the  species,  differs  greatly,  according
to  the  age  of  the  individual,  and  in  the  present  Curlew  I have  seen  it
in  some  birds  nearly  three  inches  shorter  than  in  others,  although  all
were  full  grown.  In  many  of  its  habits,  the  Long-billed  Curlew  is  closely
allied  to  the  smaller  species  of  Ibis  ; its  flight  and  manner  of  feeding  are
similar,  and  it  has  the  same  number  of  eggs.  Unlike  the  Ibis,  however,
which  always  breeds  on  trees,  and  forms  a large  nest,  the  Curlew  breeds
on  the  ground,  forming  a scanty  receptacle  for  its  eggs ; yet,  according
to  my  friend  Bachman,  the  latter,  like  the  former,  places  its  nests  “ so
close  together,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  a man  to  walk  between
theiH,  without  injuring  the  eggs.”

The  Long-billed  Curlew  spends  the  day  in  the  sea-marshes,  from
which  it  returns  at  the  approach  of  night,  to  the  sandy  beaches  of  the
sea-shores,  where  it  rests  until  dawn.  As  the  sun  sinks  beneath  the  hori-
zon, the  Curlews  rise  from  their  feeding-grounds  in  small  parties,  seldom
exceeding  fifteen  or  twenty,  and  more  usually  composed  of  only  five  oi
six  individuals.  The  flocks  enlarge,  however,  as  they  proceed,  and  in
the  course  of  an  hour  or  so  the  number  of  birds  that  collect  in  the  place
selected  for  their  nightly  retreat,  sometimes  amounts  to  several  thousands.
As  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  witness  their  departures  and  arrivals,  in  the
company  of  my  friend  Bachman,  I will  here  describe  them.

Accompanied  by  several  friends,  I left  Charleston  one  beautiful  morn-
ing, the  10th  of  November  1831,  with  a view  to  visit  Cole’s  Island,  about
twenty  miles  distant.  Our  crew  was  good,  and  although  our  pilot  knew
but  little  of  the  cuttings  in  and  out  of  the  numerous  inlets  and  channels  in
our  way,  we  reached  the  island  about  noon.  After  shooting  various  birds,


VOL.  III.


a


242


LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.


examining  the  island,  and  depositing  our  provisions  in  a small  summer
habitation  then  untenanted,  we  separated ; some  of  the  servants  went  off
to  fish,  others  to  gather  oysters,  and  the  gunners  placed  themselves  in  rea-
diness for  the  arrival  of  the  Curlews.  The  sun  at  length  sunk  beneath
the  water-line  that  here  formed  the  horizon ; and  we  saw  the  birds  making
their  first  appearance.  They  were  in  small  parties  of  two,  three,  or  five,
and  by  no  means  shy.  These  seemed  to  be  the  birds  which  we  had  ob-
served near  the  salt-marshes,  as  Ave  were  on  our  way.  As  the  twilight
became  darker  the  number  of  Curlews  increased,  and  the  flocks  approach-
ed in  quicker  succession,  until  they  appeared  to  form  a continuous  pro-
cession, moving  not  in  lines,  one  after  another,  but  in  an  extended  mass,
and  with  considerable  regularity,  at  a height  of  not  more  than  thirty
yards,  the  individuals  being  a few  feet  apart.  Not  a single  note  or  cry
was  heard  as  they  advanced.  They  moved  for  ten  or  more  yards  with
regular  flappings,  and  then  sailed  for  a few  seconds,  as  is  invariably  the
mode  of  flight  of  this  species,  their  long  bills  and  legs  stretched  out  to
their  full  extent.  They  flew  directly  towards  their  place  of  rest,  called
the  “ Bird  Banks,”  and  were  seen  to  alight  without  performing  any  of  the
evolutions  which  they  exhibit  when  at  their  feeding-places,  for  they  had
not  been  disturbed  that  season.  But  when  we  followed  them  to  the  Bird
Banks,  which  are  sandy  islands  of  small  extent,  the  moment  they  saw  us
land  the  congregated  flocks,  probably  amounting  to  several  thousand  in-
dividuals all  standing  close  together,  rose  at  once,  performed  a few  evolu-
tions in  perfect  silence,  and  re-alighted  as  if  with  one  accord  on  the  ex-
treme margins  of  the  sand-bank  close  to  tremendous  breakers.  It  was
now  dark,  and  we  left  the  place,  although  some  flocks  were  still  arriving.
The  next  morning  we  returned  a little  before  day ; but  again  as  we
landed,  they  all  rose  a few  yards  in  the  air,  separated  into  numerous  par-
ties, and  dispersing  in  various  directions,  fleAv  off  towards  their  feeding-
grounds,  keeping  low  over  the  waters,  until  they  reached  the  shores,  when
they  ascended  to  the  height  of  about  a hundred  yards,  and  soon  disap-
peared.

Now,  Reader,  allow  me  to  say  a few  words  respecting  our  lodgings.
Fish,  fowl,  and  oysters  had  been  procured  in  abundance ; and  besides
these  delicacies,  we  had  taken  with  us  from  Charleston  some  steaks  of
beef,  and  a sufficiency  of  good  beverage.  But  we  had  no  cook,  save  your
humble  servant.  A blazing  fire  Avarmed  and  lighted  our  only  apartment.
The  oysters  and  fish  Avere  thrown  on  the  hot  embers  ; the  steaks  we  stuck


LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.


243


on  sticks  in  front  of  them ; and  ere  long  every  one  felt  perfectly  contented.
It  is  true  we  had  forgotten  to  bring  salt  with  us  ; but  I soon  proved  to
my  merry  companions  that  hunters  can  find  a good  substitute  in  their
powder-flasks.  Our  salt  on  this  occasion  was  gunpowder,  as  it  has  been
with  me  many  a time ; and  to  our  keen  appetites,  the  steaks  thus  salted
were  quite  as  savoury  as  any  of  us  ever  found  the  best  cooked  at  home.
Our  fingers  and  mouths,  no  doubt,  bore  marks  of  the  “ villanous  salt-
petre,” or  rather  of  the  charcoal  with  which  it  was  mixed,  for  plates  or
forks  we  had  none  ; but  this  only  increased  our  mirth.  Supper  over,  we
spread  out  our  blankets  on  the  log  floor,  extended  ourselves  on  them  with
our  feet  towards  the  fire,  and  our  arms  under  our  heads  for  pillows.  I
need  not  tell  you  how  soundly  we  slept.

The  Long-billed  Curlews  are  in  general  easily  shot,  but  take  a good
charge.  So  long  as  Ufe  remains  in  them,  they  skulk  off  among  the  thick-
est plants,  remaining  perfectly  silent.  Should  they  fall  on  the  water,
they  swim  towards  the  shore.  The  birds  that  may  have  been  in  com-
pany with  a wounded  one  fly  off  uttering  a few  loud  whistling  notes.  In
this  respect,  the  species  differs  from  aU  the  others,  which  commonly  re-
main and  fly  about  you.  When  on  land,  they  are  extremely  wary  ; and
unless  the  plants  are  high,  and  you  can  conceal  yourself  from  them,  it  is
very  difficult  to  get  near  enough.  Some  one  of  the  flock,  acting  as  senti-
nel, raises  his  wings,  as  if  about  to  fly,  and  sounds  a note  of  alarm,  on
which  they  all  raise  their  wings,  close  them  again,  give  over  feeding,  and
watch  all  your  motions.  At  times  a single  step  made  by  you  beyond  a
certain  distance  is  quite  enough  to  raise  them,  and  the  moment  it  takes
place,  they  all  scream  and  fly  off.  You  need  not  follow  the  flock.  The
best  mode  of  shooting  them  is  to  watch  their  course  for  several  evenings
in  succession ; for  after  having  chosen  a resting  place,  they  are  sure  to
return  to  it  by  the  same  route,  until  greatly  annoyed.

The  food  of  the  Long-billed  Curlews  consists  principally  of  the  small
crabs  called  fiddlers,  which  they  seize  by  running  after  them,  or  by  pull-
ing them  out  of  their  burrows.  They  probe  the  wet  sand  to  the  full
length  of  their  bill,  in  quest  of  sea-worms  and  other  animals.  They  are
also  fond  of  small  salt-water  shell-fish,  insects,  and  worms  of  any  kind  ;
but  I have  never  seen  them  searching  for  berries  on  elevated  lands,  as
the  Esquimaux  Curlews  are  wont  to  do.  Their  flesh  is  by  no  means  so
delicate  as  that  of  the  species  just  mentioned,  for  it  has  usually  a fishy
taste,  and  is  rarely  tender,  although  many  persons  consider  it  good.  They

q2


244


LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.


are  sold  at  all  seasons  in  the  markets  of  Charleston,  at  about  twenty-five
cents  the  pair.

Rambling  birds  of  this  species  are  sometimes  seen  as  far  as  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Boston;  for  my  learned  friend  Thomas  Nuttall  says  in  his
Manual,  that  “ they  get  so  remarkably  fat,  at  times,  as  to  burst  the  skin
in  falling  to  the  ground,  and  are  then  superior  in  flavour  to  almost  any
other  game  bird  of  the  season.  In  the  market  of  Boston,  they  are  seen
as  early  as  the  8th  of  August.”  I found  them  rather  rare  in  East  Florida
in  winter  and  spring.  Ehey  were  tnere  seen  either  on  large  savannahs,
or  along  the  sea  shore,  mixed  with  marbled  Godwits,  Tell-tales,  and  other
species.


Numenius  LONGIROSTRIS,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,
p.  314. — Richards  and  Swains.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  376.

Long-billed  Curlew,  Numenius  longirostris,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.
p.  23.  pi.  64.  fig.  1.  adult — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  94.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  excessively  elongated,  being  more  than  four  times  the  length  of
head,  very  slender,  subcylindrical,  slightly  compressed,  nearly  straight  to
the  middle,  beyond  which  it  is  slightly  curved.  Upper  mandible  with
the  ridge  broad  and  flat  at  the  base,  broad  and  rounded  in  the  rest
of  its  extent,  a deep  groove  running  from  the  nostrils  to  near  the  tip,
which  is  decurved,  enlarged  so  as  to  form  an  oblong  obtuse  knob,  pro-
jecting beyond  the  point  of  the  lower  mandible,  the  edges  rounded,  the
inner  surface  with  a deep  narrow  groove.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  longi-
tudinal, linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  similar  in  its  curvature  to  the
upper,  its  angle  extremely  narrow,  and  extending  to  near  the  middle,  the
ridge  rounded,  the  sides  with  a shallow  groove  to  near  the  end,  the  edges
directly  meeting  those  of  the  upper  mandible,  the  tip  obtuse.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  long  and  slender.
Body  rather  slender.  Feet  long  and  rather  stout.  Toes  rather  small,
scutellate  above ; first  very  small,  second  and  fourth  about  equal,  third
considerably  longer,  flat  beneath  and  broadly  marginate,  the  three  ante-
rior connected  by  short  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  much  larger.  Bare
part  of  tibia  covered  with  transverse  series  of  angular  scales,  as  is  the
upper  part  of  the  tarsus,  its  lower  two-thirds  with  scutella  in  front.
Claws  small,  compressed,  blunt,  that  of  middle  toe  largest,  curved  out-
wards, with  a sharp  dilated  inner  edge.


LONG-BILLED  CURLEW.


245


Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short.
Wings  long,  very  acute,  narrow,  the  first  quill  longest,  the  second  a little
shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  of  moderate  length,
slightly  incurved,  narrowly  rounded,  some  of  the  inner  greatly  elongated
and  tapering.  Tail  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Upper  mandible  of  a rich  deep  brown  in  its  whole  extent,  as  is  the
lower  in  its  terminal  half,  its  basal  portion  being  flesh  colour  tinged  with
brown.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  light  greyish-blue;  claws  dusky.  The  ground
colour  of  the  plumage  is  light  yellowish-red ; the  head  marked  with  ob-
long spots,  the  back  with  spots  and  bars  of  brownish-black.  Alula  and
outer  webs  of  first  four  quills  deep  brown,  the  rest  of  the  quills  of  the
general  colour,  barred  on  both  webs  with  dark  brown,  as  are  the  tail  fea-
thers. Chin  or  upper  part  of  throat  white,  as  is  the  lower  eyelid ; neck
marked  with  longitudinal  lines  of  brownish-black ; sides  barred  with  the
same,  as  are  the  lower  larger  wing-coverts  ; the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  un-
spotted, the  sides  and  under  wing-coverts  of  a richer  yellowish-red  than
the  rest.

Length  to  end  of  tail  26  inches,  to  end  of  wings  26,  to  end  of  claws
29 ; extent  of  wings  40  ; wing  from  flexure  II  | ; tail  4^  ; bill  along  the
back  8| ; along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  8 ; bare  part  of  tibia  2 ;
tarsus  3j%  ; middle  toe  its  claw  ||.  Weight  1|  lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXXT.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  Male  by  external  ap-
pearance.

The  bill  varies  in  length  from  7 to  9 inches.  It  has  been  remarked
that  the  tarsus  of  this  species  is  scutellate  anteriorly  in  its  whole  length,
whereas  that  of  N.  arquata  is  scutellate  on  its  lower  half  only ; but  this  is
incorrect ; for  both  species  have  transverse  series  of  small  scales  on  the
upper  third  of  the  tarsus.


( 246  )


THE  HOODED  MERGANSER.

Mergus  cucullatus,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXXXII.  Male  and  Female.

Excepting  the  Smew  or  White  Nun,  the  Hooded  Merganser  is  the
handsomest  of  its  family.  Its  broad  and  rounded  crest  of  pure  white,
with  an  edging  of  jetty  black,  and  which  it  closes  or  spreads  out  at  plea-
sure, renders  the  male  of  this  species  conspicuous  on  the  waters  to  which
it  resorts.  The  activity  of  its  motions,  the  rapidity  of  its  flight,  and  its
other  habits,  contribute  to  render  it  a pleasing  object  to  the  student  of
nature,  not  less  than  to  the  sportsman.  Its  flesh,  however,  has  a fishy
taste  and  odour,  although  it  is  relished  by  some  persons.  It  seems  to  pre-
fer fresh  water,  and  is  by  no  means  very  frequent  along  the  sea  coast.
Long,  narrow,  and  moderately  deep  creeks,  or  small  ponds,  are  more  fre-
quented by  it  than  large  rivers  or  lakes.

On  the  waters  of  the  Western  and  Southern  States,  these  Mergansers
are  seen  to  arrive  from  the  north  early  in  October,  but  generally  later
than  many  species  of  Ducks,  although  sooner  than  either  the  Red-breasted
Merganser  or  the  Goosander.  At  the  approach  of  night,  a person  stand-
ing still  on  the  banks  of  such  a river  as  the  Ohio,  first  hears  the  well-
known  sound  of  wings  whistling  through  the  air,  presently  after,  a diffe-
rent noise,  as  if  produced  by  an  eagle  stooping  on  her  prey,  when  gliding
downwards  with  the  rapidity  of  an  arrow,  he  dimly  perceives  the  Hooded
Mergansers  sweeping  past.  Five  or  six,  perhaps  ten,  there  are;  with
quick  beats  of  their  pinions,  they  fly  low  over  the  waters  in  wide  circles.
Now  they  have  spied  the  entrance  of  a creek ; there  they  shoot  into  it,
and  in  a few  seconds  you  hear  the  rushing  noise  which  they  make  as  they
alight  on  the  bosom  of  the  still  pool.  How  often  have  I enjoyed  such
scenes,  when  enticed  abroad  by  the  clear  light  of  the  silvery  moon,  I have
wandered  on  the  shores  of  la  belle  riviere,  to  indulge  in  the  contemplation
of  nature !

Up  the  creek  the  Mergansers  proceed,  washing  their  bodies  by  short
plunges,  and  splashing  up  the  water  about  them.  Then  they  plume  them-
selves, and  anoint  their  feathers,  now  and  then  emitting  a low  grunting
note  of  pleasure.  And  now  they  dive  in  search  of  minnows,  which  they


HOODED  MERGANSER.


247


find  in  abundance,  and  which  no  doubt  prove  delicious  food  to  the  hun-
gry travellers.  At  length,  having  satisfied  their  appetite,  they  rise  on
wing,  fly  low  over  the  creek  with  almost  incredible  velocity,  return  to  the
broad  stream,  rove  along  its  margin  until  they  meet  with  a clean  sand-
beach,  where  they  alight,  and  where,  secure  from  danger,  they  repose  un-
til the  return  of  day.  A sly  Racoon  may,  when  in  search  of  mussels,
chance  to  meet  with  the  sleeping  birds,  and  surprise  one  of  them  ; but
this  rarely  happens,  for  they  are  as  wary  and  vigilant  as  their  enemy  is
cunning,  and  were  the  prowler  to  depend  upon  Hooded  Mergansers  for
food,  he  would  be  lean  enough.

This  bird  ranges  throughout  the  United  States  during  winter,  content
with  the  food  it  meets  with  in  the  bays  and  estuaries  of  the  eastern  coast,
and  on  the  inland  streams.  The  dam  of  the  Pennsylvania  miller  is  as
agreeable  to  it  as  that  of  the  Carolina  rice-planter.  The  Le  High  and
Brandy-wine  Creek  have  their  fishes,  as  well  as  the  waters  of  Bear  Grass
or  Bayou  Sara.  Nay,  the  numerous  streams  and  pools  of  the  interior  of
the  Floridas  are  resorted  to  by  this  species,  and  there  I have  found  them
full  of  life  and  gaiety,  as  well  as  on  the  Missouri,  and  on  our  great  lakes.
When  the  weather  proves  too  cold  for  them  they  move  southwards  many
of  them  removing  towards  Mexico.

The  Hooded  Merganser  is  a most  expert  diver,  and  so  vigilant  that
at  times  it  escapes  even  from  the  best  percussion  gun.  As  to  shooting  at
it  with  a flint  lock,  you  may  save  yourself  the  trouble  unless  you  prevent
it  from  seeing  the  flash  of  the  pan.  If  you  wound  one,  never  follow  it :
the  bird,  when  its  strength  is  almost  exhausted,  immerses  its  body,  raises
the  point  of  its  bill  above  the  surface,  and  in  this  manner  makes  its  way
among  the  plants,  until  finding  some  safe  retreat  along  the  shore,  it  be-
takes itself  to  it,  and  there  remains,  so  that  you  may  search  for  it  in  vain,
unless  you  have  a good  dog.  Even  on  wing  it  is  not  easily  shot.  If  on
a creek  ever  so  narrow,  it  will  fly  directly  towards  its  mouth,  although
you  may  be  standing  knee-deep  in  the  middle.  It  comes  up  like  a ball,
rises  and  passes  over  head  with  astonishing  speed,  and  if  you  shoot  at  it,
do  not  calculate  upon  a hit.  You  may  guess  how  many  one  may  shoot
in  a day.

When  I removed  from  Pennsylvania  to  Kentucky,  the  Hooded  Mer-
ganser was  not  uncommon  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Louisville  during
summer,  and  I told  Wilson  so.  On  several  occasions  I caught  the
young  with  a partridge  net ; and  let  me  assure  you,  Reader,  that  they


248


HOODED  MERGANSER.


are  not  yellow,  as  is  alleged  by  some  writers,  but  very  dark  brown.
Even  when  feathered  they  retain  the  same  colour  until  the  beginning  of
August,  when  they  gradually  change  it  for  the  dress  of  the  adult  female.

Like  all  the  rest  of  the  tribe,  which,  when  far  north,  for  the  want  of
hollow  trees,  breed  on  the  moss  or  ground,  the  Hooded  Mergansers  that
remain  with  us  nestle  in  the  same  kind  of  holes  or  hollows  as  the  Wood
Ducks  ; at  least  I have  found  their  nests  in  such  situations  seven  or  eight
times,  although  I never  saw  one  of  them  alight  on  the  branch  of  a tree,
as  the  birds  just  mentioned  are  wont  to  do.  They  dive  as  it  were  directly
into  their  wooden  burrows,  where  on  a few  dried  weeds  and  feathers  of
different  kinds,  with  a small  quantity  of  down  from  the  breast  of  the  fe-
male, the  eggs  are  deposited.  They  are  from  five  to  eight,  measure  one
inch  and  three-fourths  by  one  and  three-eighths,  and  in  other  respects
perfectly  resemble  those  of  the  Red-breasted  Merganser.

The  young,  like  those  of  the  Wood  Duck,  are  conveyed  to  the  water
by  their  mother,  who  carries  them  gently  in  her  bill ; for  the  male  takes
no  part  in  providing  for  his  offspring,  but  abandons  his  mate  as  soon  as
incubation  has  commenced.  The  affectionate  mother  leads  her  young
among  the  tall  rank  grasses  which  fill  the  shallow  pools  or  the  borders  of
creeks,  and  teaches  them  to  procure  snails,  tadpoles,  and  insects.  The  eggs
are  laid  in  May,  and  the  young  are  out  some  time  in  June.  On  two  oc-
casions the  parents  would  not  abandon  the  young,  although  I expected
that  the  noises  which  I made  would  have  induced  them  to  do  so : they
both  followed  their  offspring  into  the  net  which  I had  set  for  them.  The
young  all  died  in  two  days,  when  I restored  the  old  birds  to  liberty.

The  Hooded  Merganser,  as  well  as  all  the  other  species  with  which  I
am  acquainted,  moves  with  ease  on  the  ground,  nay  even  runs  with  speed.
Those  which  leave  the  United  States,  take  their  departure  from  the  first
of  March  to  the  middle  of  May ; and  I am  induced  to  believe  that  pro-
bably one-third  of  them  tarry  for  the  purpose  of  breeding  on  the  margins
of  several  of  our  great  lakes.  When  migrating,  they  fly  at  a great  height,
in  small  loose  flocks,  without  any  regard  to  order.  Their  notes  consist
of  a kind  of  rough  grunt,  variously  modulated,  but  by  no  means  musical,
and  resembling  the  syllables  croo,  croo,  crooh.  The  female  repeats  it  six
or  seven  times  in  succession,  when  she  sees  her  young  in  danger.  The
same  noise  is  made  by  the  male,  either  when  courting  on  the  water,  or  as
he  passes  on  wing  near  the  hole  where  the  female  is  laying  one  of  her


HOODED  MERGANSER.


249


The  males  do  not  acquire  tlie  full  beauty  of  their  plumage  until  the
third  spring,  but  resemble  the  females  for  the  first  year.  In  the  course
of  the  second,  the  crest  becomes  more  developed,  and  the  white  and  black
markings  about  the  head  and  body  are  more  distinct.  The  third  spring
they  are  complete,  such  as  you  see  the  bird  represented  in  the  plate.


Mehgus  cucullatus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  207. — Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.
p.  830 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  397.

Hooded  Mergansek,  Mehgus  cucullatus,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.
Amer.  part  ii.  p.  463. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  465.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  somewhat  cylindrical,
deeper  than  broad  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline
sloping  gently  to  the  middle,  then  straight,  along  the  unguis  curved,  the
ridge  broad  at  the  base,  then  convex,  the  sides  sloping  at  the  base,  con-
vex towards  the  end,  the  edges  serrated  beneath,  with  twenty-five  tooth-
like lamellae  directed  backwards,  the  unguis  oblong,  much  curved,  round-
ed at  the  end.  Nasal  groove  oblong,  subbasal,  filled  by  a soft  membrane ;
nostrils  linear-elliptical,  submedial,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible,
with  the  angle  very  narrow  and  extended  to  the  roundish  unguis,  the  sides
rounded,  with  a long  narrow  groove,  the  edges  with  about  twenty-five  la-
mellae.

Head  of  moderate  size,  compressed,  oblong.  Neck  rather  short,  body
full  and  depressed.  Wings  small.  Feet  placed  far  behind,  extremely
short ; tibia  bare  for  a short  space  above  the  joint ; tarsus  extremely
short,  compressed,  anteriorly  covered  with  scutella,  and  another  row  on
the  lower  half  externally,  the  sides  reticulate.  Hind  toe  very  small,  with
an  inferior  free  membrane  ; anterior  toes  double  the  length  of  the  tarsus  ;
second  shorter  than  fourth,  which  is  nearly  as  long  as  the  third,  all  con-
nected by  reticulated  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  deeply  cut ; the  outer
toe  slightly  margined,  the  inner  with  a broad  marginal  membrane.  Claws
short,  considerably  curved,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  middle  toe  with
a thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  on  the  upper  parts  strong  and  imbricated,  on  the  lower
blended  and  glossed ; on  the  head  and  neck  soft  and  blended,  the  feathers
of  the  upper  part  of  the  head  elongated  and  capable  of  being  erected  into
a long  compressed  rounded  crest,  those  of  tlie  shoulders  very  broad  and


250


HOODED  MERGANSER.


elongated.  Wings  very  short,  small,  curved,  and  pointed;  primaries
narrow,  tapering,  the  first  scarcely  shorter  than  second,  the  rest  rapidly
graduated  ; secondaries  short,  narrow,  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and
tapering.  Tail  short,  graduated,  of  sixteen  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  yellow.  Feet  yellowish-brown  ; claws  dusky.  Up-
per part  of  the  head,  back,  smaller  wing-coverts,  quills  and  tail,  brown-
ish-black ; sides  of  the  head,  upper  half  of  neck  all  round,  the  broad  ex-
tremities of  the  large  feathers  on  the  shoulders,  the  scapulars,  inner  secon-
daries, and  larger  wing-coverts,  greenish-black.  A broad  patch  of  white
behind  the  eye,  very  conspicuous  in  the  erected  crest.  Lower  part  of
neck  and  breast  also  white,  as  are  the  speculum  and  the  central  part  of
the  inner  secondaries.  Sides  beautifully  marked  with  undulated  trans-
verse lines  of  yellowish-brown  and  brownish-black  ; lower  tail-coverts
whitish,  similarly  undulated.

Length  to  end  of  tail  19  inches,  to  end  of  wings  16|,  to  end  of  claws
18;  extent  of  wings  26;  wing  from  flexure  7^;  tail  4;  bill  along  the
ridge  li|,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  If;  tarsus  Ij,  middle  toe
1^|,  its  claw  Weight  1 lb.  7 oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXXII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  much  smaller  than  the  male.  The  crest  is  smaller  and
of  a looser  texture  ; the  feathers  of  the  shoulders  not  so  large ; those  of
the  sides  shorter  and  more  compact.  The  bill  is  brownish-black  towards
the  end  and  along  the  ridge,  orange  towards  the  base.  The  upper  part
of  the  head,  including  the  crest,  yellowish-brown  ; chin  whitish,  upper
part  of  neck  and  sides  of  the  head  greyish-brown.  The  general  colour  of
the  back,  upper  surface  of  wings,  tail,  and  sides,  is  blackish-brown,  the
feathers  edged  with  paler,  the  edgings  of  the  fore  part  of  the  back  and
shoulders  larger  and  pale  greyish-brown ; speculum  greyish- white ; breast
and  abdomen  pale  yellowish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  17i  inches,  to  end  of  claws  16^ ; extent  of
wings  24.  Weight  1 lb.

The  Young  resemble  the  female.  The  young  males  after  their  first
moult  still  resemble  the  female,  but  have  the  speculum  and  lower  parts
pure  white.


( 251  )


THE  SORA  RAIL.

Rallus  carolinus,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXXXIII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Not  many  years  have  elapsed  since  it  .was  supposed  by  some  of  the
inhabitants  of  those  districts  to  which  thousands  of  this  species  of  Rail
resort  at  particular  periods,  that  the  Soras  buried  themselves  in  the  mud
at  the  approach  of  cold  weather,  for  the  purpose  of  there  spending  the
winter  in  a state  of  torpidity.  Many  wonderful  tales  were  circulated  to
convince  the  world  of  the  truth  of  this  alleged  phenomenon  ; but  the  fact
was,  as  you  will  naturally  anticipate,  that  the  birds  merely  shifted  their
quarters,  as  no  doubt  they  will  continue  to  do,  so  long  as  the  climate  be-
comes too  cold  for  them  in  winter.  Prior  to  the  days  of  Wilson,  very
little  indeed  had  been  published  respecting  the  habits  of  our  birds.  Su-
perstitious notions  and  absurd  fancies  occupied  the  place  of  accurate
knowledge  in  the  minds  of  people  too  earnestly  engaged  in  more  import-
ant pursuits,  to  attend  to  the  history  of  the  animals  around  them  ; and
with  respect  to  the  Sora  in  particular,  I have  no  doubt  that  the  settlers
in  our  original  forests  cared  very  little  about  them,  farther  than  that,
when  well  cooked,  they  afforded  a very  savoury  dish.  Now,  however,
the  case  is  very  different.  Many  of  the  enterprising  and  industrious  sons
of  Columbia  have  attained  affluence  and  ease,  and  their  children  receive
a liberal  education.  The  sciences  and  arts,  those  attendants  on  peaceful
commerce,  are  now  sources  of  pleasure  to  many  of  our  citizens,  and  at  the
present  day  there  are  not  a few  individuals  among  us,  devotedly  engaged
in  the  pursuit  of  zoology  in  all  its  branches.  So  rapid  has  been  the  pro-
gress of  ornithology  in  particular,  that  I should  hesitate  before  asserting
that  any  American,  however  uncultured,  now  believes  that  Rails  burrow
in  the  mud.

Those  who  have  studied  the  habits  of  our  birds,  or  of  those  of  any  part
of  the  world,  no  longer  admit  that  Swallows  are  condemned  to  search  for
warmth  under  the  ice ; for  we  have  proofs  that  these  birds  can  with  ease  ob-
tain all  that  is  necessary  for  their  comfortable  subsistence,  by  removing  on
wing  to  a warmer  region.  The  Soras  and  many  other  species  of  birds  are
similar  in  this  respect  to  the  Swallows.  The  Vulture  that  was  supposed


262


SORA  RAIL.


to  scent  his  food  from  afar,  has  well  nigh  lost  his  olfactory  powers.
Geese  are  no  longer  the  offspring  of  sea-shells  ; nor  do  Swans  now  chaunt
their  own  requiem.  The  Pelican,  too,  has  ceased  to  tear  its  own  breast
to  gorge  its  voracious  young.  Students  of  nature  have  gradually  recti-
fied the  various  errors  into  which  our  ancestors  had  fallen  ; and  we  should
now  just  as  readily  expect  to  see  a shoal  of  fishes  issuing  from  beneath
the  plough,  as  to  see  a flock  of  Rails  emerge  from  the  mud,  shake  them-
selves, and  fly  off.  This  subject,  then,  being  disposed  of,  I have  now  to
relate  to  you  the  result  of  my  observations  on  the  habits  of  the  Sora.

This  bird,  which  I think  might  have  been  named  the  Pennsylvanian
or  Virginian  Rail,  enters  the  Union  from  the  shores  of  Mexico,  early  in
March,  when  many  are  to  be  seen  in  the  markets  of  New  Orleans.  Some
reach  their  northern  destination  by  ascending  along  the  margins  of  our
western  streams,  or  by  crossing  the  country  directly,  in  the  manner  of  the
Woodcock;  while  those  which  proceed  along  the  coast  shorten  their  jour-
ney as  much  as  possible  by  flying  across  the  headlands  of  the  numerous
inlets  or  bays  of  our  southern  districts,  retiring  or  advancing  more  slowly
according  to  the  state  of  the  weather.  Thus,  those  which  cross  the  pen-
insula of  Florida,  through  the  marshes  and  lagoons  that  lead  to  the  head
waters  of  the  St  John’s  River,  instead  of  travelling  round  the  shores  of
Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  fly  directly  across  towards  Cape  Lookout.
It  it  nevertheless  true,  that  a certain  number  of  these  birds  follow  the  si-
nuosities of  the  shores,  for  I found  some  in  the  markets  of  Charleston,  in
the  month  of  April,  that  had  been  killed  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood
of  that  city,  and  I obtained  others  in  various  parts ; but  the  number  of
these  is  very  small  compared  with  that  of  those  which  cross  at  once.
When  their  passage  takes  place,  either  during  calm  weather  or  with  a
favourable  wind,  the  fortunate  travellers  pursue  their  journey  by  entering
Pimlico  Sound,  and  following  the  inner  margins  of  the  outward  banks  of
this  part  of  the  coast  until  they  reach  Cape  Henry.  From  thence  some
ascend  the  Chesapeake,  while  others  make  for  the  mouth  of  the  Delaware,
and  these  perhaps  again  meet  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Ontario,  or  the  wa-
ters of  the  St  Lawrence,  after  which  they  soon  enter  those  portions  of  the
country  in  which  they  breed,  and  spend  a short  but  agreeable  season.

Every  person  acquainted  with  the  general  movements  of  birds  either
during  spring,  when  they  pass  northwards,  or  the  autumnal  months,  when
they  are  on  their  way  to  milder  climes,  is  aware  that,  at  the  former  period,
their  anxiety  to  reach  the  place  of  breeding  is  much  greater  than  that


SORA  RAIL.


253


which  they  feel  at  any  other  period.  Thus,  in  its  movement  southward,
the  Sora,  like  all  other  Rails,  when  returning  with  its  progeny,  which  are
yet  feeble  and  unable  to  undergo  much  fatigue,  proceeds  considerably
slower  than  in  spring.  Hence  its  appearance  in  autumn,  in  multitudes,
in  various  places,  where  it  is  enticed  by  an  abundance  of  food  and  com-
parative security,  to  tarry  for  some  time,  and  recruit  its  strength.  Thus,
in  September  and  part  of  October,  the  Sora  is  found  in  great  numbers  on
the  borders  of  our  great  lakes,  feeding  on  wild  oats,  and  on  the  reedy
margins  of  the  rivers  of  our  Middle  Districts.  Several  natural  causes
prevent  birds  of  this  species  from  following  the  sea-coast  of  the  United
States,  while  migrating  either  in  spring  or  in  autumn,  the  principal  of
which  is  the  absence  there  of  their  favourite  Zizania  marshes,  which  are
but  very  rarely  met  with  to  the  east  of  the  State  of  New  York.  This  is
probably  the  cause  of  the  great  rarity  of  this  species  in  Massachusetts,
whilst,  so  far  as  I know,  none  are  ever  found  to  the  eastward  of  that
State.  These  observations  are  corroborated  by  those  of  my  friend  Tho-
mas MacCulloch  of  Pictou,  who  never  met  with  one  of  these  birds  du-
ring many  years’  residence  in  that  part  of  Nova  Scotia.

Having  seen  flocks  of  Soras  winging  their  way  close  over  the  waters
of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  between  Cape  Florida  and  the  main  shores
of  the  Carolinas,  in  the  month  of  April,  when  they  were  moving  direct-
ly towards  Cape  Lookout,  I have  very  little  doubt  that  many  return
in  the  same  track,  in  the  end  of  October,  when  the  young,  well  fed  and
strengthened,  are  able  to  follow  their  parents  on  wing,  even  across  that
large  extent  of  water.  I shall  now  dismiss  this  part  of  the  subject,  by
adding,  in  confirmation  of  their  capability  of  protracted  flight,  that  some
of  these  birds,  when  accidentally  separated  from  their  flock,  have  sup-
ported themselves  on  wing  until  they  have  met  with  vessels  several  hun-
dred miles  from  land  ; and  facts  of  this  kind  have  been  announced  by
persons  of  well  known  respectability.

During  the  autumnal  months,  a goodly  number  of  Soras  are  found  in
the  rice-fields  and  fresh-water  marshes  of  the  Carolinas.  Sometimes  also
they  have  been  shot  in  salt-water  marshes,  in  spring,  while  on  their  north-
Avard  migration.  At  this  period  they  are  very  silent,  until  forced  to  fly.
In  those  States  none  are  seen  during  summer.  Very  few,  it  appears,  re-
main in  any  part  of  the  Middle  Districts.  My  friend  John  Bachman,
however,  was  shewn  some  eggs  of  this  bird,  that  had  been  found  in  the
meadows  below  Philadelphia ; and  whilst  I was  in  the  company  of  my


254


SORA  RAIL,


friend  Edward  Harris,  Esq,  on  a woodcock  shooting  expedition,  my
son  shot  some  young  birds  scarcely  fledged,  and  shortly  afterwards  an
adult  female.  John  Bachman  met  with  a nest  on  the  shore  of  the  Hud-
son, and  I saw  two  in  the  marshes  of  Lake  Champlain.

Fond  of  concealment,  as  all  its  tribe  are,  the  Sora  is  rarely  seen  du-
ring day,  although,  being  seminocturnal,  it  skulks  amid  the  tall  reeds  or
grasses,  both  by  day  and  at  night,  in  search  of  its  food.  Differing,  how-
ever, in  habit,  as  well  as  in  form,  from  the  Gallinules,  it  rarely  abandons
the  retreats  which  it  has  chosen  after  the  breeding  season,  and  rises,  when
forced  by  tides,  to  the  tops  of  the  plants  about  it,  climbing  along  or
clinging  to  their  stalks  or  leaves,  with  as  much  ease  as  it  walks  on  the
floating  garbage,  when  persons  in  boats  can  see  them  without  any  diffi-
culty. Whenever  these  occurrences  take  place,  and  the  country  around
is  thickly  peopled,  great  havock  is  made  among  them.  This  particularly
happens  on  the  James  and  Delaware  rivers,  where  thousands  are  annually
destroyed  during  their  autumnal  stay.  The  sport  of  shooting  Soras  is
much  akin  to  that  of  shooting  Clapper  Rails,  or  Salt- Water-Marsh-Hens,
which  I have  already  described.  But  Wilson  having  given  an  account
of  it,  as  pursued  when  Soras  were  much  more  abundant  than  I ever  saw
them,  I shall  transcribe  his  description  of  the  manner  adopted  by  the
sportsmen  on  the  Delaware.

“ The  usual  method  of  shooting  them,  in  this  quarter  of  the  country,
is  as  follows : — The  sportsman  furnishes  himself  with  a light  batteau,  and
a stout  experienced  boatman,  with  a pole  of  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  long,
thickened  at  the  lower  end  to  prevent  it  from  sinking  too  deep  into  the  mud.
About  two  hours  or  so  before  high  water,  they  enter  the  reeds,  and  each
takes  his  post,  the  sportsman  standing  in  the  bow  ready  for  action,  the
boatman,  on  the  stern  seat,  pushing  her  steadily  through  the  reeds.  The
Rail  generally  spring  singly,  as  the  boat  advances,  and  at  a short  distance
ahead,  are  instantly  shot  down,  while  the  boatman,  keeping  his  eye  on
the  spot  where  the  bird  fell,  directs  the  boat  forward,  and  picks  it  up  as
the  gunner  is  loading.  It  is  also  the  boatman’s  business  to  keep  a sharp
look-out,  and  give  the  word  ‘ mark !’  when  a Rail  springs  on  either  side
without  being  observed  by  the  sportsman,  and  to  note  the  exact  spot
where  it  falls  until  he  has  picked  it  up ; for  this  once  lost  sight  of,  owing
to  the  sameness  in  the  appearance  of  the  reeds,  is  seldom  found  again.
In  this  manner  the  boat  moves  steadily  through  and  over  the  reeds,  the
birds  flushing  and  falling,  the  gunner  loading  and  firmg,  while  the  boat


SORA  RAIL.


256


man  is  pushing  and  picking  up.  The  sport  continues  till  an  hour  or  two
after  high  water,  when  the  shallowness  of  the  water,  and  the  strength  and
weight  of  the  floating  reeds,  as  also  the  backwardness  of  the  game  to
spring  as  the  tide  decreases,  oblige  them  to  return.  Several  boats  are
sometimes  within  a short  distance  of  each  other,  and  a perpetual  cracking
of  musketry  prevails  along  the  whole  reedy  shores  of  the  river.  In  these
excursions  it  is  not  uncommon  for  an  active  and  expert  marksman  to  kill
ten  or  twelve  dozen  in  a tide.  They  are  usually  shot  singly,  though  I
have  known  five  killed  at  one  discharge  of  a double-barrelled  piece.  These
instances,  however,  are  rare.”

“ Such  is  the  mode  of  Rail  shooting  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Phila-
delphia. In  Virginia,  particularly  along  the  shores  of  James  River,  with-
in the  tide  water,  where  the  Rail  or  Sora  are  in  prodigious  numbers,  they
are  also  shot  on  the  wing,  but  more  usually  taken  at  night  in  the  follow-
ing manner : — A kind  of  iron  grate  is  fixed  on  the  top  of  a stout  pole,
which  is  placed  like  a mast,  in  a light  canoe,  and  filled  with  fire.  The
darker  the  night  the  more  successful  is  the  sport.  The  person  who
manages  the  canoe  is  provided  with  a hght  paddle,  ten  or  twelve  feet  in
length,  and,  about  an  hour  before  high  water,  proceeds  through  among
the  reeds,  which  lie  broken  and  floating  on  the  surface.  The  whole
space,  for  a considerable  way  round  the  canoe,  is  completely  enlightened,
the  birds  stare  with  astonishment,  and,  as  they  appear,  are  knocked  on
the  head  with  the  paddle,  and  thrown  into  the  canoe.  In  this  manner,
from  twenty  to  eighty  dozen  have  been  killed  by  three  Negroes  in  the
short  space  of  three  hours  !”

The  flight  of  this  little  bird  while  migrating  is  low,  and  performed
with  a constant  beating  of  the  wings,  as  in  the  Coot  and  other  birds  of
its  kind.  They  pass  swiftly  along  in  compact  flocks  of  from  five  to  a
hundred  or  more  individuals.  At  times  you  see  them  rise  in  a long
curve,  as  if  they  had  perceived  some  dangerous  object  beneath  them ; then
resume  their  ordinary  direct  flight,  and  are  soon  out  of  sight.  On  the
contrary,  when  they  are  with  us  in  autumn,  they  seem  far  from  being
alert  on  wing,  flying  slowly  with  dangling  legs,  and  proceeding  only  to  a
short  distance,  when  they  drop  among  the  reeds  with  their  wings  extend-
ed, as  if  they  had  been  shot.  If  raised  two  or  three  times,  it  is  exti’eme-
ly  difficult  to  see  them  again ; for  on  such  occasions  they  will  rather  dive
and  hide  under  some  floating  weeds,  keeping  their  bill  only  above  the
water.  When  walking  leisurely,  they  throw  up  the  tail,  in  the  manner


256


SORA  RAIL.


of  G allin  ules,  and  if  they  apprehend  danger  in  consequence  of  any  suspi-
cious sight  or  sound,  they  run  off  with  great  speed.  Their  notes  are
shrill  and  short,  but  reiterated,  like  those  of  Ralliis  crepitans,  although
by  no  means  so  loud  and  disagreeable.  When  wounded  they  dive  well
at  the  approach  of  the  sportsman,  and  sometimes  cling  to  the  roots  of  the
grasses  for  a few  moments,  but  more  usually  rise  under  the  cover  of  the
floating  leaves.  Some  persons  still  believe  that  these  birds  cannot  be
drowned ; and  this  notion  tempted  my  friend  John  Bachman  to  make
the  experiment.  In  a note  of  his  now  before  me,  he  says  : — “ I once,  in
company  with  some  naturalists  of  Philadelphia,  tried  two  experiments
upon  two  Soras  that  had  been  slightly  wounded  in  the  wing,  to  ascertain
how  long  they  could  live  under  the  water.  They  were  placed  in  a covered
basket,  which  was  sunk  in  the  river.  One  remained  fifteen,  the  other
eight  minutes,  under  water ; and  on  being  taken  out,  they  were  both
found  dead.  We  placed  them  in  the  sun  for  several  days,  but,  I need
hardly  say,  they  did  not  revive.”

The  most  curious  habit  or  instinct  of  this  species  is  the  nicety  of  sense
by  which  they  can  ascertain  the  last  moment  they  can  remain  at  any  of
the  feeding  grounds  at  which  they  tarry  in  autumn.  One  day,  you  may
see  or  hear  the  Soras  in  their  favourite  marshes,  you  may  be  aware  of
their  presence  in  the  dusk  of  evening ; but  when  you  return  to  the  place
early  next  morning,  they  are  all  gone.  Yesterday  the  weather  was  mild,
to-day  it  is  cold  and  raw ; and  no  doubt  the  Soras  were  aware  that  a
change  was  at  hand,  and  secured  themselves  from  its  influence  by  a prompt
movement  under  night.  It  is  probable  that  these  sudden  removals  gave
rise  to  the  idea  of  their  diving  into  the  mud.


Rallcs  carolinus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  263 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  334.

Gallinui-a  CAROLINA,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  771-'

Rail,  Rallus  carolinus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  24.  pi  48.  fig.  2.  Male.
Carolina  Rail,  JVuttall,  INIanual,  vol.  ii.  p.  208.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  rather  stout,  deep,  compressed,  tapering.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight,  being  slightly  con-
vex towards  the  end,  the  ridge  flattish  for  a very  short  space  at  the  base,
very  slightly  extended  on  tlie  forehead,  narrow  in  the  rest  of  its  extent ;


SORA  RAIL.


257


the  sides  convex  towards  the  end,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  with  a slight
sinus  close  to  the  tip.  Nasal  groove  broad  and  extending  to  two-thirds
of  the  length  of  the  bill ; nostrils  linear,  lateral,  submedial,  pervious.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  narrow,  the  sides  erect,  the  dor-
sal line  sloping  upwards,  the  edges  inflected,  the  tip  narrowed,  the  gape-
line straight.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate  length.
Body  rather  slender,  much  compressed.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  ra-
ther stout ; tibia  bare  a short  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  of  ordinary
length,  compressed,  anteriorly  covered  with  broad  scutella,  posteriorly
with  smaller,  and  on  the  sides  reticulated.  Hind  toe  very  short  and
slender,  middle  toe  longest  and  longer  than  the  tarsus,  fourth  considerably
shorter  than  third,  and  a little  longer  than  second  ; toes  free,  scutellate
above,  much  compressed,  with  an  inferior  sharp  margin.  Claws  rather
long,  exceedingly  compressed,  slightly  arched,  tapering  to  a fine  point,
flat  and  marginate  beneath.

Plumage  rather  stiff,  but  blended,  slightly  glossed  above.  Feathers
of  the  forehead  with  the  shaft  enlarged  and  slightly  extended  beyond  the
tip.  Wings  short  and  broad  ; alula  large  ; primaries  curved,  broad  ta-
pering, but  rounded,  second  longest,  third  scarcely  shorter,  first  equal  to
sixth ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded.  Tail  extremely  short,  much
rounded,  of  twelve  feeble  rounded  feathers ; the  upper  and  lower  tail-
coverts  nearly  as  long  as  the  tail-feathers.

Bill  yellow  at  the  base,  dusky  towards  the  end.  Iris  bright  chestnut.
Feet  yellowish-green ; claws  light  brown.  A broad  band  surrounding  the
base  of  the  bill,  the  central  part  of  the  crown,  the  chin,  and  the  fore  neck
in  its  whole  length,  brownish-black.  Ear-coverts  olive-brown ; a band
over  the  eye,  the  cheeks,  and  the  sides  of  the  neck,  ash-grey.  Sides  of
the  crown,  the  hind  neck,  and  the  rest  of  the  upper  parts,  olive-brown,
the  feathers  brownish-black  in  the  centre,  those  on  the  back  with  two  mar-
ginal lines  of  white.  Smaller  wing-coverts  of  a lighter  brown  ; secondary
coverts  margined  with  black  and  white  markings ; quills  dusky  olive-
brown,  as  is  the  tail.  Middle  of  breast  and  abdomen  greyish-white ;
sides  barred  with  brownish-black  and  greyish-white,  as  are  the  lateral
feathers  of  the  rump,  those  of  the  abdomen  reddish-yellow.

Length  to  end  of  tail  9 inches;  to  end  of  wings  8|,  to  end  of  claws  12;
extent  of  wings  14;  wing  from  flexure  4/^  ; tail  2 ; bill  along  the  ridge


VOL.  III.


11


258


SORA  RAIL.


i§,  along  the  edge  of  the  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  middle  toe
its  claw  Weight  7 oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXXIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  differs  considerably  from  the  Male  in  colouring.  The
naked  parts  and  iris  are  similar,  as  are  the  upper  parts  generally  ; but  the
black  around  the  base  of  the  bill,  on  the  head,  and  fore  neck  is  wanting,
the  fore  part  of  the  head  being  light  brown,  the  chin  whitish,  the  sides  of
the  neck  light  greyish-brown.  The  white  lines  of  the  back  are  duller,
and  the  dark  bands  of  the  sides  of  a lighter  tint.

Young  Male.  Plate  CCXXXIII.  Fig.  3.

The  Young  Male,  after  its  first  moult,  is  intermediate  in  colouring
between  the  adult  male  and  the  female,  but  more  like  the  latter,  the  black
on  the  head  and  fore  neck  appearing  in  spots,  and  the  sides  of  the  neck
being  nearly  as  in  the  female.


( 259  )


THE  RING-NECKED  DUCK.

Fuligula  rufitorques,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXXXIV.  Male  and  Female.

The  Ring-necked  Duck  is  abundant  on  all  our  western  waters  during
autumn  and  winter.  It  is  also  met  with  along  our  Atlantic  coasts ; but
there,  although  I have  seen  many  individuals  on  the  Chesapeake  and
other  large  arms  of  the  sea,  it  is  by  no  means  so  plentiful  as  in  the  inte-
rior. Its  flesh  is  excellent,  equalling  in  my  opinion  that  of  any  other
duck ; and  when  it  has  been  feeding  along  the  margins  of  rivers,  creeks,
or  ponds  for  a few  weeks,  it  becomes  very  fat,  tender,  and  juicy,  and  has
none  of  the  fishy  flavour  of  those  species  which  are  in  the  habit  of  diving
deep  for  their  food.  In  shape,  the  Tufted  Duck,  or  Ring-bill,  as  it  is
called  in  Kentucky,  resembles  the  Scaup  or  Flocking  Fowl,  but  is  plumper
and  more  rounded.

This  bird  arrives  in  Kentucky  and  the  neighbouring  States,  as  far
down  the  Mississippi  as  New  Orleans,  from  the  20th  of  September  to  the
middle  of  October,  at  which  latter  period  it  may  be  found  in  the  whole
extent  of  the  Union,  from  Massachusetts  to  Louisiana,  being  more  nume-
rous in  some  districts  than  in  others,  according  to  the  suitableness  of  the
place.  They  commonly  move  while  on  wing  in  flocks  of  from  fifteen  to
twenty  individuals,  keeping  rather  scattered,  and  thus  rarely  affording
what  is  called  a good  shot.  They  fly  with  rapidity,  keeping  at  a con-
siderable height,  and  the  motion  of  their  wings  produces  a constant  whist-
ling as  they  pass  over  head.  Before  alighting,  they  wheel  and  perform
various  evolutions,  although  they  do  not  occupy  so  much  time  with  them
as  Teals  are  wont  to  do.

They  swim  rather  lightly  and  with  ease,  and,  unlike  the  Scaups,  ex-
perience no  difficulty  in  rising  on  wing,  whether  from  the  land  or  from
the  water,  but  generally  spring  up  at  once,  especially  if  alarmed.  They
have  an  almost  constant  practice  of  raising  the  head  in  a curved  manner,
partially  erecting  the  occipital  feathers,  and  emitting  a note  resembling
the  sound  produced  by  a person  blowing  through  a tube.  At  the  ap-
proach of  spring  the  males  are  observed  repeating  this  action  every  now


■260


RING-NECKED  DUCK.


and  then,  while  near  the  females,  none  of  which  seem  to  pay  the  least  at-
tention to  their  civilities.

Whilst  in  ponds,  they  feed  by  diving  and  dabbling  with  their  bills  in
the  mud  amongst  the  roots  of  grasses,  of  which  they  eat  the  seeds  also,
as  well  as  snails  and  all  kinds  of  aquatic  insects.  When  on  rivers,  their
usual  food  consists  of  small  fish  and  crays,  the  latter  of  which  they  pro-
cure at  the  bottom.  A male  which  I shot  near  Louisville,  in  the  begin-
ning of  May,  exhibited  a protuberance  of  the  neck  so  very  remarkable  as
to  induce  me'to  cut  the  skin,  when  I found  a frog,  the  body  of  which  was
nearly  two  inches  long,  and  which  had  almost  choked  the  bird,  as  it  al-
lowed me  to  go  up  within  a dozen  or  fifteen  paces  before  I took  aim.  This
species  remains  with  us  in  the  Western  country  later  than  most  others  of
its  tribe,  and  not  unfrequently  as  late  as  the  Blue-winged  Teal.

We  are  indebted  for  the  discovery  of  this  species  to  my  friend  the
Prince  of  Musignano,  who  first  pointed  out  the  difference  between  it  and
the  Tufted  Duck  of  Europe.  The  distinctions  that  exist  in  the  two  spe-
cies he  ascertained  about  the  time  of  my  first  acquaintance  with  him  at
Philadelphia  in  1824,  when  he  was  much  pleased  on  seeing  my  drawing
of  a male  and  a female,  which  I had  made  at  Louisville  in  Kentucky  pre-
vious to  Wilson’s  visit  to  me  there.  Wilson  supposed  it  identical  with
the  European  species.

The  summer  haunts  and  habits  of  this  Duck  have  not  been  ascertained  ;
for  although  Dr  Richardson  mentions  that  he  found  it  not  rare  in  the
fur  countries,  he  says  nothing  of  its  eggs  or  nest.  While  with  us  it  has
no  long  crest,  but  I am  inclined  to  think  that  at  the  commencement  of
the  breeding  season  that  appendage  may  be  developed.


Fuligula  rufitorques,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  United  States,  p.  393.

Tufted  Duck,  Anas  Fuligula,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  60.  pi.  67,  fig.  5.

Bing-necked  Duck,  Fuligula  rufitorques,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.

Amer.  part  ii.  p.  453 — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  439.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  same  length  as  the  head,  rather  deeper  than  broad  at
the  base,  depressed  and  enlarged  towards  the  end,  the  frontal  angles  acute.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  bne  at  first  sloping,  then  concave,  along
the  unguis  decurved,  the  ridge  broad  and  flat  at  the  base,  then  broadly
convex,  the  sides  nearly  flat  and  perpendicular  at  the  base,  convex  and


RING-NECKED  DUCK.


261


sloping  towards  the  end,  the  edges  soft,  with  about  forty-five  internal  la-
mellae, unguis  obovate,  curved.  Nostrils  subbasal,  lateral,  rather  small,
oval,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  flat,  with  the  angle  very  long  and  rather
narrow,  the  dorsal  line  very  short,  slightly  convex,  the  edges  with  about
sixty-five  lamellae  and  smaller  intermediate  ones  above.

Head  of  moderate  size,  neck  rather  long  and  slender,  body  full  and
depressed,  wings  rather  small.  Feet  very  short,  strong,  placed  rather
far  behind  ; tarsus  very  short,  compressed,  at  its  lower  part  anteriorly
with  two  series  of  scutella,  the  rest  covered  with  reticulated  angular  scales.
Toes  scutellate  above,  first  very  small,  free,  with  a broad  membrane  be-
neath, fourth  longest,  third  scarcely  shorter ; claws  small,  curved,  com-
pressed, obtuse,  the  hind  one  smaller,  more  curved  and  acute,  that  of  the
third  toe  with  an  inner  sharp  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended,  rather  glossy.  Feathers  of  the  middle
of  the  head,  and  upper  part  of  hind  neck,  very  narrow  and  a little  elon-
gated ; of  the  rest  of  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the  neck  very  short,  of
the  back  and  lower  parts  in  general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  of  mo-
derate length,  narrow,  acute ; primaries  curved,  strong,  tapering,  first
longest,  second  very  little  shorter  ; secondaries  broad,  rounded,  short,  the
inner  longer  and  tapering.  Tail  very  short,  rather  broad,  much  rounded,
of  sixteen  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black,  with  a basal  band,  the  edges  of  both  mandibles,  and  a band
across  the  upper  towards  the  end,  pale  blue.  Iris  yellow.  Legs  greyish-
blue,  the  webs  brownish-black.  The  head,  and  upper  part  of  the  neck,
greenish-black,  with  purple  reflexions.  A brownish-red  collar,  broader
before,  on  the  middle  of  the  neck.  Its  lower  part  all  round,  as  well  as
the  back,  scapulars,  smaller  wing-coverts,  and  posterior  part  of  abdomen,
brownish-black.  Inner  secondaries  of  the  same  colour,  outer  bluish-grey
on  the  outer  web,  light  brown  on  the  inner,  as  are  the  primaries,  of  which
the  outer  webs  and  tips  are  dark  brown.  Tail  brownish-grey.  Chin
white,  breast  greyish-white,  sides  and  fore  part  of  abdomen  greyish  white,
minutely  undulated  with  greyish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18  inches,  to  end  of  wings  16 ; extent  of  wings  28 ;
wing  from  flexure  7| ; tail  ; bill  along  the  back  along  the  edge
of  lower  mandible  ly|  ; tarsus  1 ; middle  toe  its  claw'

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXXIV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  has  the  neck  umber  brown,  the  upj)cr  part  of  the  liead


262


RING-NECKED  DUCK.


darker,  the  back  blackish-brown,  the  speculum  bluish-grey,  as  in  the
male,  the  breast  brownish- white,  the  loral  spaces  and  chin  pale  brown,
the  abdomen  umber  brown.

Length  16  inches.

The  Tufted  Duck  of  Europe,  Fuligula  cristata,  is  very  intimately
allied  to  this  species.  The  bill  of  the  latter  is  longer,  narrower,  and  diffe-
rently coloured,  the  unguis  broader  at  the  end,  as  is  the  flat  triangular
space  at  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible.  The  bill  of  the  Scaup  Duck  is
still  broader  towards  the  end,  with  a much  narrower  unguis,  and  the  flat-
tened part  of  the  upper  mandible  still  narrower  than  in  the  Tufted  Duck  ;
the  colour  of  the  speculum  is  also  different,  being  bluish-grey  in  the  Ring-
necked Duck,  and  white  in  the  two  allied  species.  The  females  of  the
Ring-necked  and  Scaup  Ducks,  which  are  nearly  similar  in  colour,  differ
in  the  speculum,  and  in  the  peculiar  form  of  the  bill.


( 263  )


THE  SOOTY  TERN.

Sterna  fuliginosa,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXXXV.  Male.

Early  in  the  afternoon  of  the  9th  of  May  1832,  I was  standing  on
the  deck  of  the  United  States’  revenue-cutter  the  Marion.  The  weather
was  very  beautiful,  although  hot,  and  a favourable  breeze  wafted  us  on-
wards in  our  course.  Captain  Robert  Day,  who  stood  near  me,  on
looking  toward  the  south-west,  ordered  some  person  to  be  sent  to  the  top
to  watch  the  appearance  of  land.  A young  lad  was  instantly  seen  as-
cending the  rigging,  and  not  many  minutes  after  he  had  attained  his  post,
we  heard  from  him  the  cry  of  “ land.”  It  was  the  low  keys  of  the  Tor-
tugas,  toward  which  we  had  been  steering.  No  change  was  made  in  the
course  of  the  “ Lady  of  the  Green  Mantle,”  who  glided  along  as  if  aware  of
the  knowledge  possessed  by  her  commander.  Now  the  light-house  lantern
appeared,  like  a bright  gem  glittering  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Presently
the  masts  and  flags  of  several  wreckers  shewed  us  that  they  were  anchor-
ed in  the  small  but  safe  harbour.  We  sailed  on,  and  our  active  pilot,
who  was  also  the  first  lieutenant  of  the  Marion,  pointed  out  to  me  a small
island  which  he  said  was  at  this  season  the  resort  of  thousands  of  birds,
which  he  described  by  calling  them  “ Black  and  White  Sea  Swallows,”
and  again  another  islet,  equally  well  stocked  with  another  kind  of  Sea
Swallow,  which  he  added  were  called  Noddies,  because  they  frequently
alighted  on  the  yards  of  vessels  at  night,  and  slept  there.  He  assured  me
that  both  species  were  on  their  respective  breeding-grounds  by  millions,
that  the  eggs  of  the  first  lay  on  the  sand  under  bushes,  at  intervals  of
about  a foot,  while  the  nests  of  the  last  were  placed  as  thickly  on  the
bushes  of  their  own  chosen  island.  “ Before  we  cast  anchor,”  he  added,
“ you  will  see  them  rise  in  swarms  like  those  of  bees  when  disturbed  in
their  hive,  and  their  cries  will  deafen  you.”

You  may  easily  imagine  how  anxious  I was  to  realize  the  picture  ; I
expressed  a wish  to  be  landed  on  the  island ; but  the  kind  officer  replied,
“ My  good  Sir,  you  will  soon  be  tired  of  their  incessant  noise  and  num-
bers, and  will  enjoy  the  procuring  of  Boobies  much  better.”  After  vari-
ous tacks,  we  made  our  way  through  the  curious  and  extremely  danger-


2G4


SOOTY  TERN.


ous  channels  leading  to  the  small  harbour,  where  we  anchored.  As  the
chain  grated  the  ear,  I saw  a cloud-like  mass  arise  over  the  “ Bird  Key,”
from  which  we  were  only  a few  hundred  yards  distant ; and  in  a few
minutes  the  yawl  was  carrying  myself  and  my  assistant  ashore.  On  land-
ing, I felt  for  a moment  as  if  the  birds  would  raise  me  from  the  ground,
so  thick  were  they  all  round,  and  so  quick  the  motion  of  their  wings.
Their  cries  were  indeed  deafening,  yet  not  more  than  half  of  them  took
to  wing  on  our  arrival,  those  which  rose  being  chiefly  male  birds,  as  we
afterwards  ascertained.  We  ran  across  the  naked  beach,  and  as  we  en-
tered the  thick  cover  before  us,  and  spread  in  different  directions,  we
might  at  every  step  have  caught  a sitting  bird,  or  one  scrambhng  through
the  bushes  to  escape  from  us.  Some  of  the  sailors,  who  had  more  than
once  been  there  before,  had  provided  themselves  with  sticks,  with  which
they  knocked  doAvn  the  birds  as  they  flew  thick  around  and  over  them.
In  less  than  half  an  hour,  more  than  a hundred  Terns  lay  dead  in  a heap,
and  a number  of  baskets  were  filled  to  the  brim  with  eggs.  We  then  re-
turned on  board,  and  declined  disturbing  the  rest  any  more  that  night.
My  assistant,  Mr  H.  Ward,  of  London,  skinned  upwards  of  fifty  spe-
cimens, aided  by  Captain  Day’s  servant.  The  sailors  told  me  that  the
birds  were  excellent  eating,  but  on  this  point  I cannot  say  much  in  cor-
roboration of  their  opinion,  although  I can  safely  recommend  the  eggs,
for  I considered  them  delicious,  in  whatever  way  cooked,  and  during  our
stay  at  the  Tortugas  we  never  passed  a day  without  providing  ourselves
with  a good  quantity  of  them.

The  next  morning  Mr  Ward  told  me  that  great  numbers  of  the
Terns  left  their  island  at  two  o’clock,  flew  off  towards  the  sea,  and  re-
turned a little  before  day,  or  about  four  o’clock.  This  I afterwards  ob-
served to  be  regularly  the  case,  unless  there  happened  to  blow  a gale,  a
proof  that  this  species  sees  as  well  during  the  night  as  by  day,  when  they
also  go  to  sea  in  search  of  food  for  themselves  and  their  young.  In  this
respect  they  differ  from  the  Sterna  stolida,  which,  when  overtaken  at  sea
by  darkness,  even  when  land  is  only  a few  miles  distant,  alight  on  the
water,  and  frequently  on  the  yards  of  vessels,  where  if  undisturbed  they
sleep  until  the  return  of  day.  It  is  from  this  circumstance  that  they  have
obtained  the  name  of  Noddy,  to  which  in  fact  they  are  much  better  en-
titled than  the  present  species,  which  has  also  been  so  named,  but  of
which  I never  observed  any  to  alight  on  a vessel  in  which  I Avas  for
thirty.five  days  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  at  a time  Avhen  that  bird  Avas  as


SOOTY  TERN.


2G5


abundant  during  the  day  as  the  other  species,  of  which  many  were  caught
at  my  desire  by  the  sailors.

The  present  species  rarely  alights  on  the  water,  where  it  seems  in-
commoded by  its  long  tail ; but  the  other,  the  Sterna  stolida,  which,  in
the  shape  of  its  tail,  and  in  some  of  its  habits,  shews  an  affinity  to  the
Petrels,  not  only  frequently  alights  on  the  sea,  but  swims  about  on  float-
ing patches  of  the  Gulf  Weed,  seizing  on  the  small  fry  and  little  crabs
that  are  found  among  the  branches  of  that  plant,  or  immediately  beneath
them.

I have  often  thought,  since  I became  acquainted  with  the  habits  of
the  bird  which  here  occupies  our  attention,  that  it  differs  materially  from
all  the  other  species  of  the  same  genus  that  occur  on  our  coasts.  The
Sterna  fuVtginosa  never  dives  headlong  and  perpendicularly  as  the  smaller
species  are  wont  to  do,  such  as  St.  Hirundo,  St.  arctica,  St.  minuta,  St.
Dougallii,  or  St.  nigra,  but  passes  over  its  prey  in  a curved  line,  and
picks  it  up.  Its  action  I cannot  better  compare  to  that  of  any  other  bird
than  the  Night  Hawk,  while  plunging  over  its  female.  I have  often  ob-
served this  Tern  follow  and  hover  in  the  wake  of  a porpoise,  while  the
latter  was  pursuing  its  prey,  and  at  the  instant  when  by  a sudden  dash
it  frightens  and  drives  toward  the  surface  the  fry  around  it,  the  Tern  as
suddenly  passes  over  the  spot,  and  picks  up  a small  fish  or  two.

Nor  is  the  flight  of  this  Tern  characterized  by  the  buoyancy  and  un-
decidedness, if  I may  so  speak,  of  the  other  species  mentioned  above,  it
being  as  firm  and  steady  as  that  of  the  Cayenne  Tern,  excepting  during
the  movements  performed  in  procuring  its  food.  Like  some  of  the  smaller
gulls,  this  bird  not  unfrequently  hovers  close  to  the  water  to  pick  up
floating  objects,  such  as  small  bits  of  fat  pork  and  greasy  substances
thrown  overboard  purposely  for  making  the  experiment.  It  is  not  im-
probable that  the  habits  peculiar  to  this  species,  the  Noddy,  and  one  or
two  others,  of  which  I shall  have  occasion  to  speak  elsewhere,  may  tend
to  induce  systematic  writers  to  place  them  in  a new  “ subgenus.”

There  is  a circumstance  connected  with  the  habits  of  the  two  species
of  which  I now  more  particularly  speak,  which,  although  perhaps  some-
what out  of  place,  I cannot  refrain  from  introducing  here.  It  is  that  the
Ste7-)ia  stolida  always  forms  a nest  on  trees  or  bushes,  on  which  that  bird
alights  with  as  much  ease  as  a Crow  or  Thrush  ; whereas  the  Sterna  foli-
ginosa  never  forms  a nest  of  any  sort,  but  deposits  its  eggs  in  a slight


266


SOOTY  TERN.


cavity  which  it  scoops  in  ihe  sand  under  the  trees.  But,  reader,  let  us
return  to  the  Bird  Key.

Early  the  next  morning  I was  put  on  shore,  and  remained  there  until
I had  completed  my  observations  on  the  Terns.  I paid  no  attention  to
their  lamentable  cries,  which  were  the  less  piercing  that  on  this  occasion
I did  not  molest  them  in  the  least.  Having  seated  myself  on  the  shelly
sand,  which  here  formed  the  only  soil,  I remained  almost  motionless  for
several  hours,  in  consequence  of  which  the  birds  alighted  about  me,  at
the  distance  of  only  a few  yards,  so  that  I could  plainly  see  with  what
efforts  and  pains  the  younger  females  deposited  their  eggs.  Their  bill
was  open,  and  their  pantings  indicated  their  distress,  but  after  the  egg
had  been  expelled,  they  immediately  walked  off  in  an  awkward  manner,
until  they  reached  a place  where  they  could  arise  without  striking  the
branches  of  the  bushes  near  them,  when  they  flew  away.  Here  and  there,
in  numerous  places  within  twenty  yards  of  me,  females,  having  their  com-
plement of  eggs,  alighted,  and  quietly  commenced  the  labour  of  incuba-
tion. Now  and  then  a male  bird  also  settled  close  by,  and  immediately
disgorged  a small  fish  within  the  reach  of  the  female.  After  some  curious
reciprocal  nods  of  their  heads,  which  were  doubtless  intended  as  marks
of  affection,  tbe  caterer  would  fly  off.  Several  individuals,  which  had
not  commenced  laying  their  eggs,  I saw  scratch  the  sand  with  their  feet,
in  the  manner  of  the  common  fowl,  while  searching  for  food.  In  the

i

course  of  this  operation,  they  frequently  seated  themselves  in  the  shallow
basin  to  try  how  it  fitted  their  form,  or  find  out  what  was  still  wanted  to
ensure  their  comfort.  Not  the  least  semblance  of  a quarrel  did  I observe
between  any  two  of  these  interesting  creatures  ; indeed,  they  all  appeared
as  if  happy  members  of  a single  family  ; and  as  if  to  gratify  my  utmost
wishes,  a few  of  them  went  through  the  process  of  courtship  in  my  presence.
The  male  birds  frequently  threw  their  heads  over  their  back  as  it  were,  in
the  manner  of  several  species  of  gulls ; they  also  swelled  out  their  throats,
walked  round  the  females,  and  ended  by  uttering  a soft  puffing  sound  as
they  caressed  them.  Then  the  pair  for  a moment  or  two  walked  round
each  other,  and  at  length  rose  on  wing  and  soon  disappeared.  Such  is
one  of  the  many  sights  it  has  been  my  good  fortune  to  witness,  and  by
each  of  them  have  I been  deeply  impressed  with  a sense  of  the  pervading
power  of  the  Deity.

The  Sooty  Tern  always  lays  three  eggs  as  its  full  number,  and  in  no


SOOTY  TERN.


267


instance,  among  thousands  of  the  nests  which  were  on  the  Bird  Key,  did
I find  one  more  when  the  female  was  sitting  close.  I was  desirous  of  as-
certaining whether  the  male  and  the  female  incubate  alternately ; but  this
I was  unable  to  do,  as  the  birds  frequently  left  their  eggs  for  half  an
hour  or  even  three  quarters  at  a time,  but  rarely  longer.  This  circum-
stance, together  with  the  very  slight  difference  in  size  and  colour  between
the  sexes,  was  the  cause  of  my  failure.

It  was  curious  to  observe  their  actions  whenever  a lai’ge  party  landed
on  the  island.  All  those  not  engaged  in  incubation  would  immediately
rise  in  the  air  and  scream  aloud ; those  on  the  ground  would  then  join  them
as  quickly  as  they  could,  and  the  whole  forming  a vast  mass,  with  a broad
extended  front,  would  as  it  were  charge  us,  pass  over  for  fifty  yards  or  so,
then  suddenly  wheel  round,  and  again  renew  their  attack.  This  they  would
repeat  six  or  eight  times  in  succession.  When  the  sailors,  at  our  desire,
all  shouted  as  loud  as  they  could,  the  phalanx  would  for  an  instant  be-
come perfectly  silent,  as  if  to  gather  our  meaning;  but  the  next  moment,
like  a huge  wave  breaking  on  the  beach,  it  would  rush  forward  with
deafening  noise.

When  wounded  and  seized  by  the  hand,  this  bird  bites  severely,  and
utters  a plaintive  cry  differing  from  its  usual  note,  which  is  loud  and
shriU,  resembling  the  syllables  oo-ee,  oo-ee.  Their  nests  are  all  scooped
near  the  roots  or  stems  of  the  bushes,  and  under  the  shade  of  their  boughs,
in  many  places  within  a few  inches  of  each  other.  There  is  less  difference
between  their  eggs,  than  is  commonly  seen  in  those  of  water  birds,  both
with  respect  to  size  and  colouring.  They  generally  measure  two  inches
and  one-eighth,  by  one  and  a-half,  have  a smooth  shell,  with  the  ground
of  a pale  cream  colour,  sparingly  marked  with  various  tints  of  lightish
umber,  and  still  lighter  marks  of  purple,  which  appear  as  if  within  the
shell.  The  Lieutenant,  N.  Lacoste,  Esq.  informed  me  that  shortly  af-
ter the  young  are  hatched,  they  ramble  pell-mell  over  the  island,  to  meet
their  parents,  and  be  fed  by  them  ; that  these  birds  have  been  known  to
collect  there  for  the  purpose  of  breeding,  since  the  oldest  wreckers  on
that  coast  can  recollect ; and  that  they  usually  arrive  in  May,  and  re-
main until  the  beginning  of  August,  when  they  retire  southward  to  spend
the  winter  months.  I could  not  however  obtain  a sufficiently  accurate
description  of  the  different  states  of  plumage  which  they  go  through,  so
as  to  enable  me  to  describe  them  in  the  manner  I should  wish  to  do.  All


268


SOOTY  TERN.


that  I can  say  is,  that  before  they  take  their  departure,  the  young  are
greyish-brown  above,  dull  white  beneath,  and  have  the  tail  very  short.

At  Bird  Key  we  found  a party  of  Spanish  Eggers  from  Havannah.
They  had  already  laid  in  a cai’go  of  about  eight  tons  of  the  eggs  of  this
Tern  and  the  Noddy.  On  asking  them  how  many  they  supposed  they
had,  they  answered  that  they  never  counted  them,  even  while  selling  them,
but  disposed  of  them  at  seventy-five  cents  per  gallon  ; and  that  one  turn
to  market  sometimes  produced  upwards  of  two  hundred  dollars,  while  it
took  only  a- week  to  sail  backwards  and  forwards  and  collect  their  cargo.
Some  eggers,  who  now  and  then  come  from  Key  West,  sell  their  eggs  at
twelve  and  a half  cents  the  dozen  ; but  wherever  these  eggs  are  carried,
they  must  soon  be  disposed  of  and  eaten,  for  they  become  putrid  in  a few
weeks.

On  referi'ing  to  my  journals  once  more,  I find  the  following  remarks
with  reference  to  the  Sooty  Tern.  It  would  appear  that  at  some  period
not  very  remote,  the  Noddy,  Sterna  stolida,  must  have  had  it  in  con-
templation to  appropriate  to  itself  its  neighbour’s  domains;  as  on  ex-
amination of  this  island,  several  thousand  nests  of  that  bird  were  found
built  on  the  tops  of  the  bushes,  although  no  birds  of  the  species  were
about  them.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  if  such  an  attempt  was  made
by  them,  they  were  defeated  and  forced  to  confine  themselves  to  the  neigh-
bouring island,  where  they  breed  by  themselves,  although  it  is  only  a few
miles  distant.  That  such  interferences  and  conflicts  now  and  then  occur
among  different  species  of  birds,  has  often  been  observed  by  other  per-
sons, and  in  several  instances  by  myself,  particularly  among  Herons.  In
these  cases,  right  or  wrong,  the  stronger  party  never  fails  to  dislodge  the
weaker,  and  keep  possession  of  the  disputed  ground.


Sterna  fuliginosa,  Laih,  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  804. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  355.

Sooty  Tern,  Sterna  fuliginosa.  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  vi.  p.  352 — Wils.  Amer.
Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  145.  pi.  72.  fig.  7 — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  284.


Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXV.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  strong,  slender,  nearly  straight,  compres-
sed, very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched,
the  ridge  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards  tlie  end,  the


SOOTY  TERN.


269


sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove
extended  to  beyond  half  the  length  of  the  bill,  slightly  inflected  towards
the  edge  ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  very  narrow,  acute,  extending  to  a little  beyond  the  middle,
the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  convex,  the  sharp  edges  inflected,  the
tip  very  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  ohlong,  compressed ; neck  of  moderate  length;
body  slender;  feet  very  small,  wings  and  tail  veiy  long.  Tibia  bare  for
a short  space ; tarsus  very  short,  slender,  roundish,  covered  anteriorly
with  small  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  reticulated  rather  indistinct
scales  ; toes  small,  slender,  the  first  very  small,  the  third  longest,  the
fourth  nearly  as  long,  the  second  much  shorter,  all  scutellate  above,  the
anterior  united  by  reticulated  webs,  having  an  incurved  margin ; claws
curved,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  smallest,  of  middle  toe  by
much  the  largest,  and  having  the  inner  edge  thin  and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  head  ; the  feathers  in
general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  very  long,  narrow  and  pointed  ; pri-
mary quills  tapering  but  rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  gra-
duated ; secondary  short,  broad,  rather  acute,  the  inner  more  tapering.
Tail  long,  very  deeply  forked,  of  twelve  feathers,  of  which  the  outer  are
tapering,  the  middle  rounded  and  short.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Iris  chestnut.  Forehead  white ; lores,  upper
part  of  the  head,  the  hind  neck  and  all  the  upper  parts,  deep  black
glossed  with  blue,  excepting  the  edges  of  the  wings  and  the  lateral  tail-
feathers,  which  are  white,  the  latter  with  the  inner  web  towards  the  end
dusky.  All  the  lower  parts  and  the  sides  of  the  neck  are  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  16j  inches,  to  end  of  wings  15|,  to  end  of  claws
11| ; extent  of  wings  34| ; wing  from  flexure  12  ; tail  to  the  end  7f,  to
the  fork  3| ; bill  along  the  ridge  1 J,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2^®j;
tarsus  | § ; middle  toe  its  claw


The  Female  is  similar  to  the  Male.


( 270  )


A WILD  HORSE

While  residing  at  Henderson  in  Kentucky,  I became  acquainted
with  a gentleman  who  had  just  returned  from  the  country  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  head  waters  of  the  Arkansas  River,  where  he  had  pur-
chased a newly  caught  “ Wild  Horse,”  a descendant  of  some  of  the  horses
originally  brought  from  Spain,  and  set  at  liberty  in  the  vast  prairies  of
the  Mexican  lands.  The  animal  was  by  no  means  handsome  : — he  had  a
large  head,  with  a considerable  prominence  in  its  frontal  region,  his  thick
and  unkemt  mane  hung  along  his  neck  to  the  breast,  and  his  tail,  too
scanty  to  be  called  flowing,  almost  reached  the  ground.  But  his  chest
was  broad,  his  legs  clean  and  sinewy,  and  his  eyes  and  nostrils  indicated
spirit,  vigour,  and  endurance.  He  had  never  been  shod,  and  although  he
had  been  ridden  hard,  and  had  performed  a long  journey,  his  black  hoofs
had  suffered  no  damage.  His  colour  inclined  to  bay,  the  legs  of  a deeper
tint,  and  gradually  darkening  below  until  they  became  nearly  black.  I
inquired  what  might  be  the  value  of  such  an  animal  among  the  Osage
Indians,  and'was  answered,  that  the  horse  being  only  four  years  old,  he
had  given  for  him,  with  the  tree  and  the  buffalo  tug  fastened  to  his  head,
articles  equivalent  to  about  thirty-five  dollars.  The  gentleman  added,
that  he  had  never  mounted  a better  horse,  and  had  very  little  doubt,  that
if  well  fed,  he  could  carry  a man  of  ordinary  weight  from  thirty-five  to
forty  miles  a-day,  for  a month,  as  he  had  travelled  at  that  rate  upon  him,
without  giving  him  any  other  food  than  the  grass  of  the  prairies,  or  the
canes  of  the  bottom  lands,  until  he  had  crossed  the  Mississippi  at  Natchez,
when  he  fed  him  with  corn.  Having  no  farther  use  for  him,  now  that  he
had  ended  his  joui-ney,  he  said  he  was  anxious  to  sell  him,  and  thought  he
might  prove  a good  hunting  horse  for  me,  as  his  gaits  were  easy,  and  he
stood  fire  as  well  as  any  charger  he  had  seen.  Having  some  need  of  a
horse  possessed  of  qualities  similar  to  those  represented  as  belonging  to
the  one  in  question,  I asked  if  I might  be  allowed  to  try  him.  “ Try
him.  Sir,  and  welcome  ; nay,  if  you  will  agree  to  feed  him  and  take  care
of  him,  you  may  keep  him  for  a month,  if  you  choose.”  So  I had  the
horse  taken  to  the  stable  and  fed.

About  two  hours  afterwards,  I took  my  gun,  mounted  the  prairie
nag,  and  went  to  the  woods.  I was  not  long  in  finding  him  very  sensible


A WILD  HORSE.


271


to  the  spur,  and  as  I observed  that  he  moved  with  great  ease  both  to
himself  and  his  rider,  I thought  of  leaping  over  a log  several  feet  in  dia-
meter, to  judge  how  far  he  might  prove  serviceable  in  deer-driving  or
bear-hunting.  So  I gave  him  the  reins,  and  pressed  my  legs  to  his  belly
without  using  the  spur,  on  which,  as  if  aware  that  I wished  to  try  his
mettle,  he  bounded  off  and  cleared  the  log  as  lightly  as  an  elk.  I turned
him,  and  made  him  leap  the  same  log  several  times,  which  he  did  with  equal
ease,  so  that  I was  satisfied  of  his  ability  to  clear  any  impediment  in  the
woods.  I next  determined  to  try  his  strength,  for  which  purpose  I took  him
to  a swamp,  which  I knew  was  muddy  and  tough.  He  entered  it  with  his
nose  close  to  the  water,  as  if  to  judge  of  its  depth,  at  which  I was  well
pleased,  as  he  thus  evinced  due  caution.  I then  rode  through  the  swamp
in  different  directions,  and  found  him  prompt,  decided,  and  unflinching.
Can  he  swim  well  thought  I ; — for  there  are  horses,  which,  although
excellent,  cannot  swim  at  all,  but  will  now  and  then  lie  on  their  side,  as
if  contented  to  float  with  the  current,  when  the  rider  must  either  swim
and  drag  them  to  the  shore,  or  abandon  them.  To  the  Ohio  then  I went,
and  rode  into  the  water.  He  made  off  obliquely  against  the  current,  his
head  well  raised  above  the  surface,  his  nostrils  expanded,  his  breathing
free,  and  without  any  of  the  grunting  noise  emitted  by  many  horses  on
such  occasions.  I turned  him  down  the  stream,  then  directly  against  it,
and  finding  him  quite  to  my  mind,  I returned  to  the  shore,  on  reaching
which  he  stopped  of  his  own  accord,  spread  his  legs,  and  almost  shook
me  off  my  seat.  After  this  I put  him  to  a gallop,  and  returning  home
through  the  woods,  shot  from  the  saddle  a turkey-cock,  which  he  after-
wards approached  as  if  he  had  been  trained  to  the  sport,  and  enabled  me
to  take  it  up  without  dismounting.

As  soon  as  I reached  the  house  of  Dr  Rankin,  where  I then  resided,
I sent  word  to  the  owner  of  the  horse  that  I should  be  glad  to  see  him.
When  he  came,  I asked  him  what  price  he  would  take  ; he  said,  fifty  dol-
lars in  silver  was  the  lowest.  So  I paid  the  money,  took  a bill  of  sale,
and  became  master  of  the  horse.  The  Doctor,  who  was  an  excellent  j udge,
said  smiling  to  me,  “ Mr  Audubon,  when  you  are  tired  of  him,  I will  re-
fund you  the  fifty  dollars,  for  depend  upon  it  he  is  a capital  horse.”  The
mane  was  trimmed,  but  the  tail  left  untouched  ; the  Doctor  had  him  shod
“ all  round,”  and  for  several  weeks  he  was  ridden  by  my  wife,  who  was
highly  pleased  with  him.

Business  requiring  that  I should  go  to  Philadelphia,  Barro  (he  was


272


A WILD  HORSE.


so  named  after  his  former  owner)  was  put  up  for  ten  days  and  well  at-
tended to.  The  time  of  my  departure  having  arrived,  I mounted  him  ;
and  set  off  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour ; — but  here  I must  give  you
the  line  of  my  journey,  that  you  may,  if  you  please,  follow  my  course
on  some  such  map  as  that  of  Tanner’s.  From  Henderson  through
Russellville,  Nashville,  and  Knoxville,  Abington  in  Virginia,  the  Natural
Bridge,  Harrisonburgh,  Winchester  and  Harper’s  Ferry,  Frederick  and
Lancaster  to  Philadelphia.  There  I remained  four  days,  after  which  I
returned  by  way  of  Pittsburgh,  Wheeling,  Zanesville,  Chillicothe,  Lex-
ington, and  Louisville  to  Henderson.  But  the  nature  of  my  business
was  such  as  to  make  me  deviate  considerably  from  the  main  roads,  and  I
computed  the  whole  distance  at  nearly  two  thousand  miles,  the  post  roads
being  rather  more  than  sixteen  hundred.  I travelled  not  less  than  forty
miles  a-day,  and  it  was  allowed  by  the  Doctor  that  my  horse  was  in  as  good
condition  on  my  return  as  when  I set  out.  Such  a journey  on  a single
horse  may  seem  somewhat  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  a European  ; but^in
those  days  almost  every  merchant  had  to  perform  the  like,  some  from  all
parts  of  the  western  country,  even  from  St  Louis  on  the  Missouri,  al-
though the  travellers  not  unfrequently,  on  their  return,  sold  their  horses
at  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  or  Pittsburg,  at  which  latter  place  they  took
boat.  My  wife  rode  on  a single  horse  from  Henderson  to  Philadelphia,
travelling  at  the  same  rate.  The  country  was  then  comparatively  new;
few  coaches  travelled,  and  in  fact  the  roads  were  scarcely  fit  for  carriages.
About  twenty  days  were  considered  necessary  for  performing  a journey
on  horseback  from  Louisville  to  Philadelphia,  whereas  now  the  same  dis-
tance may  be  travelled  in  six  or  seven  days,  or  even  sometimes  less,  this
depending  on  the  height  of  the  water  in  the  Ohio.

It  may  be  not  uninteresting  to  you  to  know  the  treatment  which  the
horse  received  on  those  journeys.  I rose  every  morning  before  day,
cleaned  my  horse,  pressed  his  back  with  my  hand,  to  see  if  it  had  been
galled,  and  placed  on  it  a small  blanket  folded  double,  in  such  a manner
that  when  the  latter  was  put  on,  half  of  the  cloth  was  turned  over  it.  The
surcingle,  beneath  which  the  saddle-bags  were  placed,  confined  the  blan-
ket to  the  seat,  and  to  the  pad  behind  was  fastened  the  great  coat  or
cloak,  tightly  rolled  up.  The  bridle  had  a snaffle  bit;  a breastplate  was
buckled  in  front  to  each  skirt,  to  render  the  seat  secure  during  an  ascent ;
but  my  horse  required  no  crupper,  his  shoulders  being  high  and  well-
formed.  On  starting  he  trotted  off  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  an  hour,

O


A WILD  HORSE.


27  U

which  he  continued.  I usually  travelled  from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  be-
fore breakfast,  and  after  the  first  hour  allowed  my  horse  to  drink  as  much
as  he  would.  When  I halted  for  breakfast,  I generally  stopped  two
hours,  cleaned  the  horse,  and  gave  him  as  much  corn  blades  as  he  could
eat.  I then  rode  on  until  within  half  an  hour  of  sunset,  when  I watered
him  well,  poured  a bucket  of  cold  water  over  his  back,  had  his  skin  well
rubbed,  his  feet  examined  and  cleaned.  The  rack  was  filled  with  blades,
the  trough  with  corn,  a good-sized  pumpkin  or  some  hens’  eggs,  when-
ever they  could  be  procured,  were  thrown  in,  and  if  oats  were  to  be  had,
half  a bushel  of  them  was  given  in  preference  to  corn,  which  is  apt  to
heat  some  horses.  In  the  morning,  the  nearly  empty  trough  and  rack
afforded  sufficient  evidence  of  the  state  of  his  health.

I had  not  ridden  him  many  days  before  he  became  so  attached  to  me
that  on  coming  to  some  limpid  stream,  in  which  I had  a mind  to  bathe,
I could  leave  him  at  liberty  to  graze,  and  he  would  not  drink  if  told  not
to  do  so.  He  was  ever  sure-footed,  and  in  such  continual  good  spirits,
that  now  and  then,  when  a turkey  happened  to  rise  from  a dusting  place
before  me,  the  mere  inclination  of  my  body  forward  was  enough  to  bring
him  to  a smart  canter,  which  he  would  continue  until  the  bird  left  the
road  for  the  woods,  when  he  never  failed  to  resume  his  usual  trot.  On
my  way  homewards  I met  at  the  crossings  of  the  Juniata  River  a gentle-
man from  New  Orelans  whose  name  is  Vincent  Nolte.  He  was  mount-
ed on  a superb  horse,  for  which  he  had  paid  three  hundred  dollars,  and
a servant  on  horseback  led  another  as  a change.  I was  then  an  ut-
ter stranger  to  him,  and  as  I approached  and  praised  his  horse,  he  not
very  courteously  observed  that  he  wished  I had  as  good  a one.  Finding
that  he  was  going  to  Redford  to  spend  the  night,  I asked  him  at  what
hour  he  would  get  there.  “ Just  soon  enough  to  have  some  trouts  ready
for  our  supper,  provided  you  will  join  when  you  get  there.”  I almost
imagined  that  Barro  understood  our  conversation  ; he  pricked  up  his  ears,
and  lengthened  his  pace,  on  which  Mr  Nolte  caracolled  his  horse,  and
then  put  him  to  a quick  trot,  but  all  in  vain,  for  I reached  the  hotel
nearly  a quarter  of  an  hour  before  him,  ordered  the  trouts,  saw  to  the
putting  away  of  my  good  horse,  and  stood  at  the  door  ready  to  welcome
my  companion.  From  that  day  Vincent  Nolte  has  been  a friend  to
me.  It  was  from  him  I received  letters  of  introduction  to  the  Rathbones
of  Liverpool,  for  which  I shall  ever  be  grateful  to  him.  We  rode  toge-
ther as  far  as  Shippingport,  where  my  worthy  friend  Nicholas  Bek-


VOL.  III.


274


A WILD  HORSE.


THOUD,  Esq.  resided,  and  on  parting  with  me  he  repeated  what  he  had
many  times  said  before,  that  he  never  had  seen  so  serviceable  a creature  as
Barro.

If  I recollect  rightly,  I gave  a short  verbal  account  of  this  journey,
and  of  the  good  qualities  of  my  horse,  to  my  learned  friend  J.  Skinner,
Esq.  of  Baltimore,  who  I believe  has  noticed  them  in  his  excellent  Sport-
ing Magazine.  We  agreed  that  the  importation  of  horses  of  this  kind
from  the  Western  Prairies  might  improve  our  breeds  generally ; and,
judging  from  those  which  I have  seen,  I am  inclined  to  think  that  some
of  them  may  prove  fit  for  the  course.  A few  days  after  reaching  Hender-
son, I parted  with  Barro,  not  without  regret,  for  a hundred  and  twenty
dollars.


( 275  )


THE  NIGHT  HERON.

Ardea  Nycticorax,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXXXVI.  Adult  Male  and  Young.

The  Night  Heron  is  a constant  resident  in  the  Southern  States,  where
it  is  found  in  abundance  in  the  low  swampy  tracts  near  the  coast,  from
the  mouth  of  Sabine  River  to  the  eastern  boundaries  of  South  Carolina.
On  the  whole  of  that  vast  extent  of  country,  it  may  be  procured  at  all
seasons.  The  adult  birds  keep  farther  south  than  the  young,  flocks  of
the  latter  remaining  in  South  Carolina  during  the  whole  winter,  and  there
the  Night  Herons  are  at  that  period  more  common  than  most  other  species
of  the  family.  In  that  State  it  is  named  “ the  Indian  PuUet,”  in  Lower
Louisiana  the  Creoles  call  it  “ Gros-bec,’*’’  the  inhabitants  of  East  Florida
know  it  under  the  name  of  “ Indian  Hen,”  and  in  our  Eastern  States  its
usual  appellation  is  “ Qua  Bird.”

In  the  course  of  my  winter  rambles  through  East  Florida,  I met  with
several  of  the  large  places  of  resort  of  Night  Herons,  and,  in  particular,
one  remarkable  for  the  vast  number  of  birds  congregated  there.  It  is
about  six  miles  below  the  plantation  of  my  friend  John  Bullow,  Esq.,
on  a bayou  which  opens  into  the  Halifax  River.  There  several  hundred
pairs  appeared  to  be  already  mated,  although  it  was  only  the  month  of
January  ; many  of  the  nests  of  former  years  were  still  standing,  and  all
appeared  to  live  in  peace  and  contentment.  My  friend  John  Bachman
is  acquainted  with  a place  on  Ashley  River,  about  four  miles  distant  from
Charleston,  where,  among  the  branches  of  a cluster  of  live-oak  trees,  he
has  for  the  last  fifteen  years  found  a flock  of  about  fifty  of  these  birds
during  the  winter.  They  were  all  young,  not  a single  individual  hav-
ing been  observed  in  the  adult  plumage,  which  is  the  more  remarkable,
because  it  is  usual  for  young  birds  to  retreat  farther  south  during  winter
than  the  old.  It  is  very  common  at  this  period  for  the  sportsmen  near
Charleston  to  take  their  stand  along  the  margins  of  the  salt-water  ponds,
to  which  the  Herons  generally  resort  about  dusk ; and  they  frequently
obtain  several  shots  in  an  evening,  but  not  a single  old  bird  is  known  to
have  been  killed  at  this  season.

The  Night  Heron  seldom  advances  very  far  into  the  country,  but  re-

s 2


276


NIGHT  HERON.


mains  on  the  low  swampy  lands  along  the  coast.  It  is  rare  to  see  one
farther  up  the  Mississippi  than  the  mouth  of  the  Arkansas,  to  which  a few
are  at  times  induced  to  go  while  rambling  along  the  great  stream.  I
never  saw  one,  or  heard  of  any,  whilst  in  Kentucky,  and  I doubt  much
if  they  are  ever  seen  in  the  upper  parts  of  the  State  of  Tennessee.  The
distance  of  a hundred  miles  from  the  tide-mark  appears  to  be  the  farthest
extent  of  their  inland  movements.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  fond  of
resorting  to  the  islands  along  the  coast,  on  many  of  which  they  breed.

At  the  approach  of  spring,  great  numbers  of  those  which  have  wintered
far  south,  leave  their  places  of  sojourn  and  migrate  eastward,  although
probably  an  equal  number  remain  in  the  low  lands  of  Louisiana  and  the
Floridas  during  the  whole  year.  There,  indeed,  I have  found  them  with
eggs  in  April  and  May,  and  as  young  birds  just  fledged  were  very  abun-
dant at  the  same  places,  I concluded  that  these  eggs  were  of  the  second
laying.  By  the  middle  of  March,  the  number  of  Night  Herons  is
seen  to  increase  daily  in  the  Carolinas,  and,  about  a month  later,  some
make  their  appearance  in  the  Middle  Districts,  where  many  remain  and
breed.  They  are  not  abundant  in  the  State  of  New  York,  are  seen  spar-
ingly breeding  in  Massachusetts,  while  only  a few  proceed  to  Maine,  and
farther  eastward  they  are  looked  upon  as  a great  curiosity.  In  Nova
Scotia,  Newfoundland,  and  Labrador,  this  species  is  quite  unknown.

Some  European  writers  have  alleged,  that  the  Night  Heron  is  scarce
in  the  United  States,  and  of  rare  occurrence  even  in  the  southern  parts.
I wish  these  people  had  been  with  me  and  my  friend  Bachman,  or  with
some  of  the  many  hundred  persons  who  reside  in  the  Southern  Districts,
or  have  travelled  from  Louisiana  to  North  Carobna.  How  strange  it
would  have  appeared  to  such  assertors  of  notions,  to  have  seen  a boat-
load of  Night  Herons  shot  in  the  course  of  a few  hours,  and  that  too  in
the  winter  season.

Excepting  while  breeding,  this  species  is  extremely  shy  and  wary,  es-
pecially the  adults.  To  approach  them  from  a distance  after  they  have
seen  you,  is  no  easy  task.  They  seem  to  know  the  distance  at  which
your  gun  can  injure  them,  they  watch  all  your  movements,  and  at  the
proper  moment  leave  their  perches.  Should  you  chance  to  crack  a stick
while  advancing  towards  them,  they  start  at  once,  give  a few  raps  with
their  wings  in  the  manner  of  the  Common  Pigeon,  and  fly  off  as  if  de-
lighted at  your  disappointment.  On  the  contrary,  you  may  shoot  them
witli  ease,  if  you  lie  in  wait  near  the  places  to  which  they  resort  to  roost


NIGHT  HERON.


277


by  day,  and  at  which  they  generally  arrive  singly,  or  a few  at  a time,
when,  from  your  place  of  concealment  among  the  trees,  you  may  kill  them
the  moment  they  alight  over  your  head,  and  at  a short  distance.  In  this
manner  I have  known  forty  or  fifty  procured  by  two  sportsmen  in  the
course  of  about  two  hours.  You  may  also  not  unfrequently  shoot  them
at  any  hour  of  the  day,  by  starting  them  from  secluded  feeding-grounds,
and  thus  T have  shot  a good  many  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States,
and  even  in  the  Middle  Districts.  They  are,  however,  rarely  shot  whilst
on  the  ground,  their  hearing  being  still  more  acute  than  that  of  the  Ame-
rican Bittern,  which  prefers  squatting  in  the  grass  to  flying  off,  when  any
noise  is  heard,  whereas  the  Night  Heron  rises  immediately.

This  species  breeds  in  communities  around  the  stagnant  ponds,  either
near  rice  plantations  or  in  the  interior  of  retired  and  secluded  swamps,  as
well  as  on  some  of  the  sea  islands  covered  with  evergreen  trees.  Their
heronries  are  formed  either  in  low  bushes,  or  in  middle-sized  or  tall  trees,
as  seems  most  convenient  or  secure.  In  the  Floridas,  they  are  partial  to
the  mangroves  that  overhang  the  salt-water ; in  Louisiana,  they  prefer  the
cypresses ; and  in  the  Middle  States,  they  find  the  cedars  most  suitable.
In  some  breeding-places  within  a few  miles  of  Charleston,  which  I visited
in  company  with  my  friend  John  Bachman,  the  nests  were  placed  on  low
bushes,  and  crowded  together,  some  within  a yard  of  the  ground,  others
raised  seven  or  eight  feet  above  it,  many  being  placed  flat  on  the  branches,
while  others  were  in  the  forks.  Hundreds  of  them  might  be  seen  at  once,
as  they  were  built  on  the  side  of  the  bushes  fronting  the  water.  Those
which  I found  in  the  Floridas  were  all  placed  on  the  south-west  sides  of
mangrove  islands,  but  were  farther  apart  from  each  other,  some  being  on-
ly about  a foot  above  high-water  mark,  while  others  were  in  the  very  tops
of  the  trees,  which,  however,  scarcely  exceeded  twenty  feet  in  height.  In
some  inland  swamps  in  Louisiana,  I saw  them  placed  on  the  tops  of  tall
cypress  trees  about  a hundred  feet  high,  and  along  with  those  of  Jrdea
Herodias,  A.  alba,  and  some  Anhingas.  In  the  Jerseys  I have  found  the
Night  Herons  breeding  on  water  oaks  and  cedars  ; and  my  friend  Tho-
mas Nuttall  informs  me,  that  “ in  a very  secluded  and  marshy  island,
in  Fresh  Pond,  near  Boston,  there  likewise  exists  one  of  these  ancient
heronries ; and  though  the  birds  have  been  frequently  robbed  of  their
eggs,  in  great  numbers,  by  mischievous  boys,  they  still  lay  again  im-
mediately after,  and  usually  succeed  in  raising  a second  brood.”  The
same  accurate  observer  remarks,  that  “ about  the  middle  of  October,  the


278


NIGHT  HERON.


Qua  Birds  begin  to  retire  from  this  part  of  Massachusetts,  towards  their
southern  winter  quarters,  although  a few  of  the  young  birds  still  linger
occasionally  to  the  29th  or  30th  of  that  month.”  This  last  observation
is  a farther  evidence  of  the  reluctance  which  the  young  of  this  species  feel
to  go  as  far  south  during  winter  as  the  old  birds.

The  nest  of  the  Night  Heron  is  large,  flattish,  and  formed  of  sticks
placed  in  different  directions,  sometimes  to  the  height  of  three  or  four
inches.  At  times  it  is  arranged  with  so  little  care,  that  the  young  upset
it  before  they  are  able  to  fly.  Many  of  the  nests  are  annually  repaired,
and  these  birds,  when  they  have  once  found  an  agreeable  settlement,  re-
turn regularly  to  it,  until  some  calamity  forces  them  to  abandon  it.  The
full  number  of  the  eggs  is  four,  and  they  measure  at  an  average  two  inches
and  one-sixteenth  by  an  inch  and  a half.  They  are  thin-shelled,  and  of
a plain  light  sea-green  colour.  In  about  three  weeks  after  the  young  are
hatched,  most  of  them  leave  the  nest,  and  crawl  about  the  branches,  to
which  they  cling  firmly,  ascending  to  the  tops  of  the  bushes  or  trees,  and
there  awaiting  the  return  of  their  parents  with  food.  If  you  approach
them  at  such  times,  the  greatest  consternation  ensues  both  among  the
young  and  the  old  birds ; the  loud  and  incessant  croaking  which  both
have  until  then  kept  up,  suddenly  ceases  ; the  parent  birds  rise  in  the  air,
sail  around  and  above  you,  some  alighting  on  the  neighbouring  trees ;
while  the  young  scramble  off  in  all  directions  to  avoid  being  taken.  So
great  at  times  is  their  terror,  that  they  throw  themselves  into  the  water,
and  swim  off  with  considerable  rapidity,  until  they  reach  the  shore,  when
they  run  and  hide  in  every  convenient  place.  Retire  for  half  an  hour,
and  you  will  be  sure  to  hear  the  old  and  the  young  calling  to  each  other ;
the  noise  gradually  increases,  and  in  a short  time  is  as  loud  as  ever.  The
stench  emitted  by  the  excrements  with  which  the  abandoned  nests,  the
branches  and  leaves  of  the  trees  and  bushes,  and  the  ground,  are  co-
vered, the  dead  young,  the  rotten  and  broken  eggs,  together  with  putrid
fish  and  other  matters,  renders  a visit  to  these  places  far  from  pleasant.
Crows,  Hawks  and  Vultures  torment  the  birds  by  day,  while  Racoons
and  other  animals  destroy  them  by  night.  The  young  are  quite  as  good
for  eating  as  those  of  the  Common  Pigeon,  being  tender,  juicy,  and  fat,
with  very  little  of  the  fishy  taste  of  many  birds  which,  like  them,  feed  on
fishes  and  reptiles.  At  this  period  few  if  any  of  the  old  birds  have  the
long  feathers  of  tlic  liind  head,  and  these  are  not  I'eproduced  before  tlic


NIGHT  HERON.


279


latter  part  of  the  following  winter,  when  they  seem  to  attain  their  extreme
length  in  a few  weeks.

The  flight  of  the  Night  Heron  is  steady,  rather  slow, 'and  often  greatly
protracted.  They  propel  themselves  by  regular  flappings  of  the  wings,
and,  like  the  true  Herons,  draw  in  their  head  on  the  shoulders,  while
their  legs  stretch  out  behind,  and  with  the  tail  form  a kind  of  rudder.
When  alarmed  they  at  times  rise  high  in  the  air,  and  sail  about  for  a
while.  They  sail  in  the  same  manner  before  alighting  on  their  feeding
grounds,  which  they  rarely  do  without  having  previously  attended  to
their  security  by  alighting  on  the  neighbouring  trees  and  looking  about
them.  Their  migrations  are  performed  under  night,  when  their  passage
is  indicated  by  their  loud  hoarse  notes  resembling  the  syllable  qua,  uttered
at  pretty  regular  intervals.  On  these  occasions  they  appear  to  fly  faster
than  usual.

On  the  ground,  this  bird  exhibits  none  of  the  grace  observed  in  all
the  true  Herons  ; it  walks  in  a stooping  posture,  the  neck  much  retracted,
until  it  sees  its  prey,  when,  with  a sudden  movement,  it  stretches  it  out
and  secures  its  food.  It  is  never  seen  standing  motionless,  waiting  for  its
prey,  like  the  true  Herons,  but  is  constantly  moving  about  in  search  oi
it.  Its  feeding  places  are  the  sides  of  ditches,  meadows,  the  shady  banks
of  creeks,  bayous,  and  ponds  or  rivers,  as  well  as  the  extensive  salt-marshes
and  mud-bars  left  exposed  at  low  water ; and  I have  observed  it  to  alight
in  the  ponds  in  the  suburbs  of  Charleston  towards  evening,  and  feed  there.
In  all  such  situations,  excepting  the  last,  this  bird  may  often  be  seen  by
day,  but  more  especially  in  the  evening  or  morning  twilight,  wading  up
to  its  ankles,  or,  as  we  commonly  say,  its  knee-joints.  Its  food  consists  of
fishes,  shrimps,  tadpoles,  frogs,  water-lizards,  and  leeches,  small  Crustacea
of  all  kinds,  water  insects,  moths,  and  even  mice,  which  seem  not  less  wel-
come to  it  than  its  more  ordinary  articles  of  food.  When  satisfied,
it  retires  to  some  high  tree  on  the  banks  of  a stream  or  in  the  interior  of
a swamp,  and  there  it  stands,  usually  on  one  leg,  for  hours  at  a time,  ap-
parently dosing,  though  seldom  sound  asleep.

When  wounded,  this  bird  first  tries  to  make  its  escape  by  hiding
among  the  grass  or  bushes,  squatting  the  moment  it  finds  what  it  deems
a secure  place;  but  if  no  chance  of  a safe  retreat  occurs,  it  raises  its
crest,  ruffles  its  feathers,  and,  opening  its  bill,  prepares  to  defend  itself.
It  can  bite  pretty  severely,  but  the  injury  inflicted  by  its  bill  is  not  to
be  compared  with  that  produced  by  its  claws,  which  on  such  occasion^


280


NIGHT  HERON.


it  uses  with  much  effect.  If  you  seize  it,  it  utters  a loud,  rough,  con-
tinued sound,  and  tries  to  make  its  escape  whenever  it  perceives  the  least
chance.

The  Night  Heron  undergoes  three  annual  changes  of  plumage  ere  it
attains  its  perfect  state,  although  many  individuals  breed  in  the  spring  of
the  third  year.  After  the  first  autumnal  moult,  the  young  is  as  you  see
it  represented  in  the  plate.  In  the  second  autumn,  the  markings  of  the
neck  and  other  parts  have  almost  entirely  disappeared  ; the  upper  parts
of  the  head  have  become  of  a dull  blackish-green,  mixing  near  the  upper
mandible  with  the  dull  brown  of  the  first  season,  while  the  rest  of  the
plumage  has  assumed  a uniform  dull  ochreous  greyish- brown.  In  the
course  of  the  following  season,  the  bird  exhibits  the  green  of  the  shoulders
and  back,  the  head  is  equally  richly  coloured,  and  the  frontal  band  be-
tween the  upper  mandible  and  the  eye,  and  over  the  latter,  is  pure  white.
At  this  age  it  rarely  has  the  slender  white  feathers  of  the  hind  head  longer
than  an  inch  or  two.  The  sides  of  the  neck,  and  aU  the  lower  parts,
have  become  of  a purer  greyish- white.  The  wings  are  now  spotless  in
all  their  parts,  and  of  a light  brownish-grey,  as  is  the  tail.  The  follow-
ing spring,  the  plumage  is  complete,  and  the  bird  is  as  represented  in  the
plate.  After  this  period,  with  the  exception  of  losing  its  long  crest-
feathers  after  the  young  are  hatched,  it  retains  its  colouring.  No  diffe-
rence can  be  observed  in  the  tints  of  the  sexes,  but  the  male  is  somewhat
larger.

A very  considerable  difference  in  size  is  observable  at  all  seasons  in
birds  of  this  species.  Some  that  are  fully  feathered,  and  therefore  at  least
three  years  old,  measure  as  much  as  four  inches  less  than  others  of  the  same
sex,  and  weigh  less  in  proportion.  These  circumstances  might  suffice
with  some  naturalists  to  attempt  to  form  two  species  out  of  one,  but  in
this  they  would  certainly  fail.

In  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Orleans,  and  along  the  Mississippi,  as
far  up  as  Natchez,  the  shooting  of  this  species  is  a favourite  occupation
with  the  planters,  who  represent  it  as  equalling  any  other  bird  in  the  de-
licacy of  its  flesh.

The  frog,  of  which  I have  introduced  a figure,  is  common  in  the  re-
tired swamps  which  the  Night  Heron  frequents,  and  is  often  devoured
by  it.  The  flowering  plants  which  you  see,  are  abundant  in  the  States
of  Georgia  and  So  ith  Carolina,  as  well  as  in  the  Floridas.


NIGHT  HERON.


281


Ardea  Nycticorax,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  235. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  678.
— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  306.

Night  Heron,  or  Qua  Bird,  Wits.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  3,  pi.  51,  fig.  2.  Adult.
Fig.  3.  Young.

Qua  Bird,  or  American  Night  Heron,  Ardea  discors,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.
p.  54.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCXXXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  a little  longer  than  the  head,  strong,  straight,  compressed,  taper-
ing. Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched  and  declinate,
the  ridge  broad  and  rather  rounded  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards  the
end,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  very  sharp  and  inflected,  obscurely  ser-
rated with  minute  oblique  slits,  and  having  a distinct  notch  close  to  the
compressed,  rather  obtuse  tip.  Nasal  groove  wide  at  the  base,  extending
narrow  to  near  the  tip  ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  wider  behind,  longitudinal.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line
straight  and  sloping  upwards,  the  sides  flat,  the  sharp  obscurely  jagged
edges  slightly  inflected,  the  tip  very  acute.

Head  oblong,  much  compressed  ; eyes  large.  Neck  long.  Body  ra-
ther slender,  compressed.  Feet  rather  long,  robust ; tibia  bare  at  its  lower
part ; tarsus  covered  anteriorly  along  its  upper  two-thirds  with  scutella,
below  and  on  the  sides  with  large  angular  scales  ; toes  long  and  rather
slender,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,  marginate ; hind  toe  stout,  fourth
a little  longer  than  second,  third  much  longer ; claws  of  moderate  size,
stout,  arched,  compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  middle  toe  beautifully
pectinate  on  the  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft,  blended.  Feathers  of  the  upper  and  hind  part  of  the
head  elongated  and  loose,  with  three  very  long,  linear  incurved  occipital
feathers,  having  their  webs  inflected.  The  feathers  of  the  neck,  especial-
ly of  its  lower  part  and  sides,  are  also  elongated,  the  latter  curved  back-
wards. Wings  of  moderate  length,  broad,  rounded ; primaries  broad,
rounded,  the  third  longest,  the  first  longer  than  the  fourth.  Tail  short,
slightly  rounded,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Bare  loral  space  and  eyelids  yellowish-green  ; iris  bright
red.  Feet  yellow  ; claws  brown.  Feathers  on  the  upper  part  of  the
head,  the  fore  part  of  the  back,  and  the  scapulars,  glossy  blackish-green  ;
anterior  part  of  forehead  white ; neck  anteriorly  white,  on  the  sides  and
behind  shaded  into  pale  lilac,  the  lower  elongated  feathers  tinged  witli


282


NIGHT  HERON.


cream-colour ; breast  and  abdomen  white,  similarly  tinged.  Wings,
rump,  and  tail,  light  greyish-blue,  tinged  with  lilac.

Length  to  end  of  tail  25/g  inches,  to  end  of  wings  25-J§,  to  end  of
claws  30/^;  extent  of  wings  44;  wing  from  flexure  13|;  tail  5;  bill
along  the  ridge  3j%,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  4^®g  ; bare  part  of
tibia  ; tarsus  3^  ; middle  toe  3,  its  claw  Ji.  Weight  1 lb.  14  oz.

Young  after  first  moult.  Plate  CCXXXVI.  Fig.  2.

Bill  and  bare  space  about  the  eye  yellowish-green,  the  ridge  of  the
upper  mandible,  and  part  of  the  lower  towards  the  end,  black.  Iris
bright  red.  Feet  pale  greenish-yellow.  At  this  period  the  occipital  fea-
thers are  not  developed.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light
greyish-brown,  the  edges  of  the  feathers  paler ; that  of  the  lower  parts
dull  white,  tinged  with  grey  and  cream  colour,  with  the  central  part  of
each  feather  greyish-brown  ; the  feathers  of  the  back  and  wings,  as  well
as  the  secondary  quills,  have  a long  triangular  spot  of  brownish-white  at
the  end ; the  rump  and  tail  more  tinged  with  bluish-grey.

The  Adult  Female  resembles  the  Male.


Amaryllis  Atamasco,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  51.  Pursh,  Flora  Amer.  Sept.  vol.  i.

p.  222.

This  species,  which  grows  in  swamps,  and  moist  woods,  in  Virginia
and  Carolina,  is  characterized  by  having  an  acute  bifid  spatha,  an  erect
funnel-shaped  corolla  of  a pale  rose-colour  or  pure  white,  with  a short
tube  at  the  base,  the  segments  nearly  equal,  as  are  the  decimate  stamens.
It  flowers  in  June  and  July,  and  attains  a height  of  from  eight  inches  tu
a foot.


( 283  )


THE  HUDSONIAN  CURLEW.

Numenius  hudsonicus.  Lath.

PLATE  CCXXXVII,  Male.

The  habits  of  this  species,  which  until  a few  years  ago  was  always
confounded  with  the  Esquimaux  Curlew,  Numenius  borealis,  are  yet  in  a
great  measure  unknown.  Every  person  who  writes  on  American  birds
repeats,  that  it  arrives  at  Hudson’s  Bay,  breeds  farther  north,  &c. ; but
none  has  yet  given  any  of  those  details  so  necessary  to  enable  the  student
of  nature  to  judge  in  what  respects  this  species  resembles,  or  differs
from  others,  at  the  season  of  reproduction.  During  my  visit  to  Labra-
dor, 1 made  diligent  inquiry  respecting  it  and  the  Esquimaux  Curlew,
but  I obtained  no  information  farther  than  that  the  latter  is  extremely
abundant  for  a few  weeks  in  early  autumn,  and  that  the  present  species
was  entirely  unknown.  Even  Mr  Jones  and  his  sons,  who  had  probably
killed  thousands  of  the  species  just  mentioned,  had  never  seen  it  in  the
course  of  their  long  residence  at  Bras  d’Or.  Nor  is  our  information  re-
specting their  winter  retreats  much  better,  for  scarcely  any  of  them  are
ever  seen  in  the  colder  months  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States,  and
their  movements  during  their  migrations  are  more  rapid  than  those  of
most  water  birds.  In  short,  I am  unable  to  present  you  with  such  an  ac-
count of  them  as  I could  have  wished.

I have  found  this  species  abundant  on  the  shores  of  New  Jersey  in
the  month  of  May,  and  there  they  remain  a few  weeks.  I once  saw  a
large  flock  of  them  near  Charleston,  in  the  month  of  December,  and  I
have  found  them  in  the  Boston  market  in  September.  None  were  ever  seen
by  me  in  any  part  of  the  interior,  where,  indeed,  it  is  probable  they  very
seldom  make  their  appearance.  As  I have  nothing  of  any  importance  to
add,  I shall  present  you  with  a few  extracts,  from  Wilson  and  Nuttall,
both  of  whom  have  had  opportunities  of  observing  this  species.

“ The  Short-billed  Curlew,”  says  the  former,  “ arrives  in  large  flocks
on  the  sea-coast  of  New  Jersey  early  in  May,  from  the  south,  frequents
the  salt-marshes,  muddy  shores,  and  inlets,  feeding  on  small  worms  and
minute  shell-fish.  They  are  most  commonly  seen  on  mud-flats  at  low
water,  in  company  with  various  other  waders;  and  at  high  water  roam


284


HUDSONIAN  CURLEW.


along  the  marshes.  They  fly  high,  and  with  great  rapidity.  A few  are
seen  in  June,  and  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  July,  when  they  generally
move  off*  toward  the  north.  Their  appearance  on  these  occasions  is  very
interesting  : they  collect  together  from  the  marshes  as  if  by  premeditated
design,  rise  to  a great  height  in  the  air,  usually  an  hour  before  sunset,
and,  forming  in  one  vast  line,  keep  up  a constant  whistling  on  their  way
to  the  north,  as  if  conversing  with  one  another  to  render  the  journey  more
agreeable.  Their  flight  is  then  more  slow  and  regular,  that  the  feeblest
may  keep  up  with  the  line  of  march  ; while  the  glittering  of  their  beauti-
fully speckled  wings,  sparkling  in  the  sun,  produces  altogether  a very
pleasing  spectacle.

“ In  the  month  of  June,  while  the  dewberries  are  ripe,  these  birds
sometimes  frequent  the  fields,  in  company  with  the  Long-billed  Curlews,
where  brambles  abound  ; soon  get  very  fat,  and  are  at  that  time  excellent
eating.”

Nuttall  says,  “ From  the  middle  of  August  to  the  beginning  of  Sep-
tember, they  arrive  in  the  vicinity  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  other  parts
of  New  England,  frequenting  the  pastures  as  well  as  marshes,  and  fatten
on  grasshoppers  and  berries,  till  the  time  of  their  departure,  about  the
close  of  September ; and  they  wholly  disappear  from  New  Jersey,  on  their
way  to  the  south,  early  in  the  month  of  November.”

I have  only  to  add,  that,  having  compared  specimens  of  the  present
species  with  the  Whimbrel  of  Europe,  Numenius  Phceopus,  I am  satisfied
that  they  are  perfectly  distinct.


Numenius  hudsonicus,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  712 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.

of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  314 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.

part  ii.  p.  377-

Esquimaux  Curlew,  Scolopax  borealis,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  vii.  p.  92.  pi.  59.
fig.  1.

Esquimaux  Curlew,  Numenius  hudsonicus,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  97-

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXVII.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  very  slender,  subcylindrical,  com-
pressed, slightly  arched.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly
arched,  the  sides,  excepting  at  the  base,  rounded,  and  marked  with  a nar-
row groove  extending  more  than  two-thirds  of  its  length,  the  ridge  ra-
ther flattened  at  the  base,  convex  and  narrower  towards  the  end,  the  edges


HUDSONIAN  CURLEW.


285


rather  obtuse.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear.  Lower
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  arched,  or  nearly  parallel  to  that  of  the  up-
per, the  angle  extremely  narrow  and  extended  to  near  the  end,  the  sides
at  the  base  nearly  erect  with  a shallow  groove  close  to  the  rather  obtuse
edge ; the  tips  obtuse,  and  about  equal  in  length.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long,  slender.
Body  rather  full.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  slender.  Tibia  bare  a con-
siderable way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  with  numerous  anterior  scutella,
excepting  in  its  upper  fourth,  where,  and  on  the  sides,  it  is  reticulated.
Toes  small,  scutellate  above ; first  very  small,  second  and  fourth  about
equal,  third  considerably  longer ; the  anterior  toes  marginate,  and  con-
nected at  the  base  by  short  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  larger.  Claws
small,  compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  much  larger,  curved  out-
wards, with  a sharp  dilated  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short ; the
feathers  in  general  small,  oblong  or  ovate  and  rounded.  Wings  rather
long,  very  acute,  narrow,  the  primaries  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  se-
cond a little  shorter,  the  rest  regularly  and  rapidly  graduated  ; secon-
daries short,  incurved,  rounded,  excepting  some  of  the  inner,  which  are
greatly  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded
feathers.

Bill  brownish-black,  the  basal  half  of  lower  mandible  flesh  colour.
Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  greyish-blue,  claws  black.  The  upper  part  of
the  head  is  deep  brown,  with  a central  longitudinal  line  of  white,  and  a
broader  lateral  one  of  the  same  over  each  eye  ; a brown  line  from  the  bill
to  the  eye,  and  another  extending  behind  the  latter.  The  neck  all  round
is  pale  yelloAvish-grey,  longitudinally  streaked  with  brown,  excepting  the
chin  or  upper  part  of  the  throat,  which  is  greyish-white.  The  upper  parts
in  general  are  blackish-brown,  marked  with  numerous  spots  of  brownish-
white,  there  being  several  along  the  margins  of  each  feather;  the  wings  and
rump  are  lighter,  the  upper  tail-coverts  and  tail  barred  with  brown  and
yellowish-grey,  the  latter  tipped  with  white.  Primaries  and  their  coverts
brownish-black,  the  outer  unspotted  on  their  outer  web ; all  with  trans-
verse light  markings  on  the  inner ; the  secondaries  like  the  smaller  coverts.
Breast  and  abdomen  greyish-white,  the  sides  tinged  with  cream-colour,
and  barred  with  pale  greyish-brown  ; the  outer  lower  tail-coverts  with  a
few  brown  marks.


286


HUDSONIAN  CURLEW.


Length  to  end  of  tail  19  inches,  to  end  of  wings  18,  to  end  of  claws  21 ;
wing  from  flexure  9^ ; tail  4 ; extent  of  wings  33  ; bill  along  the  back  4;^,
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  4|;  tarsus  2^%,  middle  toe  1/^,  its
claw  3j|.  Weight  1 lb.  1|^  oz.

The  Female  resembles  the  male.

The  bill  varies  greatly  in  length  : in  a specimen  now  before  me,  it  is
2^^,  in  another  2j%,  while  in  the  individual  figured  it  was  4|.


( 287  )


THE  GREAT  MARBLED  GODWIT.

Limosa  Fedoa,  Vieill.

PLATE  CCXXXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  fine  bird  is  found  during  winter  on  all  the  large  muddy  flats  of
the  coast  of  Florida  that  are  intermixed  with  beds  of  racoon  oysters.  As
the  tide  rises  it  approaches  the  shores,  and  betakes  itself  to  the  wet  savan-
nahs. At  this  season  it  is  generally  seen  in  flocks  of  five  or  six,  searching
for  food  in  company  with  the  Tell-tale,  the  Yellow-shanks,  the  Long-billed
Curlew,  and  the  White  Ibis.  While  feeding,  it  probes  the  mud  and  wet
sand,  often  plunging  its  bill  to  its  whole  length,  in  the  manner  of  the
Common  Snipe' and  the  Woodcock.  It  is  fond  of  the  small  crabs  called  fid-
dlers, many  of  which  it  obtains  both  by  probing  their  burrows,  and  run-
ning after  them  along  the  edges  of  the  salt  meadows  and  marshes.  Some-
times you  see  it  wading  in  the  water  up  to  its  body,  and  when  about  to
lose  ground,  it  rises  and  extends  its  wings,  still  continuing  to  search  for
fry,  until  forced  to  fly  off  by  the  increased  depth  of  the  water,  when  it
alights  on  the  shore  and  recommences  its  operations.  While  feeding  on
the  banks,  it  appears  to  search  for  food  between  and  under  the  oysters  with
singular  care,  at  times  pushing  the  bill  sidewise  into  the  soft  mud  beneath
the  shells.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  day,  the  separate  flocks  come  to-
gether, assembling  on  some  large  sand-bar,  where  they  remain  for  hours,
trimming  their  plumage,  after  which  many  of  them  continue  some  time
motionless,  standing  on  one  leg.  Suddenly,  however,  they  are  all  seen  to
stretch  their  wings  upwards,  their  bleating  notes  are  heard,  and  the  next
moment  the  flock  rises,  and  disperses  in  small  parties,  each  of  which  pro-
ceeds in  a different  direction  in  search  of  food.

Few  birds  are  more  shy  or  vigilant  than  the  Great  Marbled  Godwit.
It  watches  the  movements  of  the  gunner  with  extreme  care,  particularly
while  in  small  flocks,  jn  which  case  it  rarely  happens  that  one  can  ap-
proach them,  and  they  are  more  commonly  shot  by  coming  unawares  over
the  concealed  sportsman.  When  in  large  flocks  I have  known  them  to
be  neared,  and  killed  in  great  numbers.  On  such  occasions,  they  walk
towards  each  other,  until  they  are  quite  close,  when  they  stand  still.  Then
is  the  time  for  the  gunner,  who  has  driven  them  before  him  as  it  were,  to


288


GREAT  MARBLED  GODWIT.


the  extremity  of  a mud  or  sand-bar,  to  fire  with  a certainty  of  obtaining
something  worth  his  trouble,  for  besides  the  number  killed  by  his  first
shot,  he  is  likely  to  commit  equal  havock  with  the  second,  as  they  fiy  off
in  a dense  mass.

On  the  31st  of  May  1832,  1 saw  an  immense  number  of  these  birds
on  an  extensive  mud-bar  bordering  one  of  the  Keys  of  Florida,  about  six
miles  south  of  Cape  Sable,  When  I landed  with  my  party,  the  whole,
amounting  to  some  thousands,  collected  in  the  manner  mentioned  above.
Four  or  five  guns  were  fired  at  once,  and  the  slaughter  was  such,  that  I
was  quite  satisfied  with  the  number  obtained,  both  for  specimens  and  for
food.  For  this  reason,  we  refrained  from  firing  at  them  again,  although
the  temptation  was  at  times  great,  as  they  flew  over  and  wheeled  round
us  for  a while,  until  at  length  they  alighted  at  some  distance  and  began
to  feed.  Those  which  we  killed  were  plump,  and  afforded  excellent  eat-
ing. I was  much  surprised  to  find  ,these  Godwits  so  far  south,  but  next
morning,  when  none  were  to  be  seen  excepting  some  wounded  birds  which
we  had  not  pursued,  I concluded  that  the  flock,  which  was  the  largest  I
have  seen,  had  merely  alighted  there  for  the  day.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  regular  and  rather  quick,  although  in  the
latter  respect  not  to  be  compared  with  that  of  the  Curlews.  When  flying
to  a considerable  distance,  or  migrating,  they  usually  proceed  in  extended
lines,  presenting  an  irregular  front,  which  rarely  preserves  its  continuity
for  any  length  of  time,  but  undulates  and  breaks  as  the  birds  advance.
The  beat  of  their  wings  is  regular,  and  they  rarely  utter  any  cries  on  such
occasions.

This  species  enters  the  United  States,  on  its  return  from  its  northern
breeding-grounds,  about  the  middle  of  August,  and  probably  travels  along
the  coast  at  that  period  as  well  as  when  proceeding  northward,  none  ha-
ving been  seen  by  me  or  my  party  in  Labrador  or  Newfoundland,  and
their  passage  having  been  observed  only  on  the  Atlantic  shores  of  Nova
Scotia,  and  the  whole  line  of  our  coast,  on  different  parts  of  which  some
of  the  flocks  alight,  and  rest  for  a few  weeks,  both  in  spring  and  in  au-
tumn.  I may  add,  that  I never  saw  one  of  these  birds  beyond  the  di.s-
tance  of  a few  miles  from  the  sea-shore.


GREAT  MARBLED  GODWIT.


289


' Limosa  Fedoa,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  328 — Swains,
and  Richards,  Faima-Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  395.

Great  Marbled  Godwit,  Scolopax  Fedoa,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  30.
pi.  56.  fig.  4. — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  1?3.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  very  long,  slender,  subcylindrical,  tapering  to  the  obtuse  point,
slightly  recurved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  curved  up-
wards in  its  whole  extent,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  with  a narrow  groove
extending  almost  to  the  point,  the  edges  rather  obtuse,  the  tip  very  slightly
enlarged.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  nearer  the  edge  than  the  dorsal  line,
small,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and
extremely  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  recurved,  the  sides  with  a nar-
row groove  extending  almost  to  the  end,  the  edge  rather  blunt,  the  tip
obtuse.

Head  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long,  slender.  Body
slender.  Feet  long  and  slender.  Tibia  bare  for  about  a third,  anteriorly
scutellate ; tarsus  long,  slender,  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous  scu-
tella,  scutellate  behind  also,  laterally  reticulate ; toes  small,  slender,  scu-
tellate above,  flat  beneath,  broadly  marginate,  the  anterior  connected  at
the  base  by  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  much  larger ; first  toe  very  small,
second  slightly  shorter  than  fourth,  third  little  longer.  Claws  small,  com-
pressed, slightly  arched',  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  with  the  inner  edge
curved  outwards  and  thin.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short,  on
the  neck  short  and  almost  downy,  on  the  abdomen  and  sides  full,  on  the
back  moderate  ; all  the  feathers  oblong  and  rounded.  Wings  rather  long,
very  acute,  narrow ; primaries  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  second  little
shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  incurved,  obliquely  round-
ed, the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  even,  of  twelve  narrow,
rounded  feathers.

BiU  dull  flesh-colour  in  its  basal  half,  the  rest  blackish-brown.  Iris
brown.  Feet  bluish-grey.  The  head  and  neck  light  yellowish-grey,  the
throat  without  markings,  the  upper  part  of  the  head  streaked  with  black-
ish-brown, as  is  the  hind-neck,  the  markings  there  being  fainter.  The
rest  of  the  upper  parts  spotted  and  barred  with  brownish-black  and  grey-
ish-yellow. Alula  and  primary  coverts  brownish-black,  as  are  the  outer

VOL.  III.


T


290


GREAT  MARBLED  GODWIT.


webs  of  the  three  first  quills,  those  of  the  other  primaries,  and  both  webs
of  the  secondaries,  reddish-ochre,  all  more  or  less  mottled  with  dusky,  and
the  primaries  of  that  colour  towards  the  end,  but  with  the  terminal  mar-
gins whitish  ; the  inner  secondaries  barred  like  the  back,  as  are  the  tail-
feathers.  Breast,  abdomen,  and  lower  surface  of  wings,  light  reddish-
yellow,  the  axillar  feathers  of  a deeper  tint,  the  sides  faintly  barred  with
dusky.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  19^,  to  end  of  claws
21  ; wing  from  flexure  9 ; tail  3^ ; bill  along  the  ridge  4/j,  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  ; bare  part  of  tibia  1 ; tarsus  ; middle

toe  l^*g,  its  claw

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXXXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  considerably  larger  than  the  male,  but  is  similar  in  co-
louring, the  lower  parts  of  a less  bright  buff.

Length  to  end  of  tail  20^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  21 1 ; bill  5.

The  inner  edge  of  the  middle  claw  is  usually  broken,  which  is  a com-
mon circumstance  in  birds  that  have  it  very  thin,  but  there  are  no  regu-
lar serratures  or  notches  upon  it.


( 291  )


THE  AMERICAN  COOT.

FuLICA  AMERICANA,  GmEL.

PLATE  CCXXXIX.  Male.

Fkom  November  until  the  middle  of  April,  the  Coots  are  extremely
numerous  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  Floridas,  and  the  lower  portions
of  Louisiana.  At  that  season  they  are  seen  in  flocks  of  several  hun-
dreds, following  their  avocations  on  all  the  secluded  bayous,  grassy  lakes,
and  inlets,  which  are  so  plentiful  in  those  countries  ; but  after  the  period
above  mentioned  none  remain,  and  therefore  it  is  certain  none  can  breed
there,  although  such  is  asserted  by  Mr  Bartram,  who  no  doubt  mistook
the  Common  Gallinule  for  the  Coot,  that  bird  breeding  in  those  places  in
considerable  numbers.  During  the  month  of  September,  the  Coot  is
also  abundant  on  all  the  western  waters,  and  its  appearance  in  those  dis-
tricts being  so  much  earlier  than  in  the  Floridas,  is  a sure  indication  of
the  inland  course  of  its  migrations.  On  the  sea  coast,  in  fact,  it  is  com-
paratively rare.

Although  the  curious  form  of  their  feet,  and  the  situation  of  their
legs,  might  induce  one  to  suppose  these  birds  incapable  of  moving  on  land
with  ease,  experience  proves  the  contrary,  for  they  not  only  walk  with
freedom,  but  can  run  with  great  speed  when  necessary.  They  are  ac-
customed to  leave  the  water  too,  and  resort  to  open  lands  on  the  margins
of  streams  and  lakes,  for  the  purpose  of  feeding,  both  in  the  morning  and
in  the  evening.  While  ascending  the  Mississippi,  being  about  fifty  miles
above  New  Orleans,  on  the  21st  of  March  1822,  the  weather  cloudy,  I
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  about  six  or  seven  hundreds  of  these  birds
feeding  on  the  grass  of  a savannah  bordering  the  river.  I took  them  while
at  some  distance,  for  a great  flock  of  Guinea  Fowls.  Their  movements
were  brisk,  they  often  struck  at  each  other  in  the  manner  of  the  domestic
fowl,  and  ran  with  sui-prising  celerity.  As  I approached  nearer,  I plainly
saw  them  nibble  the  tender  grass,  in  the  same  manner  as  poultry  ; and
having  found  a place  of  concealment  behind  a rise  of  the  ground,  I laid
myself  flat,  and  observed  their  motions  at  leisure  ; but  during  twenty  mi-
nutes spent  in  that  situation,  I did  not  hear  a single  note  from  the  flock.
I fired  among  them,  and  killed  five,  on  which  the  rest,  after  running  a

T 2


292


AMERICAN  COOT.


few  steps,  all  rose  and  flew  oft'  with  speed  towards  the  river,  mounted  high
in  the  air,  came  curving  over  me,  their  legs  hanging  behind,  their  wings
producing  a constant  whir,  and  at  length  alighted  on  a narrow  channel
between  the  shore,  where  I was,  and  a small  island.  Following  them
with  caution,  I got  sufficiently  near  to  some  of  them  to  be  able  to  see  them
leap  from  the  water  to  seize  the  young  leaves  of  the  willows  that  overhung
the  shores.  While  swimming,  they  moved  with  ease,  although  not  with
much  speed,  and  used  a constantly  repeated  movement  of  the  head  and
neck,  corresponding  with  that  of  the  feet.  Now,  twenty  or  thirty  of  them
would  close  their  ranks,  and  swim  up  the  stream  in  a lengthened  body,
when  they  would  disperse,  and  pick  up  the  floating  substances,  not  one  of
them  diving  all  the  time.  On  firing  at  a large  group  of  them  that  had  ap-
proached me,  they  started  off  in  various  directions,  patting  the  water  with
their  feet,  and  rushing  with  extended  wings,  for  thirty  or  forty  yards,
but  without  actually  flying.  After  this,  they  made  towards  the  brushy
shores,  and  disappeared  for  about  a quarter  of  an  hour.  The  rest  of  the
birds,  which  were  a few  hundred  yards  off,  scarcely  took  notice  of  the  re-
port of  the  gun  ; and  before  I left  the  place,  they  had  returned  to  the
shore,  and  walked  into  another  savannah,  where  they  probably  remained
until  night.  The  next  morning  not  a single  Coot  could  I find  while  look-
ing for  them,  for  several  miles  along  the  river,  and  I concluded  that  they
had  left  the  place,  and  continued  their  migratory  journey  northward,  this
being  about  the  beginning  of  the  time  of  their  general  departure.

Whilst  at  General  Hernandez’s,  in  East  Florida,  I found  the  Coot
abundant  in  every  ditch,  bayou,  or  pond.  This  was  in  December  1831,
and  in  the  next  month  I saw  great  flocks  of  them  near  the  plantation  of
my  friend  John  Bullow,  Esq.  Whilst  on  a visit  to  Spring  Garden
springs,  at  the  head  of  the  St  John’s  River,  I observed  them  to  be  equally
abundant  along  the  grassy  margins  of  the  lagoons  and  lakes.  On  my  re-
turn from  the  upper  parts  of  that  river  to  St  Augustine,  on  the  28th
February,  I saw  large  flocks  of  them  already  moving  northward.  They
had  suddenly  become  shy,  and  would  rise  before  our  boat,  at  a distance
of  a hundred  yards  or  so,  with  apparently  scarcely  any  difficulty,  and  fly
in  loose  flocks  at  a considerable  height,  half  a mile  or  more  at  a time,
and  without  uttering  a note.  Indeed,  the  only  sound  I ever  heard  these
birds  utter,  is  a rough  guttural  note,  somewhat  resembling  cruck,  crude,
which  they  use  when  alarmed,  or  when  chasing  each  other  on  the  water  in
anger.  1 am  doubtful  whether  our  Coot  cackles  and  cries  by  night  and


AMERICAN  COOT.


293


by  day,  as  has  been  reported  ; on  the  other  hand,  I am  pretty  well  assured
that  Galliniiles  and  Rails  of  different  species  have  been  confounded  with
the  Coot  in  this  respect.

I never  saw  this  species  dive  for  food,  and  the  only  fish  that  I ever
found  in  the  many  that  I have  opened,  was  very  small  minnows  or  fry,
which  I think  they  catch  along  the  shallow  edges  of  the  water.  Indeed,
unless  when  wounded,  our  Coot  feels  great  reluctance  at  immersing  its
body  in  the  water ; at  all  events,  it  has  not  the  quickness  of  any  of  the
diving  birds,  and  rarely  escapes  the  shot  of  a common  flint  gun  while  at-
tempting to  get  away.  When  wounded  it  dives  to  some  distance,  but  as
soon  as  it  reaches  the  grass  or  reeds,  it  contents  itself  with  lying  flat  on
the  water,  and  thus  swimming  to  the  nearest  shore,  on  reaching  which  it  at
once  runs  off  and  hides  in  the  first  convenient  place.  When  undisturbed,
it  feeds  both  by  day  and  by  night,  and  as  often  on  land  as  on  the  water.
Its  food  consists  of  seeds,  grasses,  small  fishes,  worms,  snails,  and  insects,
and  along  with  these  it  introduces  into  its  stomach  a good  quantity  of
rather  coarse  sand.

The  principal  breeding  places  of  this  species  ai*e  yet  unknown  to  me.
At  Charleston  it  was  supposed  that  it  breeds  in  the  neighbourhood  of
that  city ; but  my  friend  Bachman  while  searching  for  their  nests  at  the
proper  season,  saw  that  the  Common  Gallinule  was  in  fact  the  bird  that
had  been  taken  for  the  Coot.  My  learned  friend  Nutt  all  mentions  that
a pair  had  bred  in  Fresh  Pond  near  Boston,  and  that  he  there  saw  parents
and  young.  Some  travelling  lumberers  assured  me  that  the  Coot  breeds
in  numbers  in  the  lakes  lying  between  Mars  Hill  in  Maine  and  the  St
Lawrence  River  ; but  I can  find  no  authentic  accounts  of  its  nest  having-
been  found  in  any  part  of  the  United  States,  although  some  probably
breed  on  the  borders  of  our  northern  lakes.

In  Louisiana,  this  species  is  named  Poule  d'Eau,  which  is  also  applied
to  Rallus  crepitans.  In  all  other  parts  of  the  Union,  it  is  known  by  the
names  of  Mud  Hen  and  Coot.  The  appellation  of  “ Flusterers”  given  to
it  by  Mr  Lawson  in  his  History  of  South  Carolina,  never  came  to  my
ear,  during  my  visits  to  that  State.

These  birds  are  frequently  caught  in  the  nets  placed  across  the  bayous
of  the  lakes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Orleans,  for  the  purpose  of
catching  Blue-winged  Teals  and  other  Ducks.  They  come  against  them
while  flying,  but  if  the  hunter  is  not  extremely  quick  they  make  their
escape  by  nimbly  scrambling  up,  using  their  bill  and  feet  until  tliey  reach


294


AMERICAN  COOT.


the  outer  part  of  the  net,  when  they  drop  into  the  water  like  so  many
terapins.  At  times  they  congregate  in  vast  numbers,  and  swim  so  closely
that  a hunter  in  my  employ,  while  on  Lake  Barataria,  killed  eighty  at  a
single  shot.  They  are  extremely  abundant  in  the  New  Orleans’  markets
during  the  latter  part  of  autumn  and  in  winter,  when  the  negroes  and  the
poorer  classes  purchase  them  to  make  “ gombo.”  In  preparing  them  for
cooking,  they  skin  them  like  rabbits  instead  of  plucking  them.

Both  old  and  young  birds  differ  considerably  in  size  and  weight.  The
male,  from  which  I drew  the  figure  in  the  plate,  was  procured  at  General
Hernandez’s,  in  East  Florida,  and  was  among  the  best  of  about  thirty
shot  on  one  of  my  excursions  there.


Fulica  AMERICANA,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  779 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of

Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  338.

Common  Coot,  Fulica  atra,  WUs.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ix.  p.  61.  pi.  73.  fig.  1.
Cinereous  Coot,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  229.


Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXXXIX.

Bill  about  the  same  length  as  the  head,  stout,  straight,  compressed,
higher  than  broad  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line
straight  and  slightly  sloping,  towards  the  end  slightly  arched  and  deflected,
the  ridge  flattish  at  the  base,  and  continuous  with  an  oblong  soft  tumid
plate  which  ascends  on  the  forehead,  the  rest  of  the  ridge  convex  ; sides
rapidly  slopping,  edges  overlapping,  sharp,  with  a sbght  notch  close  to
the  obtuse  tip.  Nasal  groove  wide,  extending  to  two-thirds  of  the  whole
length  of  the  mandible,  filled  with  a soft  bare  membrane  ; nostrils  linear,
medial,  lateral,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long,
narrow,  rounded,  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight,  the  sides  flattish,  the
edges  sharp.

Head  small,  oblong,  much  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate  length,
slender.  Body  rather  full,  compressed.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  strong ;
tibia  bare  a short  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  rather  short,  compressed,
broader  below,  anteriorly  covered  with  broad  scutella,  laterally  with  an-
gular scales,  on  the  outer  side  behind  a row  of  scutelliform  scales  ; hind
toe  short,  slender ; middle  toe  longest,  fourth  longer  than  second  ; toes
scutellate  above,  hind  one  with  an  inferior  lobe,  second  with  two  larger
inner  and  two  smaller  outer  rounded  lobes  ; third  with  three,  fourth  with


AMERICAN  COOT.


295


four  on  each  side ; claws  of  moderate  length,  slightly  arched,  much  com-
pressed, acute,  the  middle  one  with  a thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  very  soft  and  blended,  on  the  head  and  neck  short.  Wings
short,  broad,  rounded  ; primaries  curved,  second  longest,  third  little
shorter,  first  rather  longer  than  sixth,  all  broad  and  rounded ; secondaries
broad,  rounded  with  a minute  tip,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail
very  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  weak  rounded  feathers ; the  upper
and  lower  coverts  nearly  as  long  as  the  tail-feathers.

Bill  greyish-white,  with  a dusky  spot  on  each  mandible  towards  the
end  ; frontal  callosity  white  during  life,  brownish-red  after  death.  Head
and  neck  greyish-black,  the  upper  parts  deep  bluish-grey,  with  an  oliva-
ceous tinge  on  the  scapulars  and  inner  secondaries.  Quills  greyish-brown,
darker  towards  the  tips ; the  edge  of  the  wings,  outer  margin  of  first  quill,
and  tips  of  outer  secondaries,  white.  Tail  brownish-black ; lower  tail-
coverts  white.  The  breast  and  abdomen  are  light  bluish-grey,  the  latter
paler,  the  sides  darker  ; the  lower  surface  of  the  wings  of  the  same  dull
leaden  tint.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13ig  inches,  to  end  of  wings  14/^,  to  end  of
claws  18| ; extent  of  wings  25 ; wing  from  flexure  7^  ; tail  2| ; bill  along
the  back  li^,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1/^  ; bare  part  of  tibia  f ;
tarsus  2;  middle  toe  2^%,  its  claw  Weight  1 lb.


( 296  )


THE  ROSEATE  TERN.

Sterna  Dougallii,  Mont.

PLATE  CCXL.  Adult.

On  the  28th  of  April  1832,  it  was  my  lot  to  be  on  the  beautiful  rocky
islet  named  Indian  Key,  where  I spent  a few  hours  of  the  night  in  un-
successful attempts  to  procure  repose,  which  was  effectually  banished  by
the  consciousness  of  my  being  in  a portion  of  the  country  not  yet  exami-
ned by  any  industrious  student  of  nature,  and  in  which  I expected  to
find  much  that  would  prove  interesting.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents,  and
the  rattling  of  the  large  drops  on  the  shingles  of  the  veranda  in  which  my
hammock  had  been  slung,  together  with  the  chillness  of  the  air,  contri-
buted to  keep  me  awake.  Finding  it  useless  to  remain  in  bed,  I roused
my  companions ; it  was  j ust  four  o’clock,  and  in  a few  minutes  all  the
people  in  the  house  were  up,  and  breakfast  preparing.  Before  six  the
rain  abated,  and  as  I was  determined  not  to  lose  a day,  the  guns  were
mustered,  we  made  our  way  to  the  boats,  and  pushed  off  through  a gentle
shower  in  quest  of  unknown  birds  ! In  about  an  hour  the  rain  ceased,  the
sky  gradually  cleared,  and  the  sun  soon  dried  our  clothes.  About  this
time  we  observed  a gi'eat  number  of  Terns  on  a sand  bar,  which  we  ap-
proached. The  birds  were  not  shy,  so  that  we  obtained  an  opportunity
of  firing  two  guns  at  them,  when  we  leaped  out,  and  on  wading  to  the
shore  picked  up  thirty-eight  Roseate  Terns  and  several  of  another  spe-
cies.

Beautiful,  indeed,  are  Terns  of  every  kind,  but  the  Roseate  excels  the
rest,  if  not  in  form,  yet  in  the  lovely  hue  of  its  breast.  I had  never  seen
a bird  of  this  species  before,  and  as  the  unscathed  hundreds  arose  and
danced  as  it  were  in  the  air,  I thought  them  the  Humming  Birds  of  the
sea,  so  light  and  graceful  were  their  movements.  Now  they  flocked  to-
gether and  hovered  over  us,  again  with  a sudden  dash  they  plunged  to-
wards us  in  anger ; even  their  cries  of  wrath  sounded  musical,  and  al-
though I had  carried  destruction  among  them,  I felt  delighted.  As  I
have  just  said,  I had  not  before  seen  a Roseate  Tern,  not  even  the  skin
of  one  stuffed  with  tow  ; the  species  was  not  in  the  Synopsis  of  my  friend
BoNAi’AiiyE,  and  now  I had  my  cap  filled  to  the  brim  with  specimens.


ROSEATE  TERN.


297


You  may  rest  assured  that  I took  precious  care  of  those  which  I had  pro-
cured, but  not  another  individual  was  robbed  of  life  on  that  excursion.
The  other  Terns  were  as  new  to  me.  I observed  the  form  of  their  black
bill  and  feet,  the  yellow  tip  of  the  former,  and  wrapped  them  up  with
care,  while  I tried  to  recollect  the  name  they  bore  in  books.  To  have
found  hundreds  of  the  Roseate  Tern  in  the  Floridas,  while  I had  anxious
but  slender  hopes  of  meeting  it  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  was  to  me
quite  astonishing.  So  it  was,  however,  and  I determined  to  ransack  every
key  and  sand-beach,  to  try  to  find  its  breeding- ground.  Nor  were  my
desires  ungratified.

The  Roseate  Tern  spends  the  breeding  season  along  the  southern
shores  of  the  Floridas  in  considerable  numbers.  At  different  times  in  the
course  of  nearly  three  months  which  I spent  among  the  keys,  I saw  flocks
of  twenty,  thirty,  or  more  pairs,  breeding  on  small  detached  rocky  islands,
scantily  furnished  with  grass,  and  in  the  company  of  hundreds  of  Sand-
wich Terns.  The  two  species  appeared  to  agree  well  together,  and  their
nests  were  intermingled.  The  full  number  of  eggs  of  the  present  species
is  three.  They  differ  considerably  in  size  and  markings ; their  average
length,  however,  is  an  inch  and  three  quarters,  their  breadth  an  inch  and
one-eighth ; they  are  of  a longish  oval  shape,  rather  narrowed  at  the
small  end,  of  a dull  buff  or  clay  colour,  sparingly  sprinkled  and  spotted
with  different  tints  of  umber  and  light  purple.  They  were  deposited  on
the  bare  rocks,  among  the  roots  of  the  grasses,  and  left  in  fair  weather  to
the  heat  of  the  sun.  Like  those  of  the  Common  Tern  and  other  species,
they  are  delicious  eating.  The  eggs  of  the  Sandwich  Tern  were  more
attended  to  during  the  day,  but  toward  night  both  species  sat  on  their
eggs.  I did  not  see  any  of  the  young,  but  procured  a good  number  of
those  of  the  preceding  year,  which  kept  apart  from  the  old  birds,  but  had
in  all  respects  the  same  habits.

The  Roseate  Tern  is  at  all  times  a noisy,  restless  bird ; and  on  ap-
proaching its  breeding  place,  it  incessantly  emits  its  sharp  shrill  cries,  re-
sembling the  syllable  crak.  Its  flight  is  unsteady  and  flickering,  like  that
of  the  Arctic  or  Lesser  Terns,  but  rather  more  buoyant  and  graceful.
They  would  dash  at  us  and  be  off  again  with  astonishing  quickness,
making  great  use  of  their  tail  on  such  occasions.  While  in  search  of  prey,
they  carry  the  bill  in  the  manner  of  the  Common  Tern,  that  is  perpen-
dicularly downward,  plunge  like  a shot,  with  wings  nearly  closed,  so  as
to  immerse  part  of  the  body,  and  immediately  reascend.  They  were  seen


298


ROSEATE  TERN.


dipping  in  this  manner  eight  or  ten  times  in  succession,  and  each  time
generally  secured  a small  fish.  Their  food  consisted  of  fishes,  and  a kind
of  small  molluscous  animal  which  floats  near  the  surface,  and  bears  the
name  of  “ sailor’s  button.”  They  usually  kept  in  parties  of  from  ten  to
twenty,  followed  the  shores  of  the  sand-bars  and  keys,  moving  backwards
and  forwards  much  in  the  manner  of  the  Lesser  Tern,  and  wherever  a
shoal  of  small  fish  was  found,  there  they  would  hover  and  dash  headlong
at  them  for  several  minutes  at  a time.

The  wreckers  informed  me  that  this  species  returns  regularly  to  these
islands  each  spring,  about  the  10th  of  April,  and  goes  off  southward  early
in  September.  These  birds,  with  their  favourite  companions  the  Sand-
wich Terns,  habitually  resorted  to  the  sand-bars  each  day,  to  rest  for  an
hour  or  two.  I have  never  seen  them  on  any  part  of  our  middle  or  eastern
coast,  and  am  of  opinion  that  they  rarely  proceed  farther  eastward  than
the  Capes  of  Florida,  and  that  they  are  more  attached  to  the  immediate
vicinity  of  the  shores  than  the  larger  species,  which  more  generally  fly
out  to  some  distance.  The  delicate  and  beautiful  rosy  tint  of  the  breast
soon  fades  after  death.  Those  specimens  which  were  not  skinned  imme-
diately after  being  procured  did  not  retain  it  for  a week,  and  in  none  of
them  was  it  perceptible,  without  separating  the  feathers,  at  the  end  of  a
month.  In  winter  it  disappears,  as  well  as  the  glossy  black  of  tlie  bead.
The  length  of  the  outer  tail-feathers  varies  considerably ; but  I could  per-
ceive no  decided  difference  of  size  or  colour  in  the  sexes,  although  I thought
the  females  somewhat  smaller  than  the  males.


SxEiiNA  Dougallii,  Mont.  Ornith.  Diet.

Hirondelle-de-mer.  Dougall,  Sterna  Dougallii,  Temm-  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.
p.  738.

Roseate  Tern,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  278.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXL.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  tapering,  compressed,  nearly  straight,
very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched,  the
ridge  rather  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrow  towards  the  end,  the
sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove
short,  extended  to  one-third  of  the  length  of  the  bill,  deflected  towards
the  edge ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  extremely  narrow,  very  acute,  extending  to  a little  b^'yond  the


ROSEATE  TERN.


299


middle,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  convex,  the  sharp  edges  in-
flected, the  tip  extremely  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong ; neck  of  moderate  length ; body  very
slender  ; feet  small ; wings  and  tail  very  long.  Tibia  bare  for  a consi-
derable space;  tarsus  very  short,  slender,  roundish,  covered  anteriorly
with  small  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  reticular  scales ; toes  small,
slender,  the  first  very  small,  the  third  longest,  the  fourth  nearly  as  long,
the  second  much  shorter,  all  scutellate  above,  the  anterior  united  by  re-
ticulated webs  having  a concave  margin ; claws  curved,  compressed,  acute,
that  of  hind  toe  smallest,  of  middle  toe  by  much  the  largest,  and  having
the  inner  edge  thin  and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  head ; the  feathers  in
general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  very  long,  narrow,  and  pointed ;
primary  quills  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; se-
condary short,  broad,  incurved,  rounded,  the  inner  more  tapering.  Tail
long,  very  deeply  forked,  of  twelve  feathers,  of  which  the  outer  are  taper-
ing, the  middle  short  and  rounded.

Bill  brownish-black,  deep  orange  at  the  base.  Iris  brown.  Feet  ver-
milion ; claws  blackish-brown,  yellow  at  the  base.  The  upper  part  of  the
head  and  elongated  occipital  feathers  greenish-black  ; the  hind  neck  white,
the  rest  of  the  upper  parts  pale  bluish-grey,  the  tail  lighter ; the  edges  of
the  wings,  the  tips  and  inner  edges  of  the  quills,  and  the  shafts  white.
The  first  primary  is  black  on  the  outer  web  and  part  of  the  inner,  the
next  two  are  similarly  marked,  but  with  the  black  shaded  over  with  pale
grey,  the  loose  barbules  being  of  that  colour ; the  other  primaries  become
gradually  lighter.  The  lower  parts  are  of  a beautiful  light  roseate  hue,
which  soon  fades  after  death ; the  under  surface  of  wings  and  tail  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  inches,  to  end  of  wings  12,  to  end  of  claws

; extent  of  wings  30 ; wing  from  flexure  9^  ; tail  to  end  of  shortest
feathers  4|,  to  end  of  longest  feathers  7?  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  Syg  ; tarsus  y°,  middle  toe  y§,  its  claw  ^|.


( 300  )


REMINISCENCES  OF  THOMAS  BEWICK.


Through  the  kindness  of  Mr  Selby  of  Twizel-House  in  Northum-
berland, I had  anticipated  the  pleasure  of  forming  an  acquaintance  with
the  celebrated  and  estimable  Bewick,  whose  works  indicate  an  era  in  the
history  of  the  art  of  engraving  on  wood.  In  my  progress  southward,
after  leaving  Edinburgh  in  1827,  I reached  Newcastle-upon-Tyne  about
the  middle  of  April,  when  Nature  had  begun  to  decorate  anew  the  rich
country  around.  The  lark  was  in  full  song,  the  blackbird  rioted  in  the
exuberance  of  joy,  the  husbandman  cheerily  plied  his  healthful  labours,
and  I,  although  a stranger  in  a foreign  land,  felt  delighted  with  all  around
me,  for  I had  formed  friends  who  were  courteous  and  kind,  and  whose
favour  I had  reason  to  hope  would  continue.  Nor  have  I been  disappoint-
ed in  my  expectations.

Bewick  must  have  heard  of  my  arrival  at  Newcastle  before  I had  an
opportunity  of  calling  upon  him,  for  he  sent  me  by  his  son  the  following
note ; — “ T.  Bewick’s  compliments  to  Mr  Audubox,  and  will  be  glad  of
the  honour  of  his  company  this  day  to  tea  at  six  o’clock.”  These  few
words  at  once  proved  to  me  the  kindness  of  his  nature,  and,  as  my  labours
were  closed  for  the  day,  I accompanied  the  son  to  his  father’s  house.

As  yet  I had  seen  but  little  of  the  town,  and  had  never  crossed  the
Tyne.  The  first  remarkable  object  that  attracted  iny  notice  was  a fine
church,  which  my  companion  informed  me  was  that  of  St  Nicholas.  Pass-
ing over  the  river  by  a stone  bridge  of  several  arches,  I saw  by  the  wharfs
a considerable  number  of  vessels,  among  w'hich  I distinguished  some  of
American  construction.  The  shores  on  either  side  were  pleasant,  the
undulated  ground  being  ornamented  with  buildings,  windmills,  and  glass-
works. On  the  water  glided,  or  were  swept  along  by  great  oars,  boats
of  singular  form,  deeply  laden  with  the  subterranean  produce  of  the  hills
around.

At  length  we  reached  the  dwelling  of  the  Engraver,  and  I was  at  once
shewn  to  his  workshop.  There  I met  the  old  man,  who,  coming  towards
me,  welcomed  me  with  a hearty  shake  of  the  hand,  and  for  a moment  took
oft'  a cotton  night-cap,  somewhat  soiled  by  the  smoke  of  the  place.  He
was  a tall  stout  man,  with  a large  head,  and  with  eyes  placed  farther  apart


THOMAS  BEWICK.


301


than  those  of  any  man  that  I have  ever  seen  : — a perfect  old  Englishman,
full  of  life,  although  seventy-four  years  of  age,  active  and  prompt  in  his
labours.  Presently  he  proposed  shewing  me  the  work  he  was  at,  and  went
on  with  his  tools.  It  was  a small  vignette,  cut  on  a block  of  boxwood  not
more  than  three  by  two  inches  in  surface,  and  represented  a dog  frighten-
ed at  night  by  what  he  fancied  to  be  living  objects,  but  which  were  actu-
ally roots  and  branches  of  trees,  rocks,  and  other  objects  bearing  the  sem-
blance of  men.  This  curious  piece  of  art,  like  all  his  works,  was  exquisite,
and  more  than  once  did  I feel  strongly  tempted  to  ask  a rejected  bit,  but
was  prevented  by  his  inviting  me  up  stairs,  where,  he  said,  I should  soon
meet  all  the  best  artists  of  Newcastle.

There  I was  introduced  to  the  IVIisses  Bewick,  amiable  and  affable
ladies,  who  manifested  all  anxiety  to  render  my  visit  agreeable.  Among
the  visitors  I saw  a Mr  Goun,  and  was  highly  pleased  with  one  of  the
productions  of  his  pencil,  a full  length  miniature  in  oil  of  Bewick,  well
drawn,  and  highly  finished.

The  old  gentleman  and  I stuck  to  each  other,  he  talking  of  my  draw-
ings, I of  his  wood-cuts.  Now  and  then  he  would  take  off  his  cap,  and
draw  up  his  grey  worsted  stockings  to  his  nether  clothes;  but  whenever
our  conversation  became  animated,  the  replaced  cap  was  left  sticking  as
if  by  magic  to  the  hind  part  of  his  head,  the  neglected  hose  resumed
their  downward  tendency,  his  fine  eyes  sparkled,  and  he  delivered  his  sen-
timents with  a freedom  and  vivacity  which  afforded  me  great  pleasure.
He  said  he  had  heard  that  my  drawings  had  been  exhibited  in  Liverpool,
and  felt  great  anxiety  to  see  some  of  them,  which  he  proposed  to  gratify
by  visiting  me  early  next  morning  along  with  his  daughters  and  a few
friends.  Recollecting  at  that  moment  how  desirous  my  sons,  then  in
Kentucky,  were  to  have  a copy  of  his  works  on  Quadrupeds,  I asked  him
where  I could  procure  one,  when  he  immediately  answered  “ Here,”  and
forthwith  presented  me  with  a beautiful  set.

The  tea-drinking  having  in  due  time  come  to  an  end,  young  Bewick,
to  amuse  me,  brought  a bagpipe  of  a new  construction,  called  the  Dur-
ham Pipe,  and  played  some  simple  Scotch,  English  and  Irish  airs,  all
sweet  and  pleasing  to  my  taste.  I could  scarcely  understand  how,  with
his  large  fingers,  he  managed  to  cover  each  hole  separately.  The  instru-
ment sounded  somewhat  like  a hautboy,  and  had  none  of  the  shrill  war-
like notes  or  booming  sound  of  the  military  bagpipe  of  the  Scotch  High-


302


THOMAS  BEWICK.


landers.  The  company  dispersed  at  any  early  hour,  and  when  I pai-ted
from  Bewick  that  night,  I parted  from  a friend.

A few  days  after  this  I received  another  note  from  him,  which  I read
hastily,  having  with  me  at  the  moment  many  persons  examining  my  draw-
ings. This  note  having,  as  I understood  it,  intimated  his  desire  that  I
should  go  and  dine  with  him  that  day,  I accordingly  went ; but  judge  of
my  surprise  when,  on  arriving  at  his  house  at  5 o’clock,  with  an  appetite
becoming  the  occasion,  I discovered  that  I had  been  invited  to  tea  and
not  to  dinner.  However,  the  mistake  was  speedily  cleared  up  to  the  sa-
tisfaction of  all  parties,  and  an  abundant  supply  of  eatables  was  placed  on
the  table.  The  Reverend  William  Turner  joined  us,  and  the  evening
passed  debghtfuUy.  At  first  our  conversation  was  desultory  and  multi-
farious, but  when  the  table  was  removed,  Bewick  took  his  seat  by  the
fire,  and  we  talked  of  our  more  immediate  concerns.  In  due  time  we
took  leave,  and  returned  to  our  homes,  pleased  with  each  other  and  with
our  host.

Having  been  invited  the  previous  evening  to  breakfast  with  Bewick
at  8,  I revisited  him  at  that  hour  on  the  16th  April,  and  found  the  whole
family  so  kind  and  attentive  that  I felt  quite  at  home.  The  good  gentle-
man, after  breakfast,  soon  betook  himself  to  his  labours,  and  began  to
shew  me,  as  he  laughingly  said,  how  easy  it  was  to  cut  wood ; but  I soon
saw  that  cutting  wood  in  his  style  and  manner  was  no  joke,  although  to
him  it  seemed  indeed  easy.  His  delicate  and  beautiful  tools  were  all
made  by  himself,  and  I may  with  truth  say  that  his  shop  was  the  only
artist’s  “ shop”  that  I ever  found  perfectly  clean  and  tidy.  In  the  course
of  the  day  Bewick  called  upon  me  again,  and  put  down  his  name  on  my
list  of  subscribers  in  behalf  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society  of
Newcastle.  In  this,  however,  his  enthusiasm  had  misled  him,  for  the
learned  body  for  which  he  took  upon  himself  to  act,  did  not  think  proper
to  ratify  the  compact.

Another  invitation  having  come  to  me  from  Gatehead,  I found  my
good  friend  seated  in  his  usual  place.  His  countenance  seemed  to  me  to
beam  with  pleasure  as  he  shook  my  hand.  “ I could  not  bear  the  idea,”
said  he,  “ of  your  going  off,  without  telling  you,  in  written  words,  what
I think  of  your  Birds  of  America.  Here  it  is  in  black  and  white,  and
make  of  it  what  use  you  may,  if  it  he  of  use  at  all.”  I put  the  unsealed
letter  in  my  pocket,  and  we  chatted  on  subjects  connected  with  natural


THOMAS  BEWICK.


303


history.  Now  and  then  he  would  start  and  exclaim,  “ Oh,  that  I were
young  again  ! I would  go  to  America  too.  Hey  ! what  a country  it  will
be,  Mr  Audubon.”  I retorted  by  exclaiming,  “ Hey  ! what  a country  it
is  already,  Mr  Bewick  !”  In  the  midst  of  our  conversation  on  birds  and
other  animals,  he  drank  my  health  and  the  peace  of  all  the  world  in  hot
brandy  toddy,  and  I returned  the  compliment,  wishing,  no  doubt  in  ac-
cordance with  his  own  sentiments,  the  health  of  all  our  enemies.  His
daughters  enjoyed  the  scene,  and  remarked,  that  for  years,  their  father
had  not  been  in  such  a flow  of  spirits.

I regret  that  I have  not  by  me  at  present  the  letter  which  this  gene-
rous and  worthy  man  gave  me  that  evening,  otherwise,  for  his  sake,  I
should  have  presented  you  with  it.  It  is  in  careful  keeping,  however,  as  a
memorial  of  a man  whose  memory  is  dear  to  me  ; and  be  assured  I regard
it  with  quite  as  much  pleasure  as  a manuscript  “ Synopsis  of  the  Birds
of  America,”  by  Alexander  Wilson,  which  that  celebrated  individual
gave  to  me  at  Louisville  in  Kentucky,  more  than  twenty  years  ago.
Bewick’s  letter,  however,  will  be  presented  to  you  along  with  many  others,
in  connection  with  some  strange  facts,  which  I hope  may  be  useful  to  the
world.  We  protracted  our  conversation  beyond  our  usual  time  of  retir-
ing to  rest,  and  at  his  earnest  request,  and  much  to  my  satisfaction,  I
promised  to  spend  the  next  evening  with  him,  as  it  was  to  be  my  last  at
Newcastle  for  some  time.

On  the  19th  of  the  same  month  I paid  him  my  last  visit,  at  his  house.
When  we  parted,  he  repeated  three  times,  “ God  preserve  you,  God  bless
you  !”  He  must  have  been  sensible  of  the  emotion  which  I felt,  and
which  he  must  have  read  in  my  looks,  although  I refrained  from  speaking
on  the  occasion.

A few  weeks  previous  to  the  death  of  this  fervent  admirer  of  nature,
he  and  his  daughters  paid  me  a visit  in  London.  He  looked  as  well  as
when  I had  seen  him  at  Newcastle.  Our  interview  was  short  but  agree-
able, and  when  he  bade  adieu,  I was  certainly  far  from  thinking  that  it
might  be  the  last.  But  so  it  was,  for  only  a very  short  time  had  elapsed
when  I saw  his  death  announced  in  the  newspapers.

My  opinion  of  this  remarkable  man  is,  that  he  was  purely  a son  of
nature,  to  whom  alone  he  owed  nearly  all  that  characterized  him  as  an
artist  and  a man.  Warm  in  his  affections,  of  deep  feeling,  and  possessed
of  a vigorous  imagination,  with  correct  and  penetrating  observation,  he


304


THOMAS  BEWICK.


needed  little  exti’aneous  aid  to  make  him  what  he  became,  the  first  en-
graver on  wood  that  England  has  produced.  Look  at  his  tail-pieces.
Reader,  and  say  if  you  ever  saw  so  much  life  represented  before,  from  the
glutton  who  precedes  the  Great  Black-backed  Gull,  to  the  youngsters  fly-
ing their  kite,  the  disappointed  sportsman  who,  by  shooting  a magpie,  has
lost  a woodcock,  the  horse  endeavouring  to  reach  the  water,  the  bull  roar-
ing near  the  style,  or  the  poor  beggar  attacked  by  the  rich  man’s  inastiflT.
As  you  turn  each  successive  leaf,  from  beginning  to  end  of  his  admirable
books,  scenes  calculated  to  excite  your  admiration  everywhere  present
theinselves.  Assuredly  you  will  agree  with  me  in  thinking  that  in  his
peculiar  path  none  has  equalled  him.  There  may  be  men  now,  or  some
may  in  after  years  appear,  whose  works  may  in  some  respects  rival  or  even
excel  his,  but  not  the  less  must  Thomas  Bewick  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne
be  considered  in  the  art  of  engraving  on  wood  what  Linnaeus  will  ever  be
in  natural  history,  though  not  the  founder,  yet  the  enlightened  improver
and  illustrious  promoter.


{ 305  )


THE  GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.

Larus  marinus,  Linn.

PLATE  CCXLI.  Male.

High  in  the  thin  keen  air,  far  above  the  rugged  crags  of  the  desolate
shores  of  Labrador,  proudly  sails  the  tyrant  Gull,  floating  along  on  almost
motionless  wing,  like  an  eagle  in  his  calm  and  majestic  flight.  On  widely
extended  pinions,  he  moves  in  large  circles,  constantly  eyeing  the  objects
below.  Harsh  and  loud  are  his  cries,  and  with  no  pleasant  feeling  do
they  come  on  the  winged  multitudes  below.  Now  onward  he  sweeps,
passes  over  each  rocky  bay,  visits  the  little  islands,  and  shoots  off  towards
the  mossy  heaths,  attracted  perhaps  by  the  notes  of  the  Grous  or  some
other  birds.  As  he  flies  over  each  estuary,  lake,  or  pool,  the  breeding
birds  prepare  to  defend  their  unfledged  broods,  or  ensure  their  escape
from  the  powerful  beak  of  their  remorseless  spoiler.  Even  the  shoals  of
the  finny  tribes  sink  deeper  into  the  waters  as  he  approaches  ; the  young
birds  become  silent  in  their  nests  or  seek  for  safety  in  the  clefts  of  the
rocks ; the  Guillemots  and  Gannets  dread  to  look  up,  and  the  other  Gulls,
unable  to  cope  with  the  destroyer,  give  way  as  he  advances.  Far  off
among  the  rolling  billows,  he  spies  the  carcass  of  some  monster  of  the  deep,
and,  on  steady  wing,  glides  off  towards  it.  Alighting  on  the  huge  whale,
he  throws  upwards  his  head,  opens  his  bill,  and,  louder  and  fiercer  than
ever,  sends  his  cries  through  the  air.  Leisurely  he  walks  over  the  putrid
mass,  and  now,  assured  that  all  is  safe,  he  tears,  tugs,  and  swallows  piece
after  piece,  until  he  is  crammed  to  the  throat,  when  he  lays  himself  down
surfeited  and  exhausted,  to  rest  for  a while  in  the  feeble  sheen  of  the  north-
ern sun.  Great,  however,  are  the  powers  of  his  stomach,  and  ere  long  the
half-putrid  food  which  vulture-like  he  has  devoured,  is  digested.  Like  all
gluttons,  he  loves  variety,  and  away  he  flies  to  some  well-known  isle,  where
thousands  of  young  birds  or  eggs  are  to  be  found.  There,  without  re-
morse, he  breaks  the  shells,  swallows  their  contents,  and  begins  leisurely
to  devour  the  helpless  young.  Neither  the  cries  of  the  parents,  nor  all
their  attempts  to  drive  the  plunderer  away,  can  induce  him  to  desist  until
he  has  again  satisfied  his  ever- craving  appetite.  But  although  tyrannical,
the  Great  Gull  is  a coward,  and  meanly  does  he  sneak  off  when  he  sees
vor  . II I.


u


306


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


the  Skua  fly  up,  which,  smaller  as  it  is,  yet  evinces  a thoughtless  intre-
pidity, that  strikes  the  ravenous  and  merciless  bird  with  terror.

If  we  compare  this  species  with  some  other  of  its  tribe,  and  mark  its
great  size,  its  powerful  flight,  and  its  robust  constitution,  we  cannot  but
wonder  to  find  its  range  so  limited  dui’ing  the  breeding  season.  Few  in-
dividuals are  to  be  found  northward  of  the  entrance  into  Baffin’s  Bay,
and  rarely  are  they  met  with  beyond  this,  as  no  mention  is  made  of  them
by  Dr  Richardson  in  the  Fauna  Boreali-Ajmericana.  Along  our  coast,
none  breed  farther  south  than  the  eastern  extremity  of  Maine.  The
western  shores  of  Labrador,  along  an  extent  of  about  three  hundred  miles,
afford  the  stations  to  which  this  species  resorts  during  spring  and  summer ;
there  it  is  abundant,  and  there  it  was  that  I studied  its  habits.

The  farthest  limits  of  the  winter  migrations  of  the  young,  so  far  as  I
have  observed,  are  the  middle  portions  of  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Floridas.
While  at  St  Augustine,  in  the  winter  of  18.31,  I saw  several  pairs  keep-
ing company  with  the  young  Brown  Pelican,  more  as  a matter  of  interest
than  of  friendship,  as  they  frequently  chased  them  as  if  to  force  them  to
disgorge  a portion  of  their  earnings,  acting  much  in  the  same  manner  as
the  Lestris  does  toward  the  smaller  Gulls,  but  without  any  effect.  They
were  extremely  shy,  alighted  only  on  the  outer  edges  of  the  outer  sand-
bars, and  could  not  be  approached,  as  they  regularly  walked  off  before  my
party  the  moment  any  of  us  moved  towards  them,  until  reaching  the  last
projecting  point,  they  flew  off,  and  never  stopped  until  out  of  sight.  At
what  period  they  left  that  coast  I am  unable  to  say.  Some  are  seen  scat-
tered along  our  sea-shores,  from  the  Floridas  to  the  Middle  States,  there
being  but  few  old  birds  among  them ; but  the  species  does  not  become
abundant  until  beyond  the  eastern  extremities  of  the  Connecticut  and
Long  Island,  when  their  number  greatly  increases  the  farther  you  pro-
ceed. On  the  whole  of  that  extensive  range,  these  birds  are  very  shy  and
wary,  and  those  which  are  procured  are  merely  “ chance  shots.”  They
seldom  advance  far  up  the  bays,  unless  forced  to  do  so  by  severe  weather
or  heavy  gales ; and  although  I have  seen  this  bird  on  our  great  lakes,  I
do  not  remember  having  ever  observed  an  individual  on  any  of  our  eastern
rivers,  at  a distance  from  the  sea,  whereas  the  Larus  argentatus  is  fre-
quently found  in  such  places.

Towards  the  commencement  of  summer,  these  wandering  birds  are
seen  abandoning  the  waters  of  the  ocean  to  tarry  for  a while  on  the  wild
shores  of  I.abi’ador,  droar\'  and  desolate  to  man,  but  to  them  deliglitful


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


307


as  affording  all  that  they  can  desire.  One  by  one  they  arrive,  the  older
individuals  first.  As  they  view  from  afar  the  land  of  their  birth,  that
moment  they  emit  their  loud  cries,  with  all  the  joy  a traveller  feels  when
approaching  his  loved  home.  The  males  sooner  or  later  fall  in  with  the
females  of  their  choice,  and  together  they  proceed  to  some  secluded  sand-
bar, where  they  fill  the  air  with  their  furious  laughs  until  the  rocks  echo
again.  Should  the  student  of  nature  happen  to  be  a distant  spectator  of
these  meetings,  he  too  must  have  much  enjoyment.  Each  male  bows,
moves  around  his  mate,  and  no  doubt  discloses  to  her  the  ardour  of  his
love.  Matters  are  managed  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  parties,  yet  day  after
day  for  a while,  at  the  retreat  of  the  waters,  they  meet  as  if  by  mutual
agreement.  Now  you  see  them  dressing  their  plumage,  now  partially  ex-
panding their  wings  to  the  sun ; some  lay  themselves  comfortably  down
on  the  sand,  while  others,  supported  by  one  foot,  stand  side  by  side.
The  waters  again  advance,  and  the  Gulls  all  move  off  in  search  of  food.
At  length  the  time  has  arrived;  small  parties  of  a few  pairs  fly  to-
wards the  desert  isles.  Some  remain  in  the  nearest  to  prepare  their  nests,
the  rest  proceed,  until  each  pair  has  found  a suitable  retreat,  and  before
a fortnight  has  elapsed,  incubation  has  commenced.

The  nest  of  this  species  is  usually  placed  on  the  bare  rock  of  some
low  island,  sometimes  beneath  a projecting  shelf,  sometimes  in  a wide  fis-
sure. In  Labrador  it  is  formed  of  moss  and  seaweeds  carefully  arranged,
and  has  a diameter  of  about  two  feet,  being  raised  on  the  edges  to  the
height  of  five  or  six  inches,  but  seldom  more  than  two  inches  thick  in  the
centre,  where  feathers,  dry  grass,  and  other  materials  are  added.  The
eggs  are  three,  and  in  no  instance  have  I found  more.  They  are  two
inches  and  seven-eighths  in  length,  by  two  inches  and  one-eighth  in  breadth,
broadly  ovate,  rough  but  not  granulated,  of  a pale  earthy  greenish-grey
colour,  irregularly  blotched  and  spotted  with  brownish-black,  dark  umber,
and  dull  purple.  Like  those  of  most  other  Gulls,  they  afford  good  eat-
ing. This  species  lays  from  the  middle  of  May  to  that  of  J une,  and
raises  only  one  brood  in  the  season.  The  birds  never  leave  their  eggs
for  any  length  of  time,  until  the  young  make  their  appearance.  Both
sexes  incubate,  the  sitting  bird  being  supplied  with  food  by  the  other.
During  the  first  week,  the  young  are  fed  by  having  their  supplies  dis-
gorged into  their  bill,  but  when  they  have  attained  some  size,  the  food  is
dropped  beside  or  before  them.  When  they  are  approached  by  man,
they  walk  with  considerable  speed  towards  some  hiding  place,  or  to  the


u


o


308


great  black  backed  gull.


nearest  projecting  ledge,  beneath  which  they  squat.  When  five  or  six
weeks  old,  they  take  to  the  water,  to  ensure  their  escape,  and  swim  with
great  buoyancy.  If  caught,  they  cry  in  the  manner  of  their  parents.  On
the  18th  of  June,  several  small  ones  were  procured  and  placed  on  the
deck  of  the  Ripley,  where  they  walked  with  ease  and  picked  up  the  food
thrown  to  them.  As  soon  as  one  was  about  to  swallow  its  portion,  ano-
ther would  run  up,  seize  it,  tug  at  it,  and  if  stronger,  carry  it  off  and  de-
vour it.  On  the  23d  of  that  month,  two  individuals,  several  weeks  old,
and  partly  fledged,  were  also  brought  on  board.  Their  notes,  although
feeble,  perfectly  resembled  those  of  their  parents.  They  ate  greedily  of
every  thing  that  was  offered  to  them.  When  fatigued  they  sat  with  their
tarsi  placed  on  the  ground  and  extended  forward,  in  the  manner  of  all
the  Herons,  which  gave  them  a very  ludicrous  appearance.  Ere  a month
had  elapsed,  they  appeared  to  have  formed  a complete  acquaintance
with  the  cook  and  several  of  the  sailors,  had  become  quite  fat,  and
conducted  themselves  much  like  Vultures,  for  if  a dead  Duck,  or  even  a
Gull  of  their  own  species,  were  thrown  to  them,  they  would  tear  it  in
pieces,  drink  the  blood,  and  swallow  the  flesh  in  large  morsels,  each  try-
ing to  rob  the  others  of  what  they  had  torn  from  the  carcass.  They  never
drank  water,  but  not  unfrequently  washed  the  blood  and  filth  from  their
bills,  by  immersing  them  and  then  shaking  the  head  violently.  These
birds  were  fed  until  they  were  nearly  able  to  fly.  Now  and  then,  the
sailors  would  throw  them  overboard  while  we  were  in  harbour.  This
seemed  to  gratify  the  birds  as  well  as  the  sailors,  for  they  would  swim
about,  wash  themselves,  and  dress  their  plumage,  after  which  they  would
make  for  the  sides,  and  would  be  taken  on  board.  During  a violent  gale,
one  night,  while  we  were  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  of  Bras  d’Or,  our  bark
rolled  heavily,  and  one  of  our  pets  went  over  the  side  and  swam  to  the
shore,  where,  after  considerable  search  next  day,  it  was  found  shivering
by  the  lee  of  a rock.  On  being  brought  to  its  brothers,  it  was  pleasant
to  see  their  mutual  congratulations,  which  were  extremely  animated.  Be-
fore we  left  the  coast,  they  would  sometimes  fly  of  their  own  accord  into
the  water  to  bathe,  but  could  not  return  to  the  deck  without  assistance,
although  they  endeavoured  to  do  so.  I had  become  much  attached  to
them,  and  now  and  then  thought  they  looked  highly  interesting,  as  they
lay  panting  on  their  sides  on  the  deck,  although  the  thermometer  did  not
rise  above  55°.  Their  enmity  to  my  son’s  pointer  was  quite  remarkable,
and  as  that  animal  was  of  a gentle  and  kindly  disposition,  tliey  would


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


309


tease  him,  bite  him,  and  drive  him  fairly  from  the  deck  into  the  cabin.
A few  days  after  leaving  St  George’s  Bay  in  Newfoundland,  we  were  as-
sailed by  a violent  gale,  and  obliged  to  lie-to.  Next  day  one  of  the  Gulls
was  washed  overboard.  It  tried  to  reach  the  vessel  again,  but  in  vain  ;
the  gale  continued ; the  sailors  told  me  the  bird  was  swimming  towards
the  shore,  which  was  not  so  far  off  as  we  could  have  wished,  and  which  it
probably  reached  in  safety.  The  other  was  given  to  my  friend  Lieutenant
Green  of  the  United  States  Army,  at  Eastport  in  Maine.  In  one  of  his
letters  to  me  the  following  winter,  he  said  that  the  young  Larus  marinus
was  quite  a pet  in  the  garrison,  and  doing  very  well,  but  that  no  percep-
tible change  had  taken  place  in  its  plumage.

On  referring  to  my  journal  again,  I find  that  while  we  were  at  anchor
at  the  head  of  St  George’s  Bay,  the  sailors  caught  many  codlings,  of
which  each  of  our  young  Gulls  swallowed  daily  two,  measuring  fi-om
eight  to  ten  inches  in  length.  It  was  curious  to  see  them  after  such  a
meal : the  form  of  the  fish  could  be  traced  along  the  neck,  Avhich  for  a
while  they  were  obliged  to  keep  stretched  out ; they  gaped  and  were  evi-
dently suffering;  yet  they  would  not  throw  up  the  fish.  About  the  time
the  young  of  this  species  are  nearly  able  to  fly,  they  are  killed  in  consider-
able numbers  on  their  breeding  grounds,  skinned  and  salted  for  the  set-
tlers and  resident  fishermen  of  Labrador  and  Newfoundland,  at  which
latter  place  I saw  piles  of  them.  When  they  are  able  to  shift  for  them-
selves, their  parents  completely  abandon  them,  and  old  and  young  go  se-
parately in  search  of  food.

The  flight  of  the  Great  Black-backed  Gull  is  firm,  steady,  at  times
elegant,  rather  swift,  and  long  protracted.  While  travelling,  it  usually
flies  at  the  height  of  fifty  or  sixty  yards,  and  proceeds  in  a direct  course,
with  easy  regulated  flappings.  Should  the  weather  prove  tempestuous,
this  Gull,  like  most  others,  skims  over  the  surface  of  the  waters  or  the
land  within  a few  yards  or  even  feet,  meeting  the  gale,  but  not  yield-
ing to  it,  and  forcing  its  way  against  the  strongest  wind.  In  calm  wea-
ther and  sunshine,  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  it  is  fond  of  soaring  to  a
great  height,  where  it  flies  about  leisurely  and  with  considerable  elegance
for  half  an  hour  or  so,  in  the  manner  of  eagles,  vultures,  and  ravens.  Now
and  then,  while  pursuing  a bird  of  its  own  species,  or  trying  to  escape
from  an  enemy,  it  passes  through  the  air  with  rapid  boundings,  which,
however,  do  not  continue  long,  and  as  soon  as  they  are  over  it  rises  and
slowly  sails  in  circles.  When  man  encroaches  on  its  domains,  it  keeps


310


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


over  him  at  a safe  distance,  not  sailing  so  much  as  moving  to  either  side
with  continued  flappings.  To  secure  the  fishes  on  which  it  more  usually
preys,  it  sweeps  downwards  with  velocity,  and  as  it  glides  over  the  spot,
picks  up  its  prey  with  its  bill.  If  the  fish  be  small,  the  Gull  swallows  it
on  wing,  but  if  large,  it  either  alights  on  the  water,  or  flies  to  the  nearest
shore  to  devour  it.

Although  a comparatively  silent  bird  for  three-fourths  of  the  year,
the  Great  Black-backed  Gull  becomes  very  noisy  at  the  approach  of  the
breeding  season,  and  continues  so  until  the  young  are  well  fledged,  after
which  it  resumes  its  silence.  Its  common  notes,  when  it  is  interrupted  or
surprised,  sound  like  cacA;,  cacTt,  each.  While  courting,  they  are  softer
and  more  lengthened,  and  resemble  tbe  syllables  cawah,  which  are  often
repeated  as  it  sails  in  circles  or  otherwise,  within  view  of  its  mate  or  its
place  of  abode.

This  species  walks  well,  moving  firmly  and  with  an  air  of  importance.
On  the  water  it  swims  lightly  but  slowly,  and  may  soon  be  overtaken  by
a boat.  It  has  no  power  of  diving,  although  at  times,  when  searching
for  food  along  the  shores,  it  will  enter  the  water  on  seeing  a crab  or  a
lobster,  to  seize  it,  in  which  it  at  times  succeeds.  I saw  one  at  Labra-
dor plunge  after  a large  crab  in  about  two  feet  of  water,  when,  after
a tug,  it  hauled  it  ashore,  where  it  devoured  it  in  my  sight.  I watched
its  movements  with  a glass,  and  could  easily  observe  how  it  tore  the  crab
to  pieces,  swallowed  its  body,  leaving  the  shell  and  the  claws,  after  which
it  flew  off  to  its  young  and  disgorged  before  them.

It  is  extremely  voracious,  and  devours  all  sorts  of  food  excepting  ve-
getables, even  the  most  putrid  carrion,  but  prefers  fresh  fish,  young  birds,
or  small  quadrupeds,  whenever  they  can  be  procured.  It  sucks  the  eggs
of  every  bird  it  can  find,  thus  destroying  great  numbers  of  them,  as  well
as  the  parents,  if  weak  or  helpless.  I have  frequently  seen  these  Gulls
attack  a flock  of  young  Ducks  while  swimming  beside  their  mother,  when
the  latter,  if  small,  would  have  to  take  to  wing,  and  the  former  would  all
dive,  but  were  often  caugbt  on  rising  to  the  surface,  unless  they  happened
to  be  among  rushes.  The  Eider  Duck  is  the  only  one  of  the  tribe  that
risks  her  life,  on  such  occasions,  to  save  that  of  her  young.  She  will  fre-
quently rise  from  the  water,  as  her  brood  disappear  beneath,  and  keep
the  Gull  at  bay,  or  harass  it  until  her  little  ones  are  safe  under  some
shelving  rocks,  when  she  flies  oflF  in  another  direction,  leaving  the  enemy
to  digest  his  disappointment.  But  while  the  poor  Duck  is  sitting  on  her


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


311


eggs  in  any  open  situation,  the  marauder  assails  her,  and  forces  her  off,
when  he  sucks  the  eggs  in  her  very  sight.  Young  Grous  are  also  the
prey  of  this  Gull,  which  chases  them  over  the  moss-covered  rocks,  and
devours  them  before  their  parents.  It  follows  the  shoals  of  fishes  for
hours  at  a time,  and  usually  with  great  success.  On  the  coast  of  Labra-
dor, I frequently  saw  these  birds  seize  flounders  on  the  edges  of  the  shal-
lows ; they  often  attempted  to  swallow  them  whole,  but,  finding  this  im-
practicable, removed  to  some  rock,  beat  them,  and  tore  them  to  pieces.
They  appear  to  digest  feathers,  bones,  and  other  hard  substances  with
ease,  seldom  disgorging  their  food,  unless  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  their
young  or  mates,  or  when  wounded  and  approached  by  man,  or  when  pur-
sued by  some  bird  of  greater  power.  While  at  Boston  in  Massachusetts,
one  cold  winter  morning,  I saw  one  of  these  Gulls  take  up  an  eel,  about
fifteen  or  eighteen  inches  in  length,  from  a mud  bank.  The  Gull  rose
with  difficulty,  and  after  some  trouble  managed  to  gulp  the  head  of  the
fish,  and  flew  towards  the  shore  with  it,  when  a White-headed  Eagle
made  its  appearance,  and  soon  overtook  the  Gull,  which  reluctantly  gave
up  the  eel,  on  which  the  Eagle  glided  towards  it,  and,  seizing  it  with  its
talons,  before  it  reached  the  water,  carried  it  off.

This  Gull  is  excessively  shy  and  vigilant,  so  that  even  at  Labrador
we  found  it  difficult  to  procure  it,  nor  did  we  succeed  in  obtaining  more
than  about  a dozen  old  birds,  and  that  only  by  stratagem.  They  watched
our  movements  with  so  much  care  as  never  to  fly  past  a rock  behind  which
one  of  the  party  might  be  likely  to  lie  concealed.  None  were  shot  near
the  nests  when  they  were  sitting  on  their  eggs,  and  only  one  female  at-
tempted to  rescue  her  young,  and  w'as  shot  as  she  accidentally  flew  with-
in distance.  The  time  to  surprise  them  was  during  violent  gales,  for  then
they  flew  close  to  the  tops  of  the  highest  rocks,  where  we  took  care  to  con-
ceal ourselves  for  the  purpose.  When  we  approached  the  rocky  islets  on
which  they  bred,  they  left  the  place  as  soon  as  they  became  aware  of  our
intentions,  cackled  and  barked  loudly,  and  when  we  returned,  followed  us
at  a distance  more  than  a mile.

They  begin  to  moult  early  in  July.  In  the  beginning  of  August  the
young  were  seen  searching  for  food  by  themselves,  and  even  far  apart.
By  the  12th  of  that  month  they  had  all  left  Labrador.  We  saw  them
afterwards  along  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  and  while  crossing  the  Gulf
of  St  Lawrence,  and  found  them  over  the  bays  of  Nova  Scotia,  as  we  pro-
ceeded southward.  When  old,  their  flesh  is  tough  and  unfit  for  food.


312


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


Their  feathers  are  elastic,  and  good  for  pillows  and  such  purposes,  but
can  rarely  be  procured  in  sufficient  quantity.

The  most  remarkable  circumstance  relative  to  these  birds  is,  that  they
either  associate  with  another  species,  giving  rise  to  a hybrid  brood,  or  that
when  very  old  they  lose  the  dark  colour  of  the  back,  which  is  then  of
the  same  tint  as  that  of  the  Larus  argentatus,  or  even  lighter.  This
curious  fact  was  also  remarked  by  the  young  gentlemen  who  accompanied
me  to  Labrador ; and  although  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  clear  up  the
doubts  that  may  be  naturally  entertained  on  this  subject,  whichever  of
the  two  suppositions  is  adopted,  the  fact  may  yet  be  established  and  ac-
counted for  by  persons  who  may  have  better  opportunities  of  watching
them  and  studying  their  habits.  No  individuals  of  Larus  argentatus
were,  to  my  knowledge,  seen  on  that  coast  during  the  three  months  which
I passed  there,  and  the  fishermen  told  us  that  the  “ saddle-backs  were  the
only  large  Gulls  that  ever  breed  there.”

This  bird  must  be  of  extraordinary  longevity,  as  I have  seen  one  that
was  kept  in  a state  of  captivity  more  than  thirty  years.  The  following
very  interesting  account  of  the  habits  of  a partially  domesticated  indivi-
dual I owe  to  my  esteemed  and  learned  friend  Dr  Neill  of  Edinburgh.

“ In  the  course  of  the  summer  of  1818,  a “ big  scorie”  was  brought  to
me  by  a Newhaven  fisher-boy,  who  mentioned  that  it  had  been  picked  up
at  sea,  about  the  mouth  of  the  Frith  of  Forth.  The  bird  was  not  then
fully  fledged  : it  Avas  quite  uninjured:  it  quickly  learned  to  feed  on  po-
tatoes and  kitchen  refuse,  along  with  some  ducks ; and  it  soon  became
more  familiar  than  they,  often  peeping  in  at  the  kitchen  window  in  hopes
of  getting  a bit  of  fat  meat,  Avhich  it  relished  highly.  It  used  to  follow
my  servant  Peggy  Oliver  about  the  doors,  expanding  its  wings  and  vo-
ciferating for  food.  After  two  moults  1 was  agreeably  surprised  to  find
it  assuming  the  dark  plumage  of  the  back,  and  the  shape  and  colour  of
the  bill  of  the  Larus  marinus,  or  Great  Black-backed  Gull ; for  I had
hitherto  regarded  it  as  merely  a large  specimen  of  the  Lesser  Black-backed
(L.  Jiiscus),  a pair  of  which  I then  possessed,  but  which  had  never  al-
loAved  the  new  comer  to  associate  with  them.  The  bird  being  perfectly
tame,  A\^e  did  not  take  the  precaution  of  keeping  the  quills  of  one  wing-
cut  short,  so  as  to  prevent  flight ; indeed,  as  it  was  often  praised  as  a re-
markably large  and  noble  looking  Sea-maw,  we  did  not  like  to  disfigure
it.  In  the  winter  1821-2,  it  got  a companion  in  a cock-heron,  Avhich  had
been  Avounded  in  Coldinghame  Muir,  brought  to  Edinburgh  alive,  and


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


ai3

kept  for  some  weeks  in  a cellar  in  the  old  College,  and  then  presented  to
me  by  the  late  Mr  John  Wilson,  the  janitor, — a person  remarkably  dis-
tinguished for  his  attachment  to  natural  history  pursuits.  This  Heron
we  succeeded  in  taming  completely,  and  it  still  (1835)  remains  with  me,
having  the  whole  garden  to  range  in,  the  trees  to  roost  upon,  and  access
to  the  Loch  at  pleasure,  the  loch  being  the  boundary  of  my  garden.
Some  time  in  the  spring  of  1822,  the  large  Gull  was  amissing  ; and  we
ascertained  (in  some  way  that  has  now  escaped  my  memoi’y)  that  it  had
not  been  stolen,  nor  killed,  as  we  at  first  supposed,  but  had  taken  flight,
passing  northwards  over  the  village,  and  had  probably  therefore  gone  to
sea.  Of  course  I gave  up  all  expectation  of  ever  hearing  more  of  it.  It
was  not  without  surprise,  therefore,  that  on  going  home  one  day  in  the
end  of  October  of  that  year,  1 heard  my  servant  calling  out  with  great
exultation,  “ Sir,  Big  Gull  is  come  back  I”  I accordingly  found  him
walking  about  in  his  old  haunts  in  the  garden,  in  company  with,  and  re-
cognising (as  I am  firmly  persuaded)  his  old  friend  the  Heron.  He  dis-
appeared in  the  evening,  and  returned  in  the  morning,  for  several  days ;
when  Peggy  Oliver  thought  it  best  to  secure  him.  He  evidently  did
not  like  confinement,  and  it  was  concerted  that  he  should  be  allowed
his  liberty,  although  he  ran  much  risk  of  being  shot  on  the  mill-pond  by
youthful  sportsmen  from  Edinburgh.  After  this  temporary  captivity,
he  was  more  cautious  and  shy  than  formerly  ; but  still  he  made  almost
daily  visits  to  the  garden,  and  picked  up  herrings  or  other  food  laid  down
for  him.  In  the  beginning  of  March  1823  his  visits  ceased ; and  we
saw  no  more  of  him  till  late  in  the  autumn  of  that  year.  These  winter
visits  to  Canonmills,  and  summer  excursions  to  the  unknown  breeding-
place,  we're  continued  for  years  with  great  uniformity  : only  I remarked
that  after  the  Gull  lost  his  protectress,  who  died  in  1828*,  he  became
more  distant  in  his  manners.  In  my  note  book,  under  date  of  26th  Oc-
tober 1829,  I find  this  entry : ‘ Old  Peggy’s  Great  Black-backed  Gull
arrived  at  the  pond  this  morning,  the  seventh  (or  eighth)  winter  he  has
regularly  returned.  He  had  a scorie  with  him,  which  was  soon  shot  on
the  loch,  by  some  cockney  sportsman.’  The  young  bird,  doubtless

• “ Peggy  Oliver  was  remarkable  for  the  zeal  and  taste  she  displayed  in  the  domesti-
cating of  uncommon  animals,  as  well  as  in  the  culture  of  plants  : her  expertness  in  the
latter  department  is  noticed  and  praised  by  Mr  Loudon  in  his  Gardener’s  Magazine.  Her
funeral  was  attended  by  some  of  the  most  distinguished  naturalists  here,  and,  among
others,  by  your  friend  Dr  MacCui.locii  of  Pictou,  who  happened  to  be  in  Edinburgh  at
the  time,  and  whose  friendship  I have  also  the  happiness  to  enjoy.”


314


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


one  of  his  offspring,  had  its  wing  shattered,  and  continued  alive  in  the
middle  of  the  pond,  occasionally  screaming  piteously,  for  two  or  three
days,  till  relieved  by  death.  The  old  Gull  immediately  abandoned  the
place  for  that  winter,  as  if  reproaching  us  for  cruelty.  By  next  autumn,
however,  he  seemed  to  have  forgotten  the  injury  ; for,  according  to  my
record,  ‘ 30th  October  1830.  The  Great  Black-backed  Gull  once  more
arrived  at  Canonmills  garden.”  The  periods  of  arrival,  residence,  and
departure  were  nearly  similar  in  the  following  year.  But  in  1832,
not  only  October,  but  the  months  of  November  and  December  passed
away  without  Gull’s  making  his  appearance,  and  I of  course  despaired
of  again  seeing  him.  He  did,  however,  at  length  arrive.  The  following
is  the  entry  in  my  common-place  book:  ‘ Sunday,  6th  January  1833.
This  day  the  Great  Black-back  returned  to  the  mill-pond,  for  (I  think)
the  eleventh  season.  He  used  to  re-appear  in  October  in  former  years,
and  I concluded  him  dead  or  shot.  He  recognised  my  voice,  and  hover-
ed over  my  head.’  He  disappeared  early  in  March  as  usual,  and  re-ap-
peared at  Canonmills  on  23d  December  1833,  being  a fortnight  earlier
than  the  date  of  his  arrival  in  the  preceding  season,  but  six  weeks  later
than  the  original  period  of  re-appearance.  He  left  in  the  beginning  of
March  as  usual,  and  I find  from  my  notes  that  he  “ reappeared  on  30th
December  1834  for  the  season,  first  hoverine;  around  and  then  ahVlitina:
on  the  pond  as  in  former  years.’  The  latest  entry  is,  ‘11th  March
1835  : The  Black-backed  Gull  was  here  yesterday,  but  has  not  been  seen
to-day ; nor  do  I expect  to  see  him  till  November.’

“ This  Gull  has  often  attracted  the  attention  of  persons  passing  the  vil-
lage of  Canonmills,  by  reason  of  its  sweeping  along  so  low  or  near  the
ground,  and  on  account  of  the  wide  expanse  of  wing  which  it  thus  dis-
plays. It  is  well  known  to  the  boys  of  the  village  as  “ Neill’s  Gull,”
and  has,  I am  aware,  owed  its  safety  more  than  once  to  their  interfer-
ence, in  informing  passing  sportsmen  of  its  history.  When  it  first  ar-
rives in  the  autumn,  it  is  in  the  regular  habit  of  making  many  circular
sweeps  around  the  pond  and  garden,  at  a considerable  elevation,  as  if  re-
connoitring; it  then  gradually  lowers  its  flight,  and  gently  alights  about
the  centre  of  the  pond.  Upon  the  gardener’s  mounting  the  garden-wall
with  a fish  in  his  hand,  the  Gull  moves  towards  the  overhanging  spray
of  some  large  wiUow-trees,  so  as  to  catch  what  may  be  thrown  to  him,  be-
fore it  sinks  in  the  water.  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  iden-
tity of  the  bird.  Indeed,  he  unequivocally  shews  that  he  recognises  my


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


315


voice  when  I call  aloud  ‘ Gull,  Gull for  whether  he  be  on  wing  or
afloat,  he  immediately  approaches  me.

“ A few  pairs  of  the  Great  Black-backed  Gull  breed  at  the  Bass  Rock
yearly,  and  it  seems  highly  probable  that  my  specimen  had  originally
been  hatched  there.  If  I may  be  allowed  a conjecture,  I would  suppose
that,  after  attaining  maturity,  he  for  some  years  resorted  to  the  same
spot  for  the  purpose  of  breeding  ; but  that  of  late  years,  having  lost  his
mate  or  encountered  some  other  disaster,  he  has  extended  his  migration
for  that  purpose  to  some  very  distant  locality,  which  has  rendered  his  re-
turn to  winter  quarters  six  weeks  later  than  formerly.”

Lahus  marinus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  225. — Lath.  liid.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  813. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  362.

Black-backed  Gull,  or  Cobb,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  308.


Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXLI.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  robust,  compressed,  higher  near  the  end
than  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  at
the  base,  declinate  and  arched  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  the
sides  slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  arcuate-declinate  towards
the  end,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  rather  long  and  narrow ;
nostril  in  its  fore  part,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,  wider  anteriorly,  per-
vious. Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  narrow,  the  outline  of
the  crura  rather  concave,  as  is  that  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  mandible,
a prominent  angle  being  formed  at  their  meeting,  the  sides  nearly  flat,
the  edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  narrowed  anteriorly.  Neck  of  moderate
length,  strong.  Body  full.  Wings  long.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  ra-
ther slender  ; tibia  bare  below  ; tarsus  somewhat  compressed,  covered  an-
teriorly with  numerous  scuteUa,  laterally  with  angular  scales,  behind  with
numerous  small  oblong  scales  ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated,  the  fore
toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  the  fourth  longer  than  the  second,
the  third  longest,  all  scutellate  above,  and  connected  by  reticulated  en-
tire membranes,  the  lateral  toes  margined  externally  with  a narrow  mem-
brane. Claws  small,  slightly  arched,  depressed,  rounded,  that  of  middle
toe  with  an  expanded  inner  margin.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  full,  elastic,  very  soft  and  blended,
on  tlie  back  rather  compact.  Wings  very  long,  broad,  acute,  the  first


316


GREAT  BLACK-BACKED  GULL.


quill  longest,  the  second  scarcely  shorter,  the  rest  of  the  primaries  rather
rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  narrower.
Tail  of  moderate  length,  even,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  gamboge-yellow,  the  lower  mandible  bright  carmine  towards  the
end.  Edges  of  eyelids  bright  carmine,  iris  silvery.  Feet  yellow,  claws
black.  The  head,  neck,  and  all  the  lower  parts,  pure  white  ; back  and
wings  deep  blackish-grey  tinged  with  purple,  or  dark  slate-colour ; the
rump  and  tail  white,  as  are  the  edges  of  the  wing,  and  a large  portion  of
the  extremities  of  all  the  quills ; the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  pri-
maries have  a broad  band  of  black  across  their  ends,  the  inner  web  only
of  the  second  being  so  mai'ked,  in  some  specimens  however  both  webs.
The  oesophagus  is  very  large,  the  gizzard  small,  the  intestine  four  feet
long,  and  about  the  thickness  of  a goose  quill.

Length  to  end  of  tail  29f  inches,  to  end  of  wings  31^,  to  end  of
claws  ; extent  of  wings  67  ; wing  from  flexure  20  ; tail  9 ; bill  along
the  ridge  2i?,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  3 ; its  depth  at  the
angle  1,  at  the  base  ; tarsus  3/^  ; middle  toe  2^,  its  claw  Weight
3 1b.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  Male,  but  considerably  less.

The  Young  when  fledged  have  the  bill  brownish-black,  the  iris  dark
brown,  tbe  feet  as  in  the  adult.  The  head  and  neck  are  greyish -white,
streaked  with  pale  brownish-grey  ; the  upper  parts  mottled  with  brown-
ish-black, brownish-grey,  and  dull  white,  the  rump  paler.  The  primary
quills  blackish-brown,  slightly  tipped  with  brownish-white ; the  tail-fea-
thers white,  with  a large  brownish-black  patch  towards  the  end,  larger  on
the  middle  feathers,  which  are  also  barred  towards  tbe  base  with  dusky.
The  lower  parts  are  greyish -white,  the  sides  and  lower  tail-coverts  ob-
scurely mottled  with  greyish-brown.


( 317  )


THE  SNOWY  HERON

ArDEA  CANDIDISSIMA,  GmEL.

PLATE  CCXLII.’  Male.

This  beautiful  species  is  a constant  resident  in  Florida  and  Louisiana,
where  thousands  are  seen  during  winter,  and  where  many  remain  during
the  breeding  season.  It  is  perhaps  of  a still  more  delicate  constitution
than  the  Blue  Heron,  Ardea  caerulea,  as  no  individuals  remain  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Charleston  when  the  winter  happens  to  be  rather  colder
than  usual.  In  its  migrations  eastward  it  rarely  proceeds  farther  than
Long  Island  in  the  State  of  New  York;  few  are  seen  in  Massachusetts,
and  none  farther  to  the  east.  My  friend  Professor  MacCulloch  never
heard  of  it  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  I cannot  imagine  on  what  authority
Wilson  stated  that  it  inhabits  the  sea-coast  of  North  America  to  the
Gulf  of  St  Lawrence.  My  friend  Nutt  all  also  asserts,  without  men-
tioning on  what  evidence,  that,  by  pursuing  an  inland  course,  it  reaches
its  final  destination  in  the  wilds  of  Canada.  It  has  not  been  observed  in
any  part  of  the  western  country ; nay,  it  rarely  ascends  the  Mississippi
as  high  as  Memphis,  or  about  two  hundred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the
Ohio,  and  cannot  be  said  to  be  at  all  abundant  much  farther  up  the  great
river  than  Natchez.  In  fact,  the  maritime  districts  furnish  its  favourite
places  of  resort,  and  it  rarely  proceeds  farther  inland  than  fifty  or  sixty
miles,  even  in  the  flat  portions  of  the  Carolinas,  but  even  in  the  Middle
States,  where  it  prefers  the  islands  along  the  Atlantic  coast.

While  I was  at  Charleston,  in  March  1831,  few  had  arrived  from  the
Floridas  by  the  18th  of  that  month,  but  on  the  25th  thousands  were  seen
in  the  marshes  and  rice  fields,  all  in  full  plumage.  They  reach  the  shores
of  New  Jersey  about  the  first  week  of  May,  when  they  may  be  seen  on
all  parts  of  the  coast  between  that  district  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  On
the  Mississippi,  they  seldom  reach  the  low  grounds  about  Natchez,  where
they  also  breed,  earlier  than  the  period  at  which  they  appear  in  the  Mid-
dle States.

While  migrating,  they  fly  both  by  night  and  by  day,  in  loose  flocks
of  from  twenty  to  a hundred  individuals,  sometimes  arranging  themselves
in  a broad  front,  then  forming  lines,  and  again  proceeding  in  a straggling


318


SNOWY  HERON.


manner.  They  keep  perfectly  silent,  and  move  at  a height  seldom  ex-
ceeding a hundred  yards.  Their  flight  is  light,  undetermined  as  it  were,
yet  well  sustained,  and  performed  by  regular  flappings,  as  in  other  birds
of  the  tribe.  When  they  have  arrived  at  their  destination,  they  often  go
to  considerable  distances  to  feed  during  the  day,  regularly  returning  at
the  approach  of  night  to  their  roosts  on  the  low  trees  and  bushes  border-
ing the  marshes,  swamps,  and  ponds.  They  are  very  gentle  at  this  sea-
son, and  at  all  periods  keep  in  flocks  when  not  disturbed.  At  the  ap-
proach of  the  breeding  season,  many  spend  a great  part  of  the  day  at  their
roosting  places,  perched  on  the  low  trees  principally  growing  in  the  water,
when  every  now  and  then  they  utter  a rough  guttural  sort  of  sigh,  raising
at  the  same  moment  their  beautiful  crest  and  loose  recurved  plumes,  curv-
ing the  neck,  and  rising  on  their  legs  to  their  full  height,  as  if  about  to
strut  on  the  branches.  They  act  in  the  same  manner  while  on  the  ground
mating.  Then  the  male,  with  great  ardour,  and  with  the  most  graceful
motions,  passes  and  repasses  for  several  minutes  at  a time  before  and  around
the  female,  whose  actions  are  similar,  although  she  displays  less  ardour.
When  disturbed  on  such  occasions,  they  rise  high  in  the  air,  sail  about
and  over  the  spot  in  perfect  silence,  awaiting  the  departure  of  the  intruder,
then  sweep  along,  exhibiting  the  most  singular  movements,  now  and  then
tumbling  over  and  over  like  the  Tumbler  Pigeon,  and  at  length  alight  on
a ti'ee.  On  the  contrary,  when  you  intrude  upon  them  while  breeding,
they  rise  silently  on  wng,  alight  on  the  trees  near,  and  remain  there  until
you  depart.

The  Snowy  Herons  breed  in  large  communities ; and  so  very  social
are  they,  that  they  do  not  appear  even  to  attempt  to  disturb  such  other
birds  as  are  wont  to  breed  among  them,  the  Night  Herons,  for  instance,
the  Green  Herons,  or  the  Boat-tailed  Grakles.  I have  visited  some  of  their
breeding  grounds,  where  several  hundred  pairs  were  to  be  seen,  and  seve-
ral nests  were  placed  on  the  branches  of  the  same  bush,  so  low  at  times
tliat  I could  easily  see  into  them,  although  others  were  situated  at  a height
of  ten  or  fifteen  feet.  In  places  where  these  birds  are  often  disturbed,
they  breed  in  taller  trees,  though  rarely  on  very  high  ones.  In  the  Flo-
ridas  I found  their  nests  on  low  mangroves  ; but  wherever  they  are  placed
you  find  them  fronting  the  water,  over  which,  indeed,  these  Herons  seem
fond  of  placing  them.  The  nest,  which  is  formed  of  dry  sticks,  is  rather
small,  and  has  a shallow  cavity.  The  eggs  are  three,  one  inch  and  five-
eighths  and  a half  in  length,  one  and  a quarter  across,  of  a broadly  cllip-


SNOWY  HERON.


319


tical  form,  and  having  a plain  pale  bluish-green  colour.  In  the  IMiddle
Districts,  the  usual  time  of  laying  is  about  the  middle  of  May  ; in  the
Carolinas  a month  sooner ; and  in  the  Floridas  still  earlier,  as  there,  on
the  19th  of  May,  I found  the  young  in  great  numbers  walking  off  their
nests  on  the  mangrove  branches,  and,  like  those  of  the  Louisiana  Heron,
which  also  breeds  in  the  same  places,  trying  to  escape  by  falling  into  the
water  below,  and  swimming  in  search  of  hiding-places  among  the  roots
and  hanging  branches.  Both  sexes  incubate.  Many  of  the  eggs  are  de-
stroyed by  Crows  and  Turkey  Buzzards,  which  also  devour  the  young,
and  many  are  carried  off  by  men.

The  young  acquire  the  full  beauty  of  their  plumage  in  the  course  of
the  first  spring,  when  they  can  no  longer  be  distinguished  from  the  old
birds.  The  legs  and  feet  are  at  first  of  a darkish  olive,  as  is  the  bill,  ex-
cept at  the  base,  where  it  is  lighter,  and  inclining  to  yellow.  At  the  ap-
proach of  autumn,  the  crest  assumes  a form,  and  the  feathers  of  the  lower
parts  of  the  neck  in  front  become  considerably  lengthened,  the  feet  ac-
quire a yellow  tint,  and  the  legs  are  marked  with  black  on  a yellowish
ground ; but  the  flowing  feathers  of  the  back  do  not  appear  until  the  ap-
proach of  spring,  when  they  grow  rapidly,  become  recurved,  and  remain
until  the  young  are  hatched,  when  they  fall  off.

The  Snowy  Heron,  while  in  the  Carolinas,  in  the  month  of  April,  re-
sorts to  the  borders  of  the  salt-water  marshes,  and  feeds  principally  on
shrimps.  Many  individuals  which  I opened  there  contained  nothing  else
in  their  stomach.  On  the  Mississippi,  at  the  time  when  the  shrimps  are
ascending  the  stream,  these  birds  are  frequently  seen  standing  on  floating-
logs,  busily  engaged  in  picking  them  up ; and  on  such  occasions  their
pure  white  colour  renders  them  conspicuous  and  highly  pleasing  to  the
eye.  At  a later  period,  they  feed  on  small  fry,  fiddlers,  snails,  aquatic
insects,  occasionally  small  lizards  and  young  frogs.  Their  motions  are
generally  quick  and  elegant,  and,  while  pursuing  small  fishes,  they  run
swiftly  through  the  shallows,  throwing  up  their  wings.  Twenty  or  thirty
seen  at  once  along  the  margins  of  a marsli  or  a river,  ivhile  engaged  in
procuring  their  food,  form  a most  agreeable  sight.  In  autumn  and  early
spring,  they  are  fond  of  resorting  to  the  ditches  of  the  rice  fields,  not  un-
frequently  in  company  with  the  Blue  Herons.  When,  on  being  wound-
ed in  the  wing  one  falls  into  the  water,  it  swims  off  towards  the  nearest
shore,  and  runs  to  hide  itself  by  the  side  of  some  log,  or  towards  a tree
which  if  possible  it  climbs,  ascending  to  its  very  top.  When  seized,  they


•320


SNOWY  HERON.


peck  at  you  with  great  spirit,  and  are  capable  of  inflicting  a severe
wound.

There  is  no  difference  between  the  sexes  as  to  plumage,  but  the  male
is  somewhat  larger.  When  in  good  condition,  its  flesh  is  excellent  eating,
especially  in  early  autumn,  when  it  is  generally  very  fat.  Some  may  be  seen
for  sale  in  the  markets  of  New  Orleans  and  other  southern  cities.  They
return  southward  from  the  Middle  Districts  early  in  October,  but  in  the
Carolinas  they  remain  until  the  first  frosts,  when  they  all  depart  for  the
Floridas,  where  I found  them  during  the  whole  winter  in  considerable
numbers,  associating  with  the  Blue  Herons.

Ardea  candidissima,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  305.

Snowy  Heron,  Ardea  candidissima,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  120.  pi.  C2.
fig.  4 Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  49.


Adult  Male  in  full  spring  plumage.  Plate  CCXLII.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering  to  a point,
the  mandibles  nearly  equal.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly
straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  slightly  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  to-
wards the  end,  a groove  from  the  base  to  two-thirds  of  its  length,  beneath
which  the  sides  are  convex,  the  edges  thin  and  sharp,  with  a slight  notch
close  to  the  veiy  acute  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,  longitudinal,  with  a
membrane  above  and  behind.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  extremely
narrow  and  elongated,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  it  ascending  and  almost
straight,  the  edges  sharp  and  slightly  inflected,  the  tip  acuminate.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  very  long  and  slender.
Body  slender  and  compressed.  Feet  very  long;  tibia  elongated,  its  lower
half  bare,  very  slender,  covered  all  round  with  angular  scales,  of  which
the  posterior  are  scutelliform  ; tarsus  elongated,  slender,  compressed,  an-
teriorly covered  with  numerous  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  angu-
lar scales.  Toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  re-
ticularly  granulate  beneath  ; third  toe  much  longer  than  second,  w'hich  is
very  little  shorter  than  fourth,  the  hind  toe  much  shorter  but  strong.
Claws  rather  small,  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  much
larger,  the  inner  edge  of  that  of  the  third  regularly  pectinate.

Space  between  the  bill  and  eye,  and  around  the  latter,  bare,  as  is  the
lower  half  of  the  tibia.  Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Feathers  of  the  up-
per and  hind  part  of  the  head,  very  long,  loose,  dccurved ; of  the  sides,


SNOWY  HERON.


321


and  especially  of  the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  also  much  elongated ; of  the
middle  of  the  back  very  long,  loose,  and  hanging  over  the  sides  and  rump,
but  with  their  extremities  recurved.  Wings  of  moderate  length ; pri-
maries tapering  and  rounded,  the  third  longest,  the  second  very  little
shorter,  first  and  fourth  about  equal ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded,
some  of  the  inner  as  long  as  the  longest  primaries,  when  the  wing  is  closed.
Tail  very  short,  small,  slightly  rounded,  of  twelve  rather  weak  feathers.

Bill  black,  the  bare  space  at  its  base  yellow.  Iris  and  edges  of  eye-
lids yellow.  Tibia  and  tarsus  black,  the  lower  part  of  the  latter  behind
and  the  toes  bright  yellow ; claws  bluish  black.  The  plumage  is  pure
white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  22^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  23,  to  end  of  claws
30^  ; extent  of  wings  38  ; wing  from  flexure  10| ; tail  3 ; loose  feathers
beyond  the  tail ; bill  along  the  ridge  ; along  the  edge  of  lower
mandible  3|- ; bare  part  of  tibia  2| ; tarsus  3^1  ; middle  toe  2|,  its  claw
Weight  12  oz.


VoL.  in


X


( 322  )


THE  AMERICAN  SNIPE.

SCOLOPAX  WlLSONII,  Temm.

PLATE  CCXLIII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young  in  Autumn.

The  summer  range  of  the  Common  American  Snipe  extend s^north-
ward  to  a considerable  distance  beyond  the  bmits  of  the  United  States.
During  the  breeding  season  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  our  Southern  Dis-
tricts, much  less  does  it  breed  on  the  borders  of  the  Mississippi,  as  has
been  alleged,  by  some  writers.  It  may  indeed,  sometimes  happen  that  a
pair  is  found  during  summer  in  the  mountainous  districts  of  the  Caro-
linas ; but  occurrences  of  this  kind  are  rare,  and  are  probably  caused  by  '
one  of  the  birds  being  disabled,  and  so  prevented  from  prosecuting  its
journey  farther  northward,  although  not  incapacitated  for  reproduction.
Some  pairs  are  more  frequently  met  with  in  Virginia,  Maryland  and
Pennsylvania,  either  with  eggs  or  with  young,  but  the  great  body  of  this
species  goes  farther  north  for  the  purpose  of  breeding.  In  the  State  of
Maine,  they  become  tolerably  abundant  at  this  season,  and  as  you  pro-
ceed eastward  you  find  them  more  numerous.  In  Nova  Scotia  they  are
plentiful  during  summer,  and  there  they  breed  in  all  convenient  places.

In  these  northern  districts,  the  Snipe  begins  to  lay  its  eggs  in  the  early
part  of  June.  The  swampy  parts  of  the  extensive  moss-covered  marshes
in  elevated  situations  afford  it  places  of  security  and  comfort,  in  which  it
is  not  likely  to  be  disturbed  by  man,  and  finds  immediately  around  it  an
abundance  of  food.  The  nest  itself  is  a mere  hollow  in  the  moss,  scantily  in-
laid with  a few  grasses.  The  eggs,  which,  like  those  of  many  of  the  Tringas,
are  four,  and  placed  with  the  small  ends  together,  measure  one  inch  and
five-eighths  by  one  and  one-eighth,  being  pyriform,  with  the  tip  some-
what inflated.  The  ground  colour  is  a yeUowish-olive,  pretty  thickly
spotted  and  blotched  with  light  and  dark  umber,  the  markings  increas-
ing in  size  as  they  approach  the  large  end,  where  they  form  a circle.
The  young,  like  those  of  the  Woodcock,  leave  the  nests  as  soon  as  hatched,
and  so  resemble  those  of  the  Common  Snipe  of  Europe,  Scolopax  Gal-
linago,  that  the  same  description  answers  for  both,  they  being  covered
with  down  of  different  tints  of  brown  and  greyish-yellow.  The  bill  is  at
this  age  short,  very  soft  and  easily  bent  by  the  least  pressure ; nor  does  it


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


323


acquire  its  full  growth  before  winter,  and  its  length  differs  in  different
apparently  full  grown  individuals,  by  half  an  inch  or  even  three-fourths.
They  seem  to  feed  at  first  on  minute  insects  collected  on  the  surface
of  the  mires,  or  amid  the  grass  and  moss ; but  as  they  grow  older,  and
the  bill  becomes  firmer  and  larger,  they  probe  the  ground  like  their
parents,  and  soon  become  expert  at  this  operation,  introducing  the  bill
at  every  half  inch  or  so  of  the  oozy  mire,  from  which  they  principally
obtain  their  food.  In  the  Middle  States,  this  Snipe,  however,  has  been
found  breeding  in  meadows,  as  well  as  in  the  State  of  Maine  ; and  it  also
nestles  in  the  mountainous  districts  of  these  parts  of  the  Union.  I never
had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  a nest  in  Pennsylvania,  although  I
have  known  several  instances  of  a pair  breeding  not  far  from  Mill  Grove
on  the  Perkioming.

In  the  Western  Country  this  bird  arrives  from  the  north  early  in  Oc-
tober, alighting  in  the  low  meadows  watered  by  warm  springs,  and  along
the  borders  of  ponds  and  small  secluded  rivulets,  sometimes  in  the  corn
fields  after  a continuance  of  rainy  weather,  but  never  in  the  woods  or  any
place  from  which  it  cannot  easily  make  its  escape  when  approached.  In
Kentucky  it  often  remains  all  winter,  and  is  at  times  very  abundant.
Farther  south,  it  is  more  plentiful,  especially  in  the  lower  parts  of  Loui-
siana, where  it  is  named  “ cache  cache”  by  the  Creoles,  and  over  the
whole  country  between  that  State  and  the  Carolinas.  During  winter,  it
is  not  uncommon  in  Louisiana  to  meet  with  it  in  flocks  of  considerable
numbers,  as  is  also  the  case  in  South  Carolina,  where  the  grounds  of  the
rice-planter  afford  it  abundance  of  food.  In  some  fields  well  known  to
my  Charleston  friends,  as  winter  retreats  of  the  snipe,  it  is  shot  in  great
numbers.  At  times  it  is  so  much  less  careful  about  concealing  itself  than
at  others,  that  it  is  not  at  all  uncommon  to  see  it  walking  about  over  its
wet  feeding-grounds,  and  on  such  occasions  many  are  killed.  In  such
places  I have  found  these  birds  by  fifties  and  hundreds  in  fields  of  a few
acres.  At  the  first  shots,  dozens  in  succession  would  take  to  wing,  each
emitting  its  cry  of  wau-aik,  after  which  they  would  rise  in  the  air,  gra-
dually collect,  fly  round  a few  times  to  the  distance  of  some  hundred
yards,  and  returning  pitch  towards  the  ground,  and  alight,  with  the  velo-
city of  an  arrow,  not  many  yards  from  the  spot  where  they  had  previously
been.  In  a few  minutes  they  would  all  disperse,  to  seek  for  food.  So
much  are  they  at  times  attached  to  particular  spots,  tliat  the  sportsmen
continue  to  shoot  them  until  their  number  is  reduced  to  a few,  which

X 2


324


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


having  perhaps  been  several  times  shot  at,  become  extremely  wary,  and
are  left  to  entice  others  to  join  them,  so  that  another  day’s  sport  may  be
obtained.  It  is  not  rare  to  find  some  of  these  birds  in  the  immediate  vi-
cinity of  Charleston,  when  they  are  pursued  by  the  younger  gunners,  and
sometimes  by  keen  sportsmen.  I have  known  eight  or  ten  procured  by
one  person  in  a short  time,  between  that  city  and  the  race-ground,  which
is  scarcely  a mile  distant.  They  are  also  abundant  in  the  wet  savannahs
in  the  Floridas,  from  which  they  retire  a few  weeks  earlier  than  from
Louisiana  and  the  Carolinas,  where  some  remain  until  the  beginning  of
April.  During  the  whole  of  the  winter  months,  these  birds  are  observed
to  ramble  from  one  place  to  another,  and  a field  which  yesterday  contained
a good  number,  has  only  a few  to-day,  and  to-morrow  may  be  quite  de-
serted. But  before  the  end  of  a week,  there  you  will  find  them  again,
as  abundant  as  at  first.  They  rarely  visit  salt  waters,  and  never  resort
to  the  interior  of  the  woods.

The  flight  of  the  Snipe  while  travelling  to  some  distance,  is  performed
at  a considerable  elevation,  by  regular  and  quickly  repeated  beats  of  the
wings.  Yet  they  do  not  appear  as  if  pursuing  a direct  course,  for  every
now  and  then  they  deviate  a little  to  either  side.  They  pass  over  rapidly,
however,  and  are  able  to  travel  to  a great  distance  in  a short  time.  Their
migrations,  although  performed  singly,  or  in  small  parties  of  a single  fa-
mily, may  be  said  to  be  in  a manner  continuous,  as  in  the  course  of  a few
days  a whole  section  of  country,  in  which  none  had  been  seen  for  several
months,  becomes  well  supplied  with  them.  When  surprised  by  the  sports-
man, or  any  other  enemy,  they  usually  rise  at  one  spring,  dash  through
the  air  in  a zig-zag  course,  a few  feet  from  the  ground,  emit  their  cry
when  about  twenty  yards  distant,  and  at  times  continue  to  employ  this
cunning  mode  of  escape  for  sixty  or  seventy  yards,  after  which  they  mount
into  the  air,  and  perform  the  rounds  already  described.  I have  found
the  instant  at  which  they  utter  their  note  of  alarm  the  best  for  pulling
the  trigger ; but  almost  every  sportsman  has  his  peculiar  fancy,  and  many
are  glad  to  kill  them  the  best  way  they  can;  for  he  who  shoots  thirty
snipes  in  succession,  without  missing  one,  is  a good  hand  at  any  kind  of
shooting.  Sometimes  the  Snipe  will  squat  with  great  pertinacity,  and  even
stand  a pointer,  while  at  other  times  it  will  not  suffer  either  man  or  dog
to  approach  within  fifty  yards  of  it.  This,  however,  depends  much  on
the  state  of  the  atmosphere.  The  finer  and  warmer  the  day,  the  easier  I
have  found  it  to  get  near  them,  and  the  smaller  is  the  distance  at  which


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


325


they  realight ; whereas  during  drizzly  weather,  they  fly  off  to  a great  dis-
tance. When  the  Snipe  alights  within  sight,  and  you  are  concealed  and
silent,  its  movements  can  easily  be  observed.  It  first  stands  for  an  in-
stant in  a half  crouching  attitude,  as  if  to  listen,  then  raises  itself  and
runs  a few  steps,  when,  if  it  be  in  any  degree  apprehensive  of  danger,  it
squats,  and  there  remains  until  put  up.  If  all  around  is  quiet,  you  see
it  move  in  its  ordinary  manner,  walking  lightly,  and  with  some  grace,  its
bill  half  inclined  downwards,  in  search  of  a good  spot  to  probe  for  food.
The  instant  it  meets  with  this  it  sets  to  work,  and  thrusts  its  bill  into  the
mud  or  the  damp  soil,  to  a depth  determined  by  the  degree  of  softness  of
the  ground,  repeating  its  thrusts  eight,  ten,  or  more  times  in  quick  suc-
cession. When  it  has  thus  examined  a spot,  and  perhaps  found  some
food,  it  walks  off  in  search  of  another,  and  thus  continues  until  it  is  satis-
fied, when  it  generally  lays  itself  down  in  a soft  tuft  of  grass  until  the  ap-
proach of  night,  when  it  flies  off  and  rambles  about  for  exercise  in  com-
parative security.  When  wounded,  it  runs  with  moderate  speed,  but,  if
closely  pursued,  squats  whenever  a good  opportunity  occurs.  It  will  at
times  continue  to  run  for  fifty  or  more  yards,  after  which,  if  you  have  not
a good  dog,  it  is  next  to  impossible  to  find  it,  for  on  such  occasions  it  re-
mains perfectly  silent.  While  travelling  eastward  from  Charleston,  in
the  month  of  March,  I found  this  Snipe  perhaps  more  abundant  near  the
Great  San  tie  River  than  any  where  else.  We  could  see  them  with  ease
from  the  carriage  as  they  were  walking  over  the  rice-fields,  as  if  in  perfect
assurance  of  security.

The  food  of  our  Common  Snipe  consists  principally  of  ground  worms,
insects,  and  the  juicy  slender  roots  of  different  vegetables,  all  of  which
tend  to  give  its  flesh  that  richness  of  flavour  and  juicy  tenderness,  for
which  it  is  so  deservedly  renowned,  it  being  equal  to  that  of  the  wood-
cock. Many  epicures  eat  up  both  Snipe  and  Woodcock  with  all  their
viscera,  worms  and  insects  to  boot,  the  intestines  in  fact  being  considered
the  most  savoury  parts.  On  opening  some  newly  killed  Snipes,  I have
more  than  once  found  fine  large  and  well-fed  ground  worms,  and  at  times
a leech,  which  I must  acknowledge  I qever  conceived  suitable  articles  of
food  for  man,  and,  for  this  reason,  I have  always  taken  good  care  to  have
both  Snipes  and  Woodcocks  well  cleaned,  as  all  game  ought  to  be.

To  Wilson  is  due  the  merit  of  having  first  shewn  the  difference  be-
tween this  bird  and  the  Common  Snipe  of  Europe ; and  it  is  honourable
for  the  ornithologists  of  that  region  of  the  globe  to  liave  dedicated  our


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


ti26

species  to  so  zealous  and  successful  a student  of  nature.  I have,  how-
ever, been  surprised  that  he  should  not  have  mentioned  the  difference  in
the  notes  of  the  two  species,  which  in  fact  is  as  great  as  that  between  those
of  the  American  Crow  and  the  Carrion  Crow  of  Europe.  A decided
difference  of  this  kind  I am  always  disposed  to  consider  as  satisfactory  in
the  case  of  nearly  allied  species.  While  glancing  over  some  of  the  num-
berless compilations  that  are  pouring  their  muddy  waters  into  the  great
stream  of  human  knowledge,  I was  somewhat  surprised  to  find  in  one  of
them  an  account  of  the  American  Snipe,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  it  is  a
xointer  visitant  in  the  northern  States,  and  will  most  probably  breed  far-
ther south,  without  leaving  the  country  !

The  American  Snipe  is  easily  caught  in  snares  placed  on  the  spots  of
mud  which  it  is  wont  to  probe,  and  a good  number  are  thus  obtained  by
the  farmers’  children,  especially  during  very  cold  weather,  when,  the  birds
having  become  emaciated  from  want  of  a good  supply  of  food,  they  re-
sort to  the  small  warm  springs  of  our  meadows,  and  there  remain  until
the  return  of  milder  weather.  At  such  times  and  places,  I have  heard
this  bird  utter  various  curious  notes,  which  I am  unable  to  describe,  put-
ting themselves  into  strange  postures  all  the  while,  jerking  their  tails  up-
wards, downwards,  and  sideways,  for  several  seconds  at  a time,  while  the
head  and  neck  were  moved  backwards  and  forwards,  as  if  the  bird  had
been  in  a fit.  I never  saw  this  during  warm  weather,  and  am  unable  to
account  for  it.

It  arrives  in  Pennsylvania  from  the  south  about  the  middle  of  March,
earlier  or  later  according  to  the  nature  of  the  season,  a month  later  in
Maine,  and  about  a week  or  ten  days  after  in  Nova  Scotia.  We  neither
saw  nor  heard  of  any  in  Newfoundland  or  Labrador,  but  they  are  abun-
dant in  the  interior  of  the  northern  parts  of  the  Canadas.

The  young  acquire  the  full  plumage  of  the  adult  the  first  year  after  their
birth,  when  no  essential  difference  is  perceptible  between  the  sexes,  the
female  being  merely  somewhat  larger  than  the  male.  My  friend  Thomas
MacCulloch,  who  has  not  unfrequently  found  this  bird  breeding,  and
from  whom  I have  received  many  of  its  eggs,  was  unable  to  say  whether
both  sexes  incubate,  although  this  is  very  probable,  as  the  male  is  often
seen  with  or  near  the  female  while  she  is  sitting,  excepting  towards  evening
or  in  the  early  part  of  the  morning,  when  he  mounts  into  the  air,  as  if  for
the  purpose  of  congratulating  her  by  his  curious  song.  It  often  happens
that  before  these  birds  depart  in  spring,  many  are  already  mated.  The


AxMERICAN  SNIPE.


327


bii’ds  are  then  met  with  in  meadows  or  on  low  grounds,  and,  by  being  on
the  spot  before  sunrise,  you  may  see  both  mount  high  in  the  air  in  a spiral
manner,  now  with  continuous  beats  of  the  wings,  now  in  short  sailings,
until  more  than  a hundred  yards  high,  when  they  whirl  round  each  other
with  extreme  velocity,  and  dance  as  it  were  to  their  own  music ; for  at  this
juncture,  and  during  the  space  of  five  or  six  minutes,  you  hear  rolling
notes  mingling  together,  each  more  or  less  distinct,  perhaps  according  to
the  state  of  the  atmosphere.  The  sounds  produced  are  extremely  pleas-
ing, though  they  fall  faintly  on  the  ear.  I know  not  how  to  describe
them,  but  I am  well  assured  that  they  are  not  produced  simply  by  the
beatings  of  the  wings,  as  at  this  time  the  wings  are  not  flapped,  but  are
used  in  sailing  swiftly  in  a circle  not  many  feet  in  diameter.  A person
might  cause  a sound  somewhat  similar  by  blowing  rapidly  and  alternately
from  one  end  to  another,  across  a set  of  small  pipes  consisting  of  two  or  three
modulations.  This  performance  is  kept  up  until  incubation  terminates,
but  I never  observed  it  at  any  other  period.  Our  Woodcock  produces  a
somewhat  similar  sound  at  the  same  season,  and  also  at  times  on  fine  au-
tumnal evenings,  as  I shall  mention  more  particularly  when  describing
that  bird.

In  confinement,  our  Common  Snipe  feeds  freely  on  moistened  Indian
corn  meal,  mixed  with  some  insects,  but  rarely  becomes  as  gentle  as  the
Woodcock  in  similar  circumstances.  When  approached,  it  droops  its
wings  and  runs  round  its  place  of  confinement,  even  should  it  be  a small
room,  keeping  its  tail  spread  out  on  the  side  next  you.  If  the  bird  is
confined  in  a small  space  in  front  of  you,  it  alternately  throws  the  tail  up-
wards, and  spreads  it  in  the  manner  mentioned  at  every  successive  turn  to
and  from  each  corner.  Sometimes  it  emits  a lisping  sound,  but  is  more
usually  silent.

ScoLOPAX  WiLSONii,  Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  330

Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  401.

Snipe,  Scolopax  Gallinago,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  18.  pi.  47.  fig.  1.

Wilson’s  Snipe,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  185.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXLIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  twice  as  long  as  the  head,  subulate,  straight,  compressed  for  more
than  half  its  length,  depressed  towards  the  end.  Upper  mandible  with
the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  ridge  for  a short  space  at  the  base  flattish,
then  convex,  towards  the  end  flattened,  the  sides  with  a nariow  groove


328


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


extending  to  near  the  tip,  which  is  obtuse  and  probe-like,  the  edges  soft
and  obtuse.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,  very  small.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  extremely  long  and  narrow,  the  sides  nearly  erect,  with  a groove
having  several  bars  across  it ; the  end  of  both  mandibles  covered,  after
death,  with  numerous  prominences,  or  rather  with  reticular  depi’essions,
leaving  small  prominences  between  them.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  narrowed  anteriorly,  the  forehead  elevated
and  rounded.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  rather  full.  Legs  of  moderate
length,  slender ; tibia  bare  below,  scutellate  before  and  behind ; tarsus  with
numerous  scutella  before,  smaller  ones  behind,  and  reticulated  sides  ; toes
very  slender,  free,  scutellate  above,  narrow  and  slightly  margined  beneath  ;
first  very  small,  third  longer  than  the  tarsus,  fourth  much  shorter,  but  con-
siderably longer  than  second.  Claws  slightly  arched,  extremely  compress-
ed, very  acute,  that  of  the  third  toe  largest.

Plumage  very  soft,  rather  full,  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head
very  short.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  narrow,  sharp  ; primaries  broad,
tapering,  but  rounded,  the  first  extremely  small  and  pointed,  the  second
longest,  the  third  very  little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; se-
condaries broad,  short,  incurved,  rounded,  the  inner  very  long,  tapering,
as  are  the  scapulars.  Tail  short,  rounded,  of  sixteen  rounded  feathers.

Bill  brown,  the  granulated  part  towards  the  tip  black.  Iris  hazel.
Feet  bluish-grey,  claws  dusky.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  head  two  brown-
ish-black longitudinal  broad  bands,  separated  by  a narrower  central  pale
brown  one,  and  with  another  pale  brown  band  on  each  side  from  the  biU
over  the  eye  ; then  a loral  band  of  dark  brown  ; chin  whitish ; neck  pale
reddish-brown,  spotted  with  brownish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the
upper  parts  is  brownish-black,  variegated  with  pale  reddish-brown,  of
which  latter  colour  are  the  outer  edges  of  the  scapulars  and  of  the  lateral
feathers  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  back.  Wing-coverts  and  inner  se-
condaries similarly  mottled,  the  smaller  anterior  coverts,  the  primary  co-
verts, primary  quills,  and  outer  secondaries  deep  brown,  more  or  less  tipped
with  white ; first  quill  white,  dusky  in  the  centre,  second  with  the  outer
edge  brownish-white  ; rump  barred  with  yellowish-grey  and  dusky ; upper
tail-coverts  similar,  but  the  larger  barred  with  brownish-red  and  black.
Tail-feathers  brownish-black  at  the  base, with  a broad  subterminal  band
of  brownish-red  on  the  outer  web  of  the  two  middle,  and  on  both  webs  of
the  rest,  excepting  the  outer  on  each  side,  which  is  barred  with  brownish-
black  and  white,  the  black  bars  five;  the  tips  of  all  white.  Anterior  part


AMERICAN  SNIPE.


329


of  breast  like  the  neck,  the  rest  white ; abdomen  and  lower  tail-coverts
greyish-yellow,  barred  with  brownish-black,  as  are  the  sides ; scapulars
white,  barred  with  greyish-black  ; lower  wing-coverts  similarly  mottled.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10|  inches,  to  end  of  claw  11^  ; extent  of
wings  17  ; wing  from  flexure  5 ; tail  2^ ; bill  along  the  back  along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2^®^  ; tarsus  middle  toe  1;^,  its  claw
Weight  3 oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXLIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  Male,  but  is  rather  larger.

Autumnal  plumage,  Plate  CCXLIII.  Fig  3.

The  young  in  autumn  resemble  the  old  birds,  but  have  the  dark  mark-
ings of  a browner  tint,  the  light  more  dingy,  and  the  colours  in  general
less  pure.


( 330  )


THE  COMMON  GALLINULE.

Gallinula  Chloropus,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXLIV.  Male.

The  two  species  of  Gallinule  which  occur  in  the  United  States  are
confined  within  a comparatively  small  range  in  that  extensive  country,
the  southern  portions  of  which  appear  to  suit  them  better,  at  all  seasons
of  the  year,  than  the  other  districts.  The  Common  Gallinule  is  extremely
abundant  during  winter  along  the  rivers,  fresh-water  creeks,  lagoons,
ponds  and  lakes,  between  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  eastern  shores  of
the  Eloridas,  while  in  spring  and  summer  a good  number  migrate  east-
ward into  the  Carolinas,  and  now  and  then  a few  stragglers  may  be  seen
on  the  fresh  waters  of  the  Middle  Districts,  beyond  which  none,  to  my
knowledge,  have  ever  been  observed.  They  seldom  ascend  any  of  our
southern  streams  to  any  considerable  distance,  few  are  ever  met  with  many
miles  above  Natchez  on  the  Mississippi,  and  none  are  to  be  seen  in  the
Western  Country.

In  general  they  are  equally  diurnal  and  nocturnal  in  their  habits,  and
when  undisturbed  frequent  the  land  as  much  as  the  water.  In  the  lower
parts  of  Louisiana  and  the  Eloridas,  I have  seen  them  seek  their  food  and
amuse  themselves  by  day  in  the  pastures  and  fields,  and  I have  observed
both  them  and  the  Gallinules  of  England  enacting  their  courtship,  while
the  sun  was  yet  high  above  the  horizon.  In  sight  of  man,  howevei',  they
are  timorous  although  not  shy,  and  retreat  from  him  among  the  grass  and
sedges  bordering  the  water,  to  which  they  resort  for  safety.  If  shot  at,
or  otherwise  frightened,  they  run  with  speed,  and  either  fly  or  swim  off
as  fast  as  possible,  to  elude  their  enemy.

During  my  various  temporary  residences  in  London,  I have  often  seen
the  Gallinules  resort  to  the  grounds  in  the  Regent’s  Park  at  all  hours  of
the  day.  They  were  there  in  a manner  partially  domesticated,  and  walked
quite  unconcernedly  in  the  meadows,  led  their  young  over  the  water,  and
paid  their  addresses  to  each  other,  while  fifty  or  more' persons  were  amu-
sing themselves  with  feeding  the  ducks  and  swans  over  the  bridge  leading
to  the  inner  circle,  and  within  sight  of  these  birds.  While  I was  at
Spring-Garden  Spring  in  East  Elorida,  in  the  early  part  of  January,  the


CO^JMON  GALLINULE.


331


Gallinules  were  seen  in  great  numbers  on  every  bayou  leading  towards
the  waters  of  the  St  John,  and  at  that  early  period  the  manifestations  of
their  amatory  propensity  were  quite  remarkable.  The  male  birds  courted
the  females,  both  on  the  land  and  on  the  water  ; they  frequently  spread
out  their  tail  like  a fan,  and  moved  round  each  other,  emitting  a murmur-
ing sound  for  some  seconds.  The  female  would  afterwards  walk  to  the

O

water’s  edge,  stand  in  the  water  up  to  her  breast,  and  receive  the  caresses
of  the  male,  who  immediately  after  would  strut  on  the  water  before  her,
jerking  with  rapidity  his  spread  tail  for  a while,  after  which  they  would
both  resume  their  ordinary  occupations.  This  was  in  the  middle  of  the
day,  when  I could  have  counted  eight  or  ten  pairs  in  sight.

The  nest  is  formed  with  more  labour  than  art,  being  composed  of  a
quantity  of  withered  rushes  and  plants,  interwoven  in  a circular  form,
frequently  from  two  to  three  inches  thick  in  the  centre,  surrounded  by  an
edge  or  brim  four  or  five  inches  high.  If  not  greatly  disturbed,  these
birds  raise  several  broods  in  a season,  using  the  same  nest,  and  making
additions  to  it  previous  to  depositing  each  new  set  of  eggs.  In  Lower
Louisiana  I found  it  usually  five  or  six  feet  from  the  water,  among  the
rankest  weeds,  along  the  bayous  and  lakes,  which  are  so  numerous  there.
In  some  instances  it  was  placed  on  a prostrate  trunk  of  a tree  over  the
water,  when  the  materials  of  which  it  was  composed  were  less  abundant
than  in  other  circumstances.  I never  saw  one  floating  loose,  but  have
often  heard  people  say  they  had  occasionally  seen  a nest  in  that  state,  al-
though I am  not  much  disposed  to  give  credit  to  such  assertions.  The
number  of  eggs  seldom  exceeds  eight  or  nine,  and  is  more  frequently  from
five  to  seven.  As  the  bird  lays  more  than  once,  its  progeny  is  thus  nu-
merous. The  Gallinules  cover  their  eggs  when  they  leave  them,  no  doubt
to  protect  them  from  crows  and  other  enemies,  but  return  to  them  as  soon
as  food  has  been  procured,  although  both  sexes  incubate.  The  eggs
measure  an  inch  and  five-eighths,  by  an  inch  and  one  and  a half  eighths,
and  are  of  a dull  darkish  cream  colour,  spotted  and  dotted  with  various
tints  of  reddish-brown  and  umber.

The  females  are  as  assiduous  in  their  attentions  to  their  young  as  the
wild  Turkey  Hens ; and,  although  the  young  take  to  the  water  as  soon
as  hatched,  the  mother  frequently  calls  them  ashore,  when  she  nurses  and
dries  them  under  her  body  and  wings.  In  this  manner  she  looks  after
them  until  they  are  nearly  a month  old,  when  she  abandons  them  and  be-
gins to  breed  again.  The  young,  which  are  covered  with  hairy,  shining,


332


COMMON  GALLINULE.


black  down,  swim  beautifully,  jerking  their  heads  forward  at  each  move-
ment of  their  feet.  They  seem  to  grow  surprisingly  fast,  and  at  the  age
of  six  or  seven  weeks  are  strong,  active,  and  perhaps  as  well  able  to  elude
their  enemies  as  the  old  birds  are.  Their  food  consists  of  grasses,  seeds,
water-insects,  worms,  and  snails,  along  with  which  they  swallow  a good
deal  of  sand  or  gravel.  They  walk  and  run  over  the  broad  leaves  of  water-
lilies,  as  if  on  land,  dive  if  necessary,  and  appear  at  times  to  descend  into
the  water  in  search  of  food,  although  I cannot  positively  assert  that  they
do  so.

On  more  than  one  occasion,  I have  seen  a flock  of  these  young  birds
playing  on  the  surface  of  the  water  like  Ducks,  beating  it  with  their
wings,  and  splashing  it  about  in  a curious  manner,  when  their  gam-
bols would  attract  a garfish,  which  at  a single  dart  would  seize  one  of
them  and  disappear.  The  rest  affrighted  would  run  as  it  were  with  in-
conceivable velocity  on  the  surface  of  tlie  water,  make  for  the  shore,  and
there  lie  concealed  and  silent  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  or  so.  In  the
streams  and  ponds  of  the  Floridas,  this  species  and  some  others  of  simi-
lar habits,  suffer  greatly  from  Alligators  and  Turtles,  as  well  as  from  va-
rious kinds  of  fish,  although,  on  account  of  their  prolific  nature,  they  are
yet  abundant.

This  Gallinule  seldom  resorts  to  salt  water,  but  at  times  is  met  with
on  the  banks  of  bayous  in  which  the  water  is  brackish.  This,  however,
happens  only  during  winter.  On  land  it  walks  somewhat  like  a chicken,
and  thirty,  forty,  or  more  individuals  may  be  seen  searching  for  worms
and  insects  among  the  grass,  which  they  also  nip  in  the  manner  of  the
domestic  fowl.  On  such  occasions,  the  constantly  repeated  movements  of
their  tail  are  rendered  conspicuous  by  the  pure  white  of  the  feathers  be-
neath it,  which,  along  with  the  white  sti’ipes  on  the  flanks,  and  in  spring
the  vivid  red  of  the  frontal  plate,  renders  their  general  appearance  quite
interesting.  In  cases  of  danger,  they  run  with  great  speed,  and  easily
conceal  themselves.  On  the  water  they  sit  very  lightly,  and  swim  with
activity,  the  movements  of  their  head  and  neck  keeping  pace  with  those
of  their  feet.  They  pick  up  their  food  from  either  side,  continually  jerk
their  tail,  and  not  unfrequently  touch  the  water  with  it.

Although  not  a migratory  bird,  this  species  flies  very  well,  whenever
it  has  occasion  to  rise  from  the  ground.  Its  wings,  although  concave,
are  large  for  its  size,  more  so  in  fact  than  those  of  Rallus  crepitans,  which
migrates  to  a considerable  extent.  But  in  general,  the  Gallinules  arc


COMMON  GALLINULE.


333


averse  from  flying,  unless  when  anxious  to  remove  from  one  lake  or  stream
to  another,  when  they  rise  fifty  or  sixty  feet  in  the  air,  and  fly  with  ease
and  considerable  velocity,  by  continued  flappings,  the  neck  and  legs
stretched  out.  At  all  other  times  when  raised,  they  suffer  their  legs  to
dangle,  proceed  slowly  to  a short  distance,  and  drop  among  the  reeds,
or,  if  over  the  water,  they  dive  and  hide,  leaving  nothing  but  the  bill
projecting  above  the  surface.

The  young  in  autumn  have  not  attained  their  full  size ; their  colours
are  much  duller  than  those  of  the  old  birds,  particularly  the  stripes  on
the  flanks  and  under  the  tail,  which  are  of  a dull  cream  colour  instead  of
being  pure  white.  The  frontal  plate  is  small,  and  almost  covered  by  the
feathers  around  it ; the  legs  and  feet  are  of  a dingy  green,  and  the  red
band  on  the  tibia  is  scarcely  apparent.  In  spring  they  acquire  their  full
plumage,  but  the  frontal  plate  increases  in  size  for  several  years.

There  are  great  differences  as  to  size  between  birds  of  both  sexes.
The  male  from  which  I drew  the  figure  in  the  plate,  was  of  an  average
size,  having  been  selected  from  a bagful  procured  expressly  for  the  pur-
pose. Our  Gallinule  corresponds  so  precisely  with  that  of  Europe,  that
I cannot  hesitate  in  affirming  that  it  is  the  same  species.

Gallinula  chloropcs,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  voL  ii.  p.  770.

Gallinula  galeata,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  128.  pi.  27*  fig-  1-

Florida  Gallinule,  Gallinula  galeata,  Xuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  223.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCXLIV.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  nearly  straight,  rather  stout,  deep,  com-
pressed, tapering.  Upper  mandible  with  a soft  oblong  plate  at  the  base
extending  over  the  forehead,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  this  plate  straightish
and  slightly  declinate  as  far  as  the  middle,  then  arcuato-declinate,  the
ridge  rather  narrow,  the  sides  nearly  perpendicular,  towards  the  end
slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp,  with  a notch  close  upon  the  narrow  ob-
tuse tip.  Nasal  groove  extending  to  the  middle  of  the  bill,  rather  broad;
nostrils  submedial,  lateral,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  long  and  narrow,  the  sides  nearly  erect,  with  a groove  to  the
middle,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  the  angle  ascending,  straight,  the  edges
sharp,  inclinate,  the  tip  narrowed,  rather  sharp.

Head  small,  oblong,  much  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate  length,
slender.  Body  much  compressed.  Feet  large,  long  ; tibia  bare  a con-


COMMON  GALLINULE.


.‘}34

siderable  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  rather  long,  strong,  compressed,
anteriorly  covered  with  broad  scutella,  laterally  with  angular  scales,  pos-
teriorly with  minute  scales ; hind  toe  comparatively  small,  middle  toe
longest  and  much  longer  than  the  tarsus,  fourth  considerably  shorter,  and
but  little  longer  than  the  second  ; toes  free,  slender,  compressed,  scutel-
late  above,  flat  beneath  and  marginate ; claws  rather  long,  slender,  much
compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  short ; a tuft  of
elongated  incurved  feathers  on  the  sides.  Wings  short,  broad;  alula
large ; primaries  curved,  broad,  second  and  third  longest,  first  and  sixth
about  equal ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded.  Tail  short,  much  round-
ed, of  twelve  rather  weak  rounded  feathers,  which  but  slightly  exceed  the
upper  and  lower  coverts.

Frontal  plate  and  bill  deep  carmine,  the  ends  of  both  mandibles  yel-
low. Iris  bright  red.  Feet  yellowish-green,  a portion  of  the  bare  part
of  the  tibia  carmine  ; claws  dusky.  Head  and  neck  deep  bluish-grey ;
that  colour  continues  paler  over  the  breast,  sides  and  abdomen,  the
latter  having  the  feathers  tipped  with  greyish  white,  and  the  posterior
hypochondrial  feathers  having  a longitudinal  band  of  white  towards  the
end ; lower  eyelid  white,  as  are  the  lateral  lower  tail-coverts,  those  in  the
middle  black.  The  back  and  wings  are  deep  olive,  the  latter  having  a
narrow  edging  of  white,  which  also  runs  along  the  outer  quill.  Tail
brownish-black.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14  inches,  to  end  of  claws  10  ; extent  of  wings
22;  wing  from  flexure  ; tail  3 ; bill  from  base  of  frontal  plate  lyj,
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1;^;  tarsus  2^,  middle  toe  2/j,  its
claw  Weight  12  oz.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  has  the  frontal  plate  smaller.

The  Young,  when  fledged,  have  the  upper  part  of  the  head  of  an  oli-
vaceous brown,  like  the  back  and  wings,  the  neck  of  a light  dull  grey,  the
chin  dull  white,  the  lower  parts  light  grey  tinged  with  yellowish  on  the
breast,  most  of  the  feathers  tipped  with  whitish,  the  lines  on  the  hypo-
chondrial feathers  of  a dull  cream  colour  and  of  small  extent.  The  fron-
tal plate  is  small,  and  with  the  bill  of  a dingy  greenish  colour,  as  are  the
feet,  the  claws  yellowish-brown.


COMMON  GALLINULE.


335


On  comparing  together  a great  number  of  European  and  American
specimens,  I can  find  no  specific  differences.  Individuals  of  either  kind
are  larger  or  smaller,  their  frontal  plates  differ  in  size  and  somewhat  in
form,  as  do  the  bill  and  the  claws ; but  if  the  species  are  really  diffe-
rent, Nature  has  made  them  so  wonderfully  like  each  other,  that  there
seems  to  me  no  possibility  of  distinguishing  them.

My  friend  Dr  Neill  has  furnished  me  with  the  following  anecdotes
illustrative  of  the  habits  of  this  bird.  “ At  Canonmills  Loch,  near  Edin-
burgh, a pair  (or  sometimes  two  pairs)  of  water-hens  breed  yearly,  mak-
ing their  nest  on  the  branches  of  some  very  large  saughs  (willow-trees,
Salix  russeliana)  growing  in  my  garden,  and  overhanging  the  pond.  One
season  (four  or  five  years  ago)  finding  themselves  persecuted  by  a tame
heron,  which  watched  and  devoured  their  first  young  brood  (for  we  de-
tected him  in  the  act),  they  formed  their  next  nest  more  than  fifteen  feet
high  on  the  trunk  of  the  willow-tree.  There  the  eggs  were  hatched  in
safety,  four  or  five  young  being  in  due  time  seen  sailing  about  with  the
old  birds.  We  had  only  one  pair  on  the  Loch  last  summer.  How  they
descended  to  the  water  can  only  be  conjectured  : they  might  have  crept
downwards  three  or  four  feet,  but  they  must  at  all  events  have  fallen  at
once  from  a height  of  not  less  than  twelve  feet.  When  the  pond  is  frozen
over  and  covered  with  skaters,  the  water-hens  enter  the  garden  and  con-
ceal themselves  in  an  overgrown  rock-work,  subsisting  on  minced  flesh
mixed  with  bread  or  potatoes,  purposely  laid  down  for  them,  and  on  which
I have  often  watched  them  feasting  when  the  snow  was  lying  deep.”


( 33G  )


THE  LARGE-BILLED  GUILLEMOT.

Uria  Brunnichii,  Sabine.

PLATE  CCXLV.  Adult  Male.

I HAVE  never  observed  this  bird  on  any  part  of  the  coast  of  our  Mid-
dle Districts,  and,  although  I was  told  that  it  not  unfrequently  occurred
about  the  Bay  of  Boston,  I failed  in  my  endeavours  to  procure  it  there.
The  specimen  from  which  my  figure  was  made  was  sent  to  me  in  ice,  along
with  several  other  rare  birds,  from  Eastport  in  Maine.  I received  it  quite
fresh  and  in  excellent  plumage,  on  the  18th  of  February  1833.  It  had
been  shot  along  with  several  other  individuals  of  the  same  species  while
searching  for  food  in  the  waters  of  Pasmaquody  Bay,  which  were  then
covered  with  broken  ice.  Its  flight  was  described  by  Mr  Cuetis,  who
sent  it  to  me,  as  similar  to  that  of  the  Foolish  Guillemot,  with  which  it
associated.  No  other  information  was  transmitted,  excepting  that  it  dived
and  swam  bke  the  other  species.  I afterwards  sent  the  skin  to  my  friend
John  Bachman,  in  whose  collection  it  remains.

No  individuals  of  this  species  were  observed  by  my  party  on  our  way
to  Labrador ; and  as  the  Foolish  Guillemot  was  abundant  on  the  coast  of
that  country,  I concluded  that  the  Thick-billed  Guillemots  which  visit
our  eastern  seas  in  winter,  set  out  for  the  far  north  at  an  earlier  period
than  the  others.  I am  indebted  to  Mr  Hewitson  of  Newcastle,  author
of  the  “ British  Oology,”  for  a description  of  an  egg  of  this  bird,  which
is  in  the  valuable  collection  of  the  Messrs  Hancocks,  who  procured  it
from  Greenland.  It  measures  3|  inches  in  length,  by  2^  at  its  broadest
part,  and  is  of  a bluish-green  colour,  streaked  and  spotted  with  black  or
very  dark  umber.


Uria  Brunnichii,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  United  States,  p.  424.

Uria  Brunnicii,  Brunnich’s  Guillemot,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.
Amer.  part  ii.  p.  477-

Large-billed  Guillemot,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  529.


Adult  Male  in  winter.  Plate  CCXLV.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  stout,  tapering,  compressed,  acute.  Upper


LARGE-BILLED  GUILLEMOT.


.337


mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  curved,  the  ridge  narrow,  broader
at  the  base,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  a little
decurved,  with  a slight  notch.  Nasal  groove  broad,  feathered ; nostrils
at  its  lower  edge,  subbasal,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  with  the  angle  medial,  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  sloping  upwards
and  straight,  the  back  very  narrow,  the  sides  nearly  flat,  the  edges  sharp
and  inflected.

Head  large,  oblong,  depressed,  narrowed  before.  Eyes  of  moderate
size.  Neck  short  and  thick.  Body  stout,  rather  depressed.  Wings
small.  Feet  short,  placed  far  behind  ; the  greater  part  of  the  tibia  con-
cealed, its  lower  portion  bare  ; tarsus  short,  stout,  compressed,  anteriorly
sharp,  and  covered  with  a double  row  of  scutella,  the  sides  with  angular
scales ; toes  of  moderate  length,  the  first  wanting,  the  third  longest,  the
fourth  longer  than  the  second,  all  covered  above  with  numerous  scutella,
webbed,  the  lateral  ones  with  small  margins ; claws  small,  slightly  arched,
compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  the  middle  toe  largest,  with  a dilated  in-
ner edge.

Plumage  dense,  very  soft,  blended  ; on  the  head  very  short.  Wings
rather  short,  narrow,  acute ; primary  quills  curved,  tapering,  the  second
longest,  the  first  slightly  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries
short,  incurved,  broad,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  rounded,  of  twelve
narrow  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  dusky,  tinged  with  red.  The
general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  greyish-black  on  the  upper  parts,  those
of  the  head  tinged  with  brown.  The  sides  of  the  head  and  neck,  its  fore
part,  the  breast,  abdomen,  edges  of  the  wings  and  the  tips  of  the  secon-
daries, white ; the  sides  shaded  with  greyish-black ; a line  of  the  same
behind  the  eye.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  2H ; extent  of
wings  30  ; wing  from  flexure  8,  tail  2^  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2 ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  its  claw
Weight  2j  lb.


VOL.  III.


V


( 338  )


PITTING  OF  WOLVES.

There  seems  to  be  a universal  feeling  of  hostility  among  men  against
the  Wolf,  whose  strength,  agility,  and  cunning,  which  latter  is  scarcely  in-
ferior to  that  of  his  relative  master  Reynard,  tend  to  render  him  an  object  of
hatred,  especially  to  the  husbandman,  on  whose  flocks  he  is  ever  apt  to
commit  depredations.  In  America,  where  this  animal  was  formerly  abun-
dant, and  in  many  parts  of  which  it  still  occurs  in  considerable  numbers^
it  is  not  more  mercifully  dealt  with  than  in  other  parts  of  the  world.
Traps  and  snares  of  all  sorts  are  set  for  catching  it,  while  dogs  and  horses
are  trained  for  hunting  the  Fox.  The  Wolf,  however,  unless  in  some  way
injured,  being  more  powerful  and  perhaps  better  winded  than  the  Fox,  is
rarely  pursued  with  hounds  or  any  other  dogs  in  open  chase  ; but  as  his
depredations  are  at  times  extensive  and  highly  injurious  to  the  farmer,
the  greatest  exertions  have  been  used  to  exterminate  his  race.  Few  in-
stances have  occurred  among  us  of  any  attack  made  by  Wolves  on  man,
and  only  one  has  come  under  my  own  notice.

Two  young  Negroes  who  resided  near  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  in  the
lower  part  of  the  State  of  Kentucky,  about  twenty-three  years  ago,  had
sweethearts  living  on  a plantation  ten  miles  distant.  After  the  labours
of  the  day  were  over,  they  frequently  visited  the  fair  ladies  of  their  choice,
the  nearest  way  to  whose  dwelling  lay  directly  across  a great  cane  brake.
As  to  the  lover  every  moment  is  precious,  they  usually  took  this  route,
to  save  time.  Winter  had  commenced,  cold,  dark,  and  forbidding,  and
after  sunset  scarcely  a glimpse  of  light  or  glow  of  warmth,  one  might  im-
agine, could  be  found  in  that  dreary  swamp,  excepting  in  the  eyes
and  bosoms  of  the  ardent  youths,  or  the  hungry  Wolves  that  prowled
about.  The  snow  covered  the  earth,  and  rendered  them  more  easy
to  be  scented  from  a distance  by  the  famished  beasts.  Prudent  in  a
certain  degree,  the  young  lovers  carried  their  axes  on  their  shoulders,
and  walked  as  briskly  as  the  narrow  path  would  allow.  Some  transient
glimpses  of  light  now  and  then  met  their  eyes,  but  so  faint  were  they
that  they  believed  them  to  be  caused  by  their  faces  coming  in  contact
with  the  slender  reeds  covered  with  snow.  Suddenly,  however,  a long
and  frightful  howl  burst  upon  them,  and  they  instantly  knew  that  it
proceeded  from  a troop  of  hungry,  perhaps  desperate  Wolves.  They


PITTING  OF  WOLVES.


33  9.

stopped,  and  putting  themselves  in  an  attitude  of  defence,  awaited  the
result.  All  around  was  dark,  save  a few  feet  of  snow,  and  the  silence
of  night  was  dismal.  Nothing  could  be  done  to  better  their  situation,
and  after  standing  a few  minutes  in  expectation  of  an  attack,  they  judged
it  best  to  resume  their  march ; but  no  sooner  had  they  replaced  their
axes  on  their  shoulders,  and  begun  to  move,  than  the  foremost  found
himself  assailed  by  several  foes.  His  legs  were  held  fast  as  if  pressed  by
a powerful  screw,  and  the  torture  inflicted  by  the  fangs  of  the  ravenous
animal  was  for  a moment  excruciating.  Several  Wolves  in  the  mean
time  sprung  upon  the  breast  of  the  other  Negro,  and  dragged  him  to
the  ground.  Both  struggled  manfully  against  their  foes  ; but  in  a short
time  one  of  them  ceased  to  move,  and  the  other,  reduced  in  strength,
and  perhaps  despairing  of  maintaining  his  ground,  still  more  of  aiding
his  unfortunate  companion,  sprung  to  the  branch  of  a tree,  and  speedily
gained  a place  of  safety  near  the  top.  The  next  morning,  the  mangled
remains  of  his  comrade  lay  scattered  around  on  the  snow,  which  was
stained  with  blood.  Three  dead  Wolves  lay  around,  but  the  rest  of
the  pack  had  disappeared,  and  Scipio,  sliding  to  the  ground,  took  up
the  axes,  and  made  the  best  of  his  way  home,  to  relate  the  sad  adven-
ture.

About  two  years  after  this  occurrence,  as  I was  travelling  between
Henderson  and  Vincennes,  I chanced  to  stop  for  the  night  at  a farmer’s
house  by  the  side  of  the  road.  After  putting  up  my  horse  and  refresh-
ing myself,  I entered  into  conversation  with  mine  host,  who  asked  if  I
should  like  to  pay  a visit  to  the  wolf-pits,  which  were  about  half  a mile
distant.  Glad  of  the  opportunity  I accompanied  him  across  the  fields
to  the  neighbourhood  of  a deep  wood,  and  soon  saw  the  engines  of  de-
struction. He  had  three  pits,  within  a few  hundred  yards  of  each
other.  They  were  about  eight  feet  deep,  and  broader  at  bottom,  so
as  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  most  active  animal  to  escape  from
them.  The  aperture  was  covered  with  a revolving  platform  of  twigs,
attached  to  a central  axis.  On  either  surface  of  the  platform  was
fastened  a large  piece  of  putrid  venison,  with  other  matters  by  no
means  pleasant  to  my  olfactory  nerves,  although  no  doubt-  attractive  to
the  Wolves.  My  companion  wished  to  visit  them  that  evening,  merely
as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  so  daily,  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  that  all
was  right.  He  said  that  Wolves  were  very  abundant  that  autumn,  and
had  killed  nearly  the  whole  of  his  sheep  and  one  of  his  colts,  but  that

Y 2


340


PITTING  OF  WOLVES.


he  was  now  “ paying  them  off  in  full and  added  that  if  1 would  tarry
a few  hours  with  him  next  morning,  he  would  beyond  a doubt  shew  me
some  sport  rarely  seen  in  those  parts.  We  retired  to  rest  in  due  time,
and  were  up  with  the  dawn.

“ I think,”  said  my  host,  “ that  all’s  right,  for  I see  the  dogs  are
anxious  to  get  away  to  the  pits,  and  although  they  are  nothing  but  curs,
their  noses  are  none  the  worse  for  that.”  As  he  took  up  his  gun,  an
axe  and  a large  knife,  the  dogs  began  to  howl  and  bark,  and  whisked
around  us,  as  if  full  of  joy.  When  we  reached  the  first  pit,  we  found
the  bait  all  gone,  and  the  platform  much  injured;  but  the  animal  that
had  been  entrapped  had  scraped  a subterranean  passage  for  himself  and
so  escaped.  On  peeping  into  the  next,  he  assured  me  that  “ three  fa-
mous fellows  were  safe  enough  ” in  it.  I also  peeped  in  and  saw  the
Wolves,  two  black,  and  the  other  brindled,  all  of  goodly  size,  sure
enough.  They  lay  flat  on  the  earth,  their  ears  laid  close  over  the  head,
their  eyes  indicating  fear  more  than  anger.  “ But  how  are  we  to  get
them  out — “ How  Sir,”  said  the  farmer,  “ why  by  going  down  to  be
sure,  and  ham-stringing  them.”  Being  a novice  in  these  matters,  I beg-
ged to  be  merely  a looker-on.  “ With  all  my  heart,”  quoth  the  farmer,
“ stand  here,  and  look  at  me  through  the  brush.”  Whereupon  he  glid-
ed down,  taking  with  him  his  axe  and  knife,  and  leaving  his  rifle  to
my  care.  I was  not  a little  surprised  to  see  the  cowardice  of  the  Wolves.
He  pulled  out  successively  their  hind  legs,  and  with  a side  stroke  of  the
knife  cut  the  principal  tendon  above  the  joint,  exhibiting  as  little  fear  as
if  he  had  been  marking  lambs.

“ Lo !”  exclaimed  the  farmer,  when  he  had  got  out,  “ we  have  for-
got the  rope  ; I’ll  go  after  it.”  Oft'  he  went  accordingly,  with  as  much
alacrity  as  any  youngster  could  shew.  In  a short  time  he  returned  out
of  breath,  and  wiping  his  forehead  with  the  back  of  his  hand — “ Now'
for  it.”  I was  desired  to  raise  and  hold  the  platform  on  its  central  ba-
lance, whilst  he,  with  all  the  dexterity  of  an  Indian,  threw  a noose  over
the  neck  of  one  of  the  Wolves.  We  hauled  it  up  motionless  with  fright,
as  if  dead,  its  disabled  legs  swinging  to  and  fro,  its  jaws  wide  open,  and
the  gurgle  in  its  throat  alone  indicating  that  it  was  alive.  Letting  him
drop  on  the  ground,  the  farmer  loosened  the  rope  by  means  of  a stick,
and  left  him  to  the  dogs,  all  of  which  set  upon  him  with  great  fury  and
soon  worried  him  to  death.  The  second  was  dealt  with  in  the  same  man-
ner ; but  the  third,  which  was  probably  the  oldest,  as  it  was  the  blackest,


PITTING  OF  WOLVES.


341


shewed  some  spirit,  the  moment  it  was  left  loose  to  the  mercy  of  the
curs.  This  Wolf,  which  we  afterwards  found  to  be  a female,  scuffled
along  on  its  fore  legs  at  a surprising  rate,  giving  a snap  every  now  and
then  to  the  nearest  dog,  which  went  off  howling  dismally  with  a mouth-
ful of  skin  torn  from  its  side.  And  so  well  did  the  furious  beast  de-
fend itself,  that  apprehensive  of  its  escape,  the  farmer  levelled  his  rifle
at  it,  and  shot  it  through  the  heart,  on  which  the  curs  rushed  upon  it,
and  satiated  their  vengeance  on  the  destroyer  of  their  master’s  flock.


( 342  )


THE  EIDER  DUCK.

Fuligula  mollissima,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXLVI.  Male  and  Female.

The  history  of  this  remarkable  duck  must  ever  be  looked  upon  with
great  interest  by  the  student  of  nature.  The  depressed  form  of  its  body,
the  singular  shape  of  its  bill,  the  beautiful  colouring  of  its  plumage,  tbe
value  of  its  down  as  an  article  of  commerce,  and  the  nature  of  its  haunts,
render  it  a very  remarkable  species.  Considering  it  as  such,  I shall  en-
deavour to  lay  before  you  as  full  an  account  of  it  as  I have  been  able  to
obtain  from  my  own  observation.

The  fact  that  the  Eider  Duck  breeds  on  our  eastern  coasts,  must  be
interesting  to  the  American  Ornithologist,  whose  fauna  possesses  but  few
birds  of  this  family  that  do  so.  The  F uligulm  are  distinguished  from  all
other  ducks  that  feed  in  fresh  or  salt  water,  by  the  comparative  shortness
of  the  neck,  the  greater  expansion  of  their  feet,' the  more  depressed  form
of  their  body,  and  their  power  of  diving  to  a considerable  depth,  in  order
to  reach  the  beds  on  which  their  favourite  shelly  food  abounds.  Their
flight,  too,  differs  from  that  of  the  true  ducks,  inasmuch  as  it  is  performed
nearer  the  surface  of  the  water.  Rarely,  indeed,  do  the  Fuligulae  fly  at
any  considerable  height  over  that  element,  and  with  the  exception  of  three
species,  they  are  rarely  met  with  inland,  unless  when  driven  thither  by
storms.  They  differ,  moreover,  in  their  propensity  to  breed  in  commu-
nities, and  often  at  a very  small  distance  from  each  other.  Lastly,  they
are  in  general  more  ready  to  abandon  their  females,  the  moment  incuba-
tion has  commenced.  Thus  the  female  is  left  in  a state  of  double  respon-
sibility, which  she  meets,  however,  with  a courage  equal  to  the  occasion,
although  alone  and  unprotected.

The  Eider  is  now  seldom  seen  farther  south  along  our  eastern  coast
than  the  vicinity  of  New  York.  Wilson  says  they  are  occasionally  ob-
served as  far  as  the  Capes  of  Delaware  ; but  at  the  present  day  this  must
be  an  extremely  rare  occurrence,  for  the  fishermen  of  the  Jerseys  informed
me  that  they  knew  nothing  of  this  duck.  In  Wilson’s  time,  however,
it  bred  in  considerable  numbers,  from  Boston  to  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and
it  is  still  to  be  met  with  on  the  rocky  shores  and  islands  between  these


EIDER  DUCK.


343


points.  Farther  to  the  eastward  they  become  more  and  more  plentiful,
until  you  reach  Labrador,  to  which  thousands  of  pairs  annually  resort,  to
breed  and  spend  the  short  summer.  Many,  however,  proceed  much  far-
ther north ; but,  as  usual,  I will  here  confine  myself  to  my  own  observa-
tions.

In  the  latter  part  of  October  1832,  the  Eiders  were  seen  in  consider-
able numbers  in  the  Bay  of  Boston.  A large  bagful  of  them  was  brought
to  me  by  a fisherman-gunner  in  my  employ,  a person  advanced  in  years,
formerly  a brave  tar,  and  one  whom  I feel  some  pride  in  telling  you  I
assisted  in  obtaining  a small  pension  from  our  government,  being  sup-
ported in  my  application  by  two  of  my  Boston  friends,  the  one  the  gene-
rous Geokge  Parkman,  M.  D.,  the  other  that  great  statesman  John
Quxncey  Adams.  The  old  man  had  once  served  under  my  father,  and
to  receive  a bagful  of  Eider  Ducks  from  him  was  a gratification  which
you  may  more  easily  conceive  than  I can  describe.  Well,  there  were  the
ducks,  all  turned  out  on  the  floor ; young  males  still  resembling  their
mother,  others  of  more  advanced  age,  and  several  males  and  females  com-
plete in  all  their  parts,  only  that  the  bills  of  the  former  had  lost  the  orange
tint,  which  that  part  exhibits  during  a few  weeks  of  the  breeding  season.
Twenty-one  there  were  in  all,  and  they  had  been  killed  in  a single  day  by
the  veteran  and  his  son.  Those  masterly  gunners  told  me,  that  to  pro-
cure this  species,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  anchoring  their  small  vessel
about  fifty  yards  off  the  rocky  isles  round  which  these  birds  harbour  and
feed  at  this  season.  There,  while  the  birds  were  passing  on  wing,  al-
though usually  in  long  lines,  they  could  now  and  then  kill  two  of  them  at
a shot.  Sometimes  the  King  Eider  was  also  procured  under  similar  cir-
cumstances, as  the  two  species  are  wont  to  associate  together  during  win-
ter. At  Boston  the  Eiders  sold  that  winter  at  from  fifty  to  seventy-five
cents  the  pair,  and  they  are  much  sought  after  by  Epicures.

On  the  31st  of  May  1833,  my  son  and  party  killed  six  Eiders  on  tlie
island  of  Grand  Manan,  off  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  where  the  birds  were
seen  in  considerable  numbers,  and  were  just  beginning  to  breed.  A nest
containing  two  eggs,  but  not  a particle  of  down,  was  found  at  a distance
of  more  than  fifty  yards  from  the  water.

Immediately  after  landing  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  on  the  18th  of
June  in  the  same  year,  we  saw  a great  number  of  “ Sea  Ducks,”  as  the
gunners  and  fishermen  on  that  coast,  as  well  as  on  our  own,  call  the  Eiders
and  some  other  species.  On  visiting  an  island  in  “ Partridge  Bay,”  we


344


EIDER  DUCK.


procured  several  females.  The  birds  there  paid  little  attention  to  us,  and
some  allowed  us  to  approach  within  a few  feet  before  they  left  their  nests,
which  were  so  numerous  that  a small  boat-load  might  have  been  collected,
had  the  party  been  inclined.  They  were  all  placed  amid  the  short  grass
growing  in  the  fissures  of  the  rock,  and  therefore  in  rows,  as  it  were.  The
eggs  were  generally  five  or  six,  in  several  instances  eight,  and  in  one  ten.
Not  a male  bird  was  to  be  seen.  At  the  first  discharge  of  the  guns,  all
the  sitting  birds  flew  off  and  alighted  in  the  sea,  at  a distance  of  about  a
hundred  yards.  They  then  collected,  splashed  up  the  water,  and  Avashed
themselves,  until  the  boat  left  the  place.  Many  of  the  nests  were  unpro-
vided with  down  ; some  had  more  or  less  than  others,  and  some,  from
which  the  female  was  absent  when  the  party  landed,  were  quite  covered
with  it,  and  the  eggs  felt  warm  to  the  hand.  The  musquitoes  and  flies
were  there  as  abundant  and  as  tormenting  as  in  any  of  the  Florida  swamps.

On  the  24th  of  the  same  month,  two  male  Eiders,  much  advanced  in
the  moult,  were  shot  out  of  a flock  all  composed  of  individuals  of  the
same  sex.  While  rambling  over  the  moss-covered  shores  of  a small
pond,  on  the  7th  of  July,  we  saw  two  females  with  their  young  on  the
water.  As  we  approached  the  edges,  the  old  birds  lowered  their  heads
and  sAvam  off  with  those  parts  lying  flat  on  the  surface,  while  the  young
followed  so  close  as  almost  to  touch  them.  On  firing  at  them  without
shot,  they  all  dived  at  once,  but  rose  again  in  a moment,  the  mothers
quacking  and  murmuring.  The  young  dived  again,  and  we  saAV  no  more
of  them  ; the  old  birds  took  to  wing,  and,  flying  over  the  hills,  made  for
the  sea,  from  which  Ave  were  fully  a mile  distant.  How  their  young  were
to  reach  it  was  at  that  time  to  me  a riddle  ; but  was  afterwards  rendered
intelligible,  as  you  Avill  see  in  the  sequel.  On  the  9th  of  July,  Avhile
taking  an  evening  walk,  I saw  flocks  of  female  Eiders  without  broods.
They  Avere  in  deep  moult,  kept  close  to  the  shore  in  a bay,  and  were  pro-
bably sterile  birds.  On  my  way  back  to  the  vessel,  the  captain  and  I
started  a female  from  a broad  flat  rock,  more  than  a hundred  yards  from
the  water,  and,  on  reaching  the  spot,  we  found  her  nest,  Avhich  was  placed
on  the  bare  surface,  Avithout  a blade  of  grass  within  five  yards  of  it.  It
Avas  of  the  usual  bulky  construction,  and  contained  five  eggs,  deeply
buried  in  down.  She  flew  round  us  until  we  retired,  when  we  had  the
pleasure  to  see  her  alight,  walk  to  her  nest,  and  compose  herself  upon  it.

Large  flocks  of  males  kept  apart,  and  frequented  the  distant  sea  islands
at  this  period,  when  scarcely  any  Avere  able  to  fly  to  any  distance,  although


EIDER  DUCK.


345


they  swam  about  from  one  island  to  another  with  great  ease.  Before  their
moulting  had  commenced,  or  fully  a month  earlier,  these  male  birds,  we
observed,  flew  in  long  lines  from  place  to  place  around  the  outermost
islands  every  morning  and  evening,  thus  securing  themselves  from  their
enemies,  and  roosted  in  numbers  close  together  on  some  particular  rock
difficult  to  be  approached  by  boats,  where  they  remained  during  the  short
night.  By  the  1st  of  August  scarcely  an  Eider  Duck  was  to  be  seen  on
the  coast  of  Labrador.  The  young  were  then  able  to  fly,  the  old  birds
had  nearly  completed  their  moult,  and  all  were  moving  southward.

Having  now  afforded  you  some  idea  of  the  migrations  and  general
habits  of  this  interesting  bird  from  spring  to  the  close  of  the  short  sum-
mer of  the  desolate  regions  of  Labrador,  I proceed,  with  my  journals  be-
fore me,  and  my  memory  refreshed  by  reading  my  notes,  to  furnish  you
Avith  such  details  as  may  perhaps  induce  you  to  study  its  habits  in  other
parts  of  the  world.

The  Eider  Duck  generally  arrives  on  the  coasts  of  NeAvfoundland  and
Labrador  about  the  1st  of  May,  nearly  a fortnight  before  the  waters  of
the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence  are  freed  from  ice.  None  are  seen  there  during
winter,  and  their  first  appearance  is  looked  upon  with  pleasure  by  the  few
residents  as  an  assurance  of  the  commencement  of  the  summer  season.
At  this  period  they  are  seen  passing  in  long  files  not  many  feet  above  the
ice  or  the  surface  of  the  w^ater,  along  the  main  shores,  and  around  the
inner  bays  or  islands,  as  if  in  search  of  the  places  where  they  had  for-
merly nestled,  or  where  they  had  been  hatched.  All  the  birds  appear  to
be  paired,  and  in  perfect  plumage.  After  a few  days,  during  which  they
rest  themselves  on  the  shores  fronting  the  south,  most  of  them  remove  to
the  islands  that  border  the  coast,  at  distances  varying  from  half  a mile  to
five  or  six  miles.  The  rest  seek  for  places  in  which  to  form  their  nests,
along  the  craggy  shores,  or  by  the  borders  of  the  stunted  fir  woods  not
far  from  the  Avater,  a feAv  proceeding  as  far  as  about  a mile  into  the  in-
terior. They  are  now  seen  only  in  pairs,  and  they  soon  form  their  nests.
I have  never  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  their  courtships,  nor  have
I received  any  account  of  them  worthy  of  particular  notice.

In  Labrador,  the  Eider  Ducks  begin  to  form  their  nests  about  the
last  week  of  May.  Some  resort  to  islands  scantily  furnished  with  grass,
near  the  tufts  of  which  they  construct  their  nests  ; others  form  them  be-
neath the  spreading  boughs  of  the  stunted  firs,  and  in  such  places,  five,
six,  or  even  eight  are  sometimes  found  beneath  a single  bush.  Many  are


346


EIDER  DUCK.


placed  on  the  sheltered  shelvings  of  rocks  a few  feet  above  high-water
mark,  but  none  at  any  considerable  elevation,  at  least  none  of  my  party,
including  the  sailors,  found  any  in  such  a position.  The  nest,  which  is
sunk  as  much  as  possible  into  the  ground,  is  formed  of  sea- weeds,  mosses,
and  dried  twigs,  so  matted  and  interlaced  as  to  give  an  appearance  of  neat-
ness to  the  central  cavity,  which  rarely  exceeds  seven  inches  in  diameter.  In
the  beginning  of  June  the  eggs  are  deposited,  the  male  attending  upon
the  female  the  whole  time.  The  eggs,  which  are  regularly  placed  on  the
moss  and  weeds  of  the  nest,  without  any  down,  are  generally  from  five  to
seven,  three  inches  in  length,  two  inches  and  one  eighth  in  breadth,  be-
ing thus  much  larger  than  those  of  the  domestic  Duck,  of  a regular  oval
form,  smooth-shelled,  and  of  a uniform  pale  olive  green.  I may  here
mention,  by  the  way,  that  they  afford  delicious  eating.  I have  not  been
able  to  ascertain  the  precise  period  of  incubation.  If  the  female  is  not
disturbed,  or  her  eggs  removed  or  destroyed,  she  lays  only  one  set  in  the
season,  and  as  soon  as  she  begins  to  sit  the  male  leaves  her.  When  the
full  complement  of  eggs  has  been  laid,  she  begins  to  pluck  some  down
from  the  lower  parts  of  her  body ; this  operation  is  daily  continued  for
some  time,  until  the  roots  of  the  feathers,  as  far  forward  as  she  can  reach,
are  quite  bare,  and  as  clean  as  a wood  from  which  the  undergrowth  has
been  cleared  away.  This  down  she  disposes  beneath  and  around  the
eggs.  When  she  leaves  the  nest  to  go  in  search  of  food,  she  places  it
over  the  eggs,  and  in  this  manner,  it  may  be  presumed  to  keep  up  their
warmth,  although  it  does  not  always  ensure  their  safety,  for  the  Black-
backed  Gull  is  apt  to  remove  the  covering,  and  suck  or  otherwise  destroy
the  eggs.

No  sooner  are  the  young  hatched  than  they  are  led  to  the  water,  even
when  it  is  a mile  distant,  and  the  travelling  difficult,  both  for  the  parent
bird  and  her  brood ; but  when  it  happens  that  the  nest  has  been  placed
among  rocks  over  the  water,  the  Eider,  like  the  Wood  Duck,  carries  the
young  in  her  bill  to  their  favourite  element.  I felt  very  anxious  to  find
a nest  placed  over  a soft  bed  of  moss  or  other  plants,  to  see,  whether,  like
the  Wood  Duck  on  such  occasions,  the  Eider  would  suffer  her  young  ones
to  fall  from  the  nest ; but  unfortunately  I had  no  opportunity  of  observ-
ing a case  of  this  kind.  The  care  which  the  mother  takes  of  her  young
for  two  or  three  weeks,  cannot  be  exceeded.  She  leads  them  gently  in  a
close  flock  in  shallow  waters,  where,  by  diving,  they  procure  food,  and  at
times,  when  the  young  are  fatigued,  and  at  some  distance  from  the  shore,


EIDER  DUCK.


347


she  sinks  her  body  in  the  water,  and  receives  them  on  her  back,  where
they  remain  several  minutes.  At  the  approach  of  their  merciless  enemy,
the  Black-backed  Gull,  the  mother  beats  the  water  with  her  wings,  as  if
intending  to  raise  the  spray  around  her,  and  on  her  uttering  a peculiar
sound,  the  young  dive  in  all  directions,  while  she  endeavours  to  entice  the
marauder  to  follow  her,  by  feigning  lameness,  or  sbe  leaps  out  of  the  wa-
ter and  attacks  her  enemy,  often  so  vigorously,  that,  exhausted  and  dis-
appointed, he  is  glad  to  fly  off,  on  which  she  alights  near  the  rocks,  among
which  she  expects  to  find  her  brood,  and  calls  them  to  her  side.  Now
and  then  I saw  two  females  which  had  formed  an  attachment  to  each  other,
as  if  for  the  purpose  of  more  effectually  contributing  to  the  safety  of  their
young,  and  it  was  very  seldom  that  I saw  these  prudent  mothers  assailed
by  the  gull.

The  young,  at  the  age  of  one  week,  are  of  a dark  mouse  colour,  thickly
covered  with  soft  warm  down.  Their  feet  at  this  period  are  proportion-
ally very  large  and  strong.  By  the  20th  of  July  they  seemed  to  be  all
hatched.  They  grew  rapidly,  and  when  about  a fortnight  old  were,  with
great  difficulty,  obtained,  unless  during  stormy  weather,  when  they  at
times  retired  from  the  sea  to  shelter  themselves  under  the  shelvings  of  the
rocks  at  the  head  of  shallow  bays.  It  is  by  no  means  difficult  to  rear
them,  provided  proper  care  be  taken  of  them,  and  they  soon  become  quite
gentle  and  attached  to  the  place  set  apart  for  them.  A fisherman  of
Eastport,  who  carried  eight  or  ten  of  them  from  Labrador,  kept  them
several  years  in  a yard  close  to  the  water  of  the  bay,  to  which,  after  they
were  grown,  they  daily  betook  themselves,  along  with  some  common  ducks,
regularly  returning  on  shore  towards  evening.  Several  persons  who  had
seen  them,  assured  me  that  they  were  as  gentle  as  their  associates,  and  al-
though not  so  active  on  land,  were  better  swimmers,  and  moved  more
gracefully  on  the  water.  They  were  kept  until  the  male  birds  acquired
their  perfect  plumage  and  mated ; but  some  gunners  shot  the  greater
number  of  them  one  winter  day,  having  taken  them  for  wild  birds,  al-
though none  of  them  could  fly,  they  having  been  pinioned.  I have  no
doubt  that  if  this  valuable  bird  were  domesticated,  it  would  prove  a great
acquisition,  both  on  account  of  its  feathers  and  down,  and  its  flesh  as  an
article  of  food.  I am  persuaded  that  very  little  attention  would  be  neces-
sary to  effect  this  object.  When  in  captivity,  it  feeds  on  different  kinds
of  grain  and  moistened  corn-meal,  and  its  flesh  becomes  excellent.  Indeed,
the  sterile  females  which  we  procured  at  Labrador  in  considerable  num-


348


EIDER  DUCK.


ber,  tasted  as  well  as  the  mallard.  The  males  were  tougher  and  more
fishy,  so  that  we  rarely  ate  of  them,  although  the  fishermen  and  settlers
paid  no  regard  to  sex  in  this  matter.

When  the  female  Eider  is  suddenly  discovered  on  her  nest,  she  takes
to  wing  at  a single  spring ; but  if  she  sees  her  enemy  at  some  distance,
she  walks  off  a few  steps,  and  then  flies  away.  If  unseen  by  a person
coming  near,  as  may  often  happen,  when  the  nest  is  placed  under  the
boughs  of  the  dwarf  fir,  she  will  remain  on  it,  although  she  may  hear
people  talking.  On  such  occasions  my  party  frequently  discovered  the
nests  by  raising  the  pine  branches,  and  were  often  as  much  startled  as  the
ducks  themselves  could  be,  as  the  latter  instantly  sprung  past  them  on
wing,  uttering  a harsh  cry.  Now  and  then  some  were  seen  to  alight  on
the  ground  within  fifteen  or  twenty  yards,  and  walk  as  if  lame  and  bro-
ken-winged, crawling  slowly  away,  to  entice  their  enemies  to  go  in  pur-
suit. Generally,  however,  they  would  fly  to  the  sea,  and  remain  there  in
a large  flock  until  their  unwelcome  visitors  departed.  When  pursued  by
a boat,  with  their  brood  around  them,  they  allowed  us  to  come  up  to
shooting  distance,  when,  feigning  decrepitude,  they  would  fly  off,  beating
the  water  with  partially  extended  wings,  while  the  young  either  dived  or
ran  on  the  surface  vdth  wonderful  speed,  for  forty  or  fifty  yards,  then
suddenly  plunged,  and  seldom  appeared  at  the  surface  unless  for  a mo-
ment. The  mothers  always  flew  away  as  soon  as  their  brood  dispersed,
and  then  ended  the  chase.  The  cry  or  note  of  the  female  is  a hoarse  roll-
ing croak  ; that  of  the  male  I never  heard.

Should  the  females  be  robbed  of  their  eggs,  they  immediately  go  off
in  search  of  mates,  whether  their  previous  ones  or  not  I cannot  tell,  al-
though I am  inclined  to  think  so.  However  this  may  be,  the  duck  in
such  a case  soon  meets  with  a drake,  and  may  be  seen  returning  the  same
day  with  him  to  her  nest.  They  swim,  fly,  and  walk  side  by  side,  and
by  the  end  of  ten  or  twelve  days  the  male  takes  his  leave,  and  rejoins
his  companions  out  at  sea,  while  the  female  is  found  sitting  on  a new  set
of  eggs,  seldom,  however,  exceeding  four.  But  this  happens  only  at  an
early  period  of  the  season,  for  I observed  that  as  soon  as  the  males  had
begun  to  moult,  the  females,  whose  nests  had  been  plundered,  abandoned
the  place.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  connected  with
these  birds  is,  that  the  females  with  broods  are  fully  three  weeks  later
in  moulting  than  the  males,  whereas  those  which  do  not  breed  begin
to  moult  as  early  as  they.  This  may  probably  seem  strange,  but  I


EIDER  DUCK.


349


became  quite  satisfied  of  the  fact  while  at  Labrador,  where,  from  the
number  which  we  procured  in  a state  of  change,  and  the  vast  quantities
every  now  and  then  in  sight,  our  opportunities  of  observing  these  birds
in  a perfectly  natural  state  were  ample.

Some  authors  have  said  that  the  males  keep  watch  near  the  females  ;
but,  although  this  may  be  the  case  in  countries  such  as  Greenland  and
Iceland,  where  the  Eiders  have  been  trained  into  a state  of  semi-domesti-
cation, it  certainly  was  not  so  in  Labrador.  Not  a single  male  did  we
there  see  near  the  females  after  incubation  had  commenced,  unless  in  the
case  mentioned  above,  when  the  latter  had  been  deprived  of  their  eggs.
The  males  invariably  kept  aloof  and  in  large  flocks,  sometimes  of  a hun-
dred or  more  individuals,  remaining  out  at  sea  over  large  banks  with
from  seven  to  ten  fathoms  of  water,  and  retiring  at  night  to  insular  rocks.
It  seemed  very  wonderful  that  in  the  long  lines  in  which  we  saw  them
travelling,  we  did  not  on  any  occasion  discover  among  them  a young
bird,  or  one  not  in  its  mature  plumage.  The  young  males,  if  they  breed
before  they  acquire  their  full  colouring,  must  either  be  by  themselves  at
this  period,  or  with  the  barren  females,  which,  as  I have  already  said,
separate  from  those  that  are  breeding.  I am  inclined  to  believe  that
the  old  males  commence  their  southward  migration  before  the  females
or  the  young,  as  none  were  to  be  seen  for  about  a fortnight  before  the
latter  started.  In  winter,  when  these  Ducks  are  found  on  the  Atlantic
shores  of  the  United  States,  the  males  and  females  are  intermingled ; and
at  the  approach  of  spring  the  mated  pairs  travel  in  great  flocks,  though
disposed  in  lines,  when  you  can  distinctly  see  individuals  of  both  sexes
alternating.

The  flight  of  the  Eider  is  firm,  strong,  and  generally  steady.  They
propel  themselves  by  constant  beats  of  the  wings,  undulating  their  lines
according  to  the  inequality  of  surface  produced  by  the  waves,  over  which
they  pass  at  the  height  of  a few  yards,  and  rarely  more  than  a mile  fi-om
the  shores.  Few  fly  across  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  as  they  prefer  fol-
lowing the  coasts  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Newfoundland,  to  the  eastern  en-
trance of  the  straits  of  Belle  Isle,  beyond  which  many  proceed  farther
north,  while  others  ascend  that  channel  and  settle  for  the  season  along
the  shores  of  Labrador,  as  far  up  as  Partridge  Bay,  and  still  farther  up
the  St  Lawrence.  Whilst  on  our  waters,  or  at  their  breeding  grounds,
the  Eiders  are  not  unfrequently  seen  flying  much  higher  than  when
travelling,  but  in  that  case  they  seem  to  be  acting  with  the  intention  of


350


EIDER  DUCK.


guarding  against  their  enemy  man.  The  velocity  of  their  flight  has
been  ascertained  to  be  about  eighty  miles  in  the  hour.

This  species  dives  with  great  agility,  and  can  remain  a considerable
time  under  water,  often  going  down  in  search  of  food  to  the  depth  of
eight  or  ten  fathoms,  or  even  more.  When  wounded,  however,  they  soon
become  fatigued  in  consequence  of  the  exertion  used  in  diving,  and  may
be  overtaken  by  a well-manned  boat  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour  or  so,
as  when  fatigued  they  swim  just  below  the  surface,  and  may  be  struck
dead  with  an  oar  or  a boat-hook.

Their  food  consists  principally  of  shell-fish,  the  shells  of  which  they
seem  to  have  the  power  of  breaking  into  pieces.  In  many  individuals
which  I opened,  1 found  the  entrails  almost  filled  with  small  fragments
of  shells  mixed  with  other  matter.  Crustaceous  animals  and  their  roe,
as  well  as  that  of  various  fishes,  I also  found  in  their  stomach,  along  with
pebbles  sometimes  as  large  as  a hazel  nut.  The  oesophagus,  which  is  in
form  like  a bag,  and  is  of  a leathery  firm  consistence,  was  often  found
distended  with  food,  and  usually  emitted  a very  disagreeable  fishy  odour.
The  gizzard  is  extremely  large  and  muscular.  The  trachea  of  the  young
male,  so  long  as  it  remains  in  its  imperfect  plumage,  or  for  the  first  twelve
months,  does  not  resemble  that  of  the  old  male;  but  on  this  subject  I
intend  to  speak  at  length  on  another  occasion.  The  males  do  not  obtain
their  full  plumage  until  the  fourth  winter.  They  at  first  resemble  the
mother,  then  gradually  become  pie-bald,  but  not  in  less  time  than  be-
tween two  and  three  years.

The  Eider  Duck  takes  a heavy  shot,  and  is  more  easily  killed  on
wing  than  while  swimming.  When  on  shore  they  mark  your  approach
while  you  are  yet  at  a good  distance,  and  fly  off  before  you  come  within
shot.  Sometimes  you  may  surprise  them  while  swimming  below  high
rocks,  and,  if  you  are  expert,  then  shoot  them ; but  when  they  have  first
seen  you,  it  is  seldom  that  you  can  procure  them,  as  they  dive  with  ex-
treme agility.  While  at  Great  Macatina  Harbour,  we  discovered  a lai'ge
basin  of  water,  communicating  with  the  sea  by  a very  narrow  passage
about  thirty  yards  across,  and  observed  that  at  particular  stages  of  the
tides  the  Eider  Ducks  entered  and  returned  by  it.  By  hiding  ourselves
on  both  sides  of  this  channel,  we  succeeded  in  killing  a good  number,  but
rarely  more  than  one  at  a shot,  although  sometimes  we  obtained  from  a
single  file  as  many  as  we  had  of  gun-barrels.

Excepting  in  a single  nest,  I found  no  down  clean,  it  having  been  in


EIDER  DUCK.


351


every  other  instance  more  or  less  mixed  with  small  dry  fir  twigs  and  bits
of  grass.  When  cleaned,  the  down  of  a nest  rarely  exceeds  an  ounce  in
weight,  although,  from  its  great  elasticity,  it  is  so  bulky  as  to  fill  a hat,
or  if  properly  prepared  even  a larger  space.  The  eggers  of  Labrador
usually  collect  it  in  considerable  quantity,  but  at  the  same  time  make
such  havock  among  the  birds,  that  at  no  very  distant  period  the  traffic
must  cease.


Anas  mollissima,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  198 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  845.

I'uLiGULA  MOLLissiMA,  Ch.  Boiiaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  388.

SoMATERiA  MOLLISSIMA,  Swains.  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  448.

Eider  Duck,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  406.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXLVI.  Figs.  1.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  some-
what depressed  towards  the  end,  which  is  broad  and  rounded.  Upper
mandible  with  a soft  tumid  substance  at  the  base,  extending  upon  the  fore-
head, and  deeply  divided  into  two  narrow  rounded  lobes,  its  whole  sur-
face marked  with  divergent  oblique  lines,  the  dorsal  outline  nearly
straight  and  sloping  to  beyond  the  nostrils,  then  curved,  the  ridge  broad
at  the  base,  broadly  convex  towards  the  end,  the  edges  perpendicular,  ob-
tuse, with  about  fifty  small  lamellae  on  the  inner  side,  the  unguis  very
large,  elHptical.  Nostrils  submedial,  oblong,  large,  pervious,  nearer  the
ridge  than  the  edge.  Lower  mandible  flattened,  with  the  angle  very  long,
rather  narrow  and  rounded,  the  dorsal  line  short  and  slightly  convex,  the
edges  with  about  sixty  lamellae,  the  unguis  very  broad,  elliptical.

Head  very  large.  Eyes  of  moderate  size.  Neck  of  moderate  length,
rather  slender  at  its  upper  part.  Body  bulky  and  much  depressed.  Wings
rather  small.  Feet  very  short,  strong,  placed  rather  far  behind  ; tai'sus
very  short,  compressed,  anteriorly  having  a series  of  scutella  in  its  whole
length,  and  a partial  series  above  the  fourth  toe,  the  rest  reticulated  with
angular  scales.  Hind  toe  small,  with  a free  membrane  beneath  ; anterior
toes  double  the  length  of  the  tarsus,  connected  by  reticulated  membranes,
having  a sinus  at  their  free  margins,  the  inner  with  a broad  lobed  margi-
nal membrane,  the  outer  with  a thickened  edge ; all  obliquely  scutellate
above,  the  third  and  fourth  about  equal  and  longest.  Claws  small,  that
of  first  toe  very  small  and  curved,  of  middle  toe  largest,  all  rather  de-
pressed and  blunt.


352


EIDER  DUCK.


Plumage  short,  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the
head  extremely  small ; on  the  upper  part  very  narrow,  on  the  occiput  and
upper  and  lateral  parts  of  the  neck  hairlike,  stiff  and  glossy.  Wings
rather  short,  narrow,  pointed ; primary  quills  curved,  strong,  tapering,
the  first  longest,  the  second  scarcely  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ;
secondaries  short,  broad,  rounded,  the  inner  elongated,  tapering,  and  re-
curved. Tail  very  short,  much  rounded,  of  sixteen  narrow  feathers.

Bill  pale  greyish-yellow,  the  unguis  lighter,  the  soft  tumid  part  pale
flesh-colour.  Iris  brown.  Feet  dingy  light  green,  the  webs  dusky.  Up-
per part  of  the  head  bluish-black ; the  central  part  from  the  occiput  to
the  middle  white.  The  hair-like  feathers  on  the  upper  part  and  sides  of
the  neck  are  of  a delicate  pale  green  tint.  The  sides  of  the  head,  the
throat,  and  the  neck,  are  white,  the  fore  neck  at  its  lower  part  of  a fine
colour  intermediate  between  buff  and  cream-colour.  The  rest  of  the
lower  surface  is  brownish-black,  as  are  the  upper  tail -coverts,  and  the
central  part  of  the  rump.  The  rest  of  the  back,  the  scapulars,  smaller
wing-coverts,  and  inner  curved  secondary  quills,  white,  the  scapulars
tinged  with  yellow.  Secondary  coverts  and  outer  secondaries  brownish-
black  ; primaries  and  tail-coverts  greyish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  25  inches,  to  end  of  wings  21 to  end  of  claws
27;  extent  of  wings  42;  wing  from  flexure  11^;  tail  4;^;  bill  from  ex-
tremity of  tumid  part  2-i§,  from  its  notch  along  the  edge  of  lower
mandible  2j°  ; tarsus  1| ; middle  toe2|§,  its  claw  Weight  in  winter,
5 lb.  5^  oz.  ; in  breeding  time  4 lb.  8^  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXLVI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  differs  greatly  from  the  Male.  The  bill  is  shorter,  its
tumid  basal  part  much  less  and  narrower.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and
upper  part  of  the  neck  are  very  small,  soft,  and  uniform  ; the  scapulars
and  inner  secondaries  are  not  elongated,  as  in  the  male.  Bill  pale  grey-
ish-ffreen ; iris  and  feet  as  in  the  male.  The  head  and  neck  all  round
light  brownish-red  with  small  lines  of  brownish-black.  Lower  part  of
neck  all  round,  the  whole  upper  surface,  the  sides,  and  the  lower  tail-
coverts  of  the  same  colours,  but  there  the  brownish-black  markings  are
broad.  Secondary  quills  and  larger  coverts  greyish-brown,  tipped  with
Avhite,  primaries  brownish-black;  tail-feathers  greyish-brown.  Breast  and
abdomen  greyish-brown,  obscurely  mottled.

Length  to  end  of  tail  24  inches,  to  end  of  wings  20^,  to  end  of  claws  27;


EIDER  DUCK.


353


extent  of  wings  39  ; wing  from  flexure  11:^;  tail  4;  bill  ; tarsus  1|;
middle  toe  its  claw  Weight  in  winter  4 lb.  4|  oz. ; in  breeding
time  3 lb.  12  oz.

The  down  of  the  female  is  light  grey ; that  of  the  male  on  the  white
parts  is  pure  white,  on  the  dark,  greyish-white.

I have  represented  three  of  these  birds  in  a state  of  irritation.  A
mated  pair,  having  a few  eggs  already  laid,  have  beeir  approached  by  a
single  male,  and  are  in  the  act  of  driving  off  the  intruder,  who,  to  facili-
tate his  retreat,  is  lashing  his  antagonists  with  his  wings.


VOL.  in.


z


( 354  )


THE  VELVET  DUCK.

Fuligula  fusca,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXLVII.  Male  and  Female.

The  Velvet  Duck  arrives  from  the  north  along  the  shores  of  the  Mid-
dle States,  about  the  first  of  September,  and  extends  to  a greater  or  less
distance  southward,  according  to  the  state  of  the  weather,  often  proceed-
ing as  far  as  Georgia.  The  Bay  of  Chesapeake  and  aU  the  estuaries  to
the  eastward  are  amply  furnished  with  it,  and  there  it  is  usually  seen  in
company  with  the  American  Scoter,  the  Golden-eyed  Duck,  and  some
other  species.  It  very  rarely  enters  fresh  waters  during  its  stay  on  our
coast,  and  is  with  great  propriety  called  a Sea  Duck.  My  friend  Tho-
mas Npttall  mentions  that  some,  which  probably  were  young  birds,  had
been  seen  in  Fresh  Pond  near  Cambridge  in  Massachusetts.  This  is  the
only  case  of  the  kind  that  I have  heard  of,  although  these  birds  breed  in
fresh  water  lakes  and  in  rivers,  in  which  they  remain  at  the  season  of  re-
production about  two  months.

In  the  beginning  of  April,  the  Velvet  Ducks,  which  are  gregarious,
collect  in  large  flocks,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  to  their  northern
breeding  places,  and  as  they  fly  steadily  onwards,  you  may  see  thousands
passing  at  short  distances  from  the  shores,  and  forming  an  almost  conti-
nuous line,  each  flock  composed  of  twenty  or  thirty  individuals,  which
fly  low  and  irregularly,  ranged  in  an  angular  form.  While  on  the  Bay
of  Fundy,  I went  with  my  party  to  a projecting  cape,  round  which  these
birds  passed  during  our  stay,  from  daylight  until  evening.  When  it
blows  hard  from  the  sea,  the  Ducks  come  near  to  the  shore,  and  afford
abundant  opportunities  to  such  sportsmen  as  are  fond  of  shooting  them.

As  we  approached  the  shores  of  Labrador,  we  found  the  waters  cover-
ed with  dense  flocks  of  these  birds,  and  yet  they  continued  to  arrive  there
from  the  St  Lawrence  for  several  days  in  succession.  We  were  all  as-
tonished at  their  numbers,  which  were  such  that  we  could  not  help  ima-
gining that  all  the  Velvet  Ducks  in  the  world  were  passing  before  us.
This  was  about  the  middle  of  June,  which  I thought  late  for  them,  but
the  season  had  been  tardy,  and  the  fishermen  informed  us,  that  when  the
weather  is  warmer,  these  birds  pass  a fortnight  earlier.  The  greater  num-


VELVET  DUCK,


355


ber  merely  appear  for  a few  days  on  their  way  farther  north,  but  some
remain  to  breed  on  the  southern  coast  of  Labrador.  Thousands  of  sterile
individuals,  however,  spend  the  summer  on  the  Bay  of  Fundy.

During  the  breeding  season,  the  Velvet  Duck  resembles  the  Eider  in
its  habits,  only  that  it  prefers  fresh  water,  which  is  rarely  the  case  with
the  other  species.  The  males  leave  the  females  after  incubation  has  com-
menced. Those  which  breed  at  Labrador  begin  to  form  their  nests  from
the  1st  to  the  10th  of  June,  and  on  the  28th  of  July  I caught  some  young
ones  several  days  old.  The  nests  are  placed  within  a few  feet  of  the  bor-
ders of  small  lakes,  a mile  or  two  distant  from  the  sea,  and  usually  under
the  low  boughs  of  the  bushes,  of  the  twigs  of  which,  with  mosses  and  va-
rious plants  matted  together,  they  are  formed.  They  are  large  and  almost
flat,  several  inches  thick,  with  some  feathers  of  the  female,  but  no  down,
under  the  eggs,  which  are  usually  six  in  number,  intermediate  in  size  be-
tween those  of  the  Eider  and  King  Ducks,  measuring  an  inch  and  three
quarters  in  length,  one  and  seven-eighths  in  breadth,  of  a uniform  pale
cream  colour  tinged  with  green,  not  pure  white  as  stated  by  some  authors*
On  the  28th  of  July  I procured  five  young  ones  out  of  a brood  of  six,  among
which,  although  to  appearance  scarcely  a week  old,  I could  readily  dis-
tinguish the  males  from  the  females  as  they  swam  on  the  little  pond
around  their  mother,  the  former  having  already  a white  spot  under  the  eye.
The  down  with  which  they  were  covered  was  rather  stiff*  and  hair-like,  of
a black  colour,  excepting  under  the  chin,  where  there  was  a small  patch
of  white.  They  swam  with  great  ease,  and  when  we  drove  them  into  a
narrow  place  for  the  purpose  of  catching  them,  they  several  times  turned
upon  us  and  dived  with  the  view  of  getting  back  to  the  middle  of  the
pond,  so  that  at  last  we  found  it  necessary  to  shoot  them.  Only  one
escaped  ashore,  which  my  young  friend  Thomas  Lincoln  caught,  but
afterwards  restored  to  its  mother,  which  continued  on  the  pond,  manifest-
ing the  greatest  anxiety,  and  calling  to  her  brood  all  the  while  with
short  squeaking  notes,  by  no  means  unpleasant  to  the  ear.  On  being
shot  at,  she  flew  off  to  another  pond,  but  soon  returned.  Her  plumage
was  rusty  and  ragged,  but  the  wings  seemed  to  be  complete,  as  she  flew
with  great  ease,  springing  at  once  from  the  water.

Mr  Jones  of  Bras  d’Or  assured  me,  that  either  that  individual  or  an-
other of  the  same  species,  had  bred  on  the  same  pond  for  six  or  seven
years  in  succession,  and  that  he  had  looked  at  the  nest  and  observed  her
manners  when  leading  about  the  young,  which  he  said  did  not  leave  the

z 2


356


VELVET  DUCK.


pond  until  they  were  able  to  fly.  That  year,  1833,  she  and  her  mate
had  arrived  nearly  a month  later  than  usual.  This  accounted  for  the
small  size  of  the  young,  which  he  was  sorry  to  see  dead ; and  here  let  me
say  that  Mr  Jones,  who  is  not  only  a good-hearted  and  benevolent  man,
but  also  fond  of  observing  nature,  was  the  first  person  I met  with  who  could
give  me  any  rational  account  of  the  ducks  which  bred  in  his  vicinity.

A few  of  the  Velvet  Ducks  breed  on  the  Island  of  Grand  Manan,  and
in  other  places  about  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  but  rarely  farther  south,  and
the  number  that  remain  in  Labrador  is  comparatively  small,  as  we  did
not  observe  there  more  than  six  or  seven  broods.  They  generally  leave
that  part  of  the  coast  about  the  middle  of  August ; but  that  season  they
were  still  seen  after  the  Eider  Ducks  had  departed,  which  makes  me  think
that  they  require  more  warmth  than  these  birds  before  they  begin  to  lay
tbeir  eggs.  Captain  James  Clark  Ross,  of  the  British  Royal  Navy,  a
gentleman,  besides  his  professional  merits,  distinguished  for  his  love  of
science,  informed  me  that  none  of  these  birds  were  observed  on  either  of
his  Arctic  voyages.  The  extreme  limits  of  their  migrations  remain  un-
known. I have  already  related  the  manner  in  which  this  and  several
other  species  are  caught  by  the  Indians  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and  there-
foi'e  it  is  unnecessary  that  I should  repeat  it  here,  as  you  will  find  it  at
p.  487.  of  Vol.  II.

'i  he  flight  of  the  Velvet  Duck  is  strong  and  sustained,  although  it
usually  flies  low ; yet  when  pursued,  or  at  the  sight  of  gunners  in  a boat,
it  often  rises  to  the  height  of  forty  or  fifty  yards,  describes  elegant  curved
lines  as  it  passes  and  repasses,  and  thus  continues  to  fly  until  danger  is  no
longer  apprehended.  Its  movements  in  the  air  are  pei'formed  by  con-
tinued flappings,  and  when  on  wing  the  white  of  the  wings  is  beautifully
contrasted  with  the  dark  hue  of  the  rest  of  its  plumage.  It  dives  with  as
much  agility  as  the  Eider  or  the  American  Scoter,  and,  Avhen  Avounded,
is  equally  difficult  to  be  caught,  nor  can  it  be  killed  with  certainty  with-
out a heavy  shot.

The  Velvet  Ducks  enter  the  bays  and  estuaries  to  a greater  distance
than  the  Eiders.  On  land  they  move  with  moi’e  difficulty  than  those
birds,  and  keep  themselves  in  a more  erect  attitude,  like  that  in  which  I
have  endeavoured  to  repiesent  the  male  in  the  plate.  They  swim  Avith
more  buoyancy  than  the  Eiders,  but  at  times  seem  to  rise  from  the  water
Aviih  considerable  difficulty.  Tbeir  food  consists  of  shell-fish  and  crus-
acea,  as  well  as  sea-Aveeds,  small  fish,  and  spaAvn.  Their  flesh  is  extreme-


VELVET  DUCK.


357


]y  dark,  tastes  of  fish,  and  is  very  unpalatable,  although  I have  seen  per-
sons of  great  judgment  in  matters  of  this  kind  not  only  eat  it  with  avidity,
but  praise  it  as  highly  as  if  it  were  equal  to  the  most  tender  and  juicy
venison.  They  are  sold  in  abundance  in  our  eastern  markets  and  those
of  the  Middle  States,  at  from  fifty  cents  to  a dollar  the  pair.

This  species  is,  in  my  opinion,  very  closely  allied  to  the  Eider,  in  so
much  that  I frequently  call  it  the  Black  King-Duck.  Along  our  coasts
it  commonly  receives  the  name  of  W^hite-winged  Coot.  The  female  is
smaller  than  the  male.  The  young  much  resemble  the  female  during  the
first  year.  The  white  spots  of  the  head,  however,  are  apparent,  although
mottled  with  dusky,  and  their  feet  now  shew  some  of  the  redness  of  those
of  the  old  males  ; but  I am  unable  to  say  with  certainty  at  what  age  they
attain  their  full  summer  plumage,  and  the  rich  colouring  of  the  bill.  The
Gizzard,  which  is  not  so  large  as  that  of  the  Eider,  is  of  a yellow  colour ;
the  gut  very  large,  tough,  and  strong,  about  eight  feet  in  length.

Anas  fusca,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  196 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  43.

Fuligula  fusca,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  390.

OiDEMiA  FUSCA,  Swains.  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  449.

Velvet  Duck,  Anas  fusca,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  viii.  p.  137-  pi.  92.  fig.  3.

Velvet  Duck,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  419.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXLVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  very  broad,  as  deep  as  broad  at  the
base,  depressed  and  flattened  towards  the  end,  which  is  rounded.  Up-
per mandible  with  a short  abrupt  prominence  at  the  base,  its  dorsal  line
on  the  prominence  straight,  at  its  fore  edge  abruptly  sloping,  then  slight-
ly concave,  and  at  the  end  curved,  the  ridge  on  the  prominence  very
broad  and  nearly  flat,  towards  the  end  broadly  convex,  the  sides  con-
vex, the  edges  obtuse  with  about  thirty  lamellae,  the  unguis  very  large,
and  elliptical.  Nostrils  subbasal,  elliptical,  very  large,  pervious,  nearer
the  ridge  than  the  edge,  and  placed  on  the  lower  side  of  the  basal  pro-
minence. Lower  mandible  flat,  with  the  angle  long,  rather  narrow,
rounded,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  convex,  the  edges  with  about  twenty-
five  lamellae,  the  unguis  nearly  circular  and  very  large.

Head  large.  Eyes  rather  small.  Neck  of  moderate  length,  thick.
Body  large,  and  much  depressed.  Wings  rather  small.  Feet  very
short,  placed  rather  far  behind  ; tarsus  very  short,  compressed,  having
anteriorly  in  its  whole  length  a series  of  small  scutella,  and  above  the


338


VELVET  DUCK.


outer  tee  a partial  series,  the  rest  covered  with  reticular  angular  scales.
Hind  toe  small,  with  a free  membrane  beneath  ; anterior  toes  double  the
length  of  the  tarsus,  united  by  reticulated  membranes  having  a sinus  on
their  free  margins,  the  inner  with  a lobed  marginal  membrane,  the  outer
with  a thick  edge,  the  third  and  fourth  about  equal  and  longest.  Claws
small,  that  of  first  toe  very  small  and  curved,  of  middle  toe  largest,  with
a dilated  inner  edge,  of  the  rest  slender,  all  obtuse.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head
extremely  small,  on  the  neck  velvety.  Wings  rather  short,  naiTow,
pointed ; primary  quills  curved,  strong,  tapering  and  pointed,  the  first
longest,  the  second  very  little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; se-
condary broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail
very  short,  narrow,  wedge  shaped,  of  fourteen  stiff  narrow  feathers.

Basal  prominence  and  sides  of  the  bill  black,  the  sides  towards  the  end
bright  red,  the  unguis  flesh-colour,  with  a black  line  on  each  side.  Iris
bright  yellow.  Feet  carmine  on  the  outer  side,  orange-red  on  the  inner,
the  webs  greyish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  brown-
ish-black,v  on  the  upper  parts  glossed  with  blue,  lighter  on  the  lower.
The  outer  secondary  quills  are  white,  and  there  is  a spot  of  the  same  un-
der the  eye.

Length  to  end  of  tail  22  inches,  to  end  of  wings  19:^,  to  end  of  claws
24^  ; extent  of  wings  39  ; wing  from  flexure  12  ; tail  3^ ; biU  1/j,  along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2j\  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  3,  its  claw  /j.
Weight  3 lb.  10  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXLVII.  Fig.  2.

In  the  Female  the  basal  prominence  of  the  bill  is  much  less  elevated,
and  the  colour  of  the  whole  bill  is  dusky.  The  iris  and  feet  are  as  in
the  Male,  but  of  duller  tints.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  a
sooty  brown,  the  breast  and  abdomen  lighter.  There  are  two  whitish  spots
on  each  side  of  the  head,  one  near  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible,  the
other  behind  the  eye ; the  outer  secondary  quiUs  are  white  as  in  the  Male.

Length  to  end  of  tail  22  inches,  to  end  of  wings  18,  to  end  of  claws
25 1 ; extent  of  wings  38 ; wing  from  flexure  11^;  tail  3^ ; bill  1 ^ j,  along
the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2j\  ; tarsus  If ; middle  toe  2^§,  its  claw
W eight  S lb.  3 oz.

The  down  of  this  species  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Eider  Duck,  and
apparently  of  equal  quality.


( 359  )


THE  PIED-BILLED  DOBCHICK.

Prodiceps  Carolinensis,  Lath.

PLATE  CCXLVIII.  Male  and  Female.

There  go  the  little  Dobchicks,  among  the  tall  rushes  and  aquatic
grasses  that  border  the  marsh.  They  have  seen  me,  and  now  1 watch
them  as  they  sink  gently  backwards  into  the  deep  water,  in  the  manner
of  frightened  frogs.  Cunning  things  ! “ Water- witches,”  as  they  call
you,  I clearly  see  your  bills,  although  you  have  withdrawn  all  of  you
save  those  parts,  and  sneak  off  towards  yon  great  bunch  of  bulrushes.
Well,  speed  on,  and  may  safety  attend  you  ! Nature  has  granted  you
means  of  eluding  your  enemies,  and  I am  heartily  glad  to  see  that  you
have  profited  by  her  instructions.  I know  you  can  fly  too.  How  happy
must  you  be,  to  be  thus  enabled  to  migrate  through  the  air,  instead  of
being  obliged  to  labour  for  months  with  your  curiously  scolloped  feet,  in
removing  from  one  country  to  another,  as  authors  say  you  do.  Ah  ! you
have  reached  a small  secluded  pool,  where  you  intend  to  breed  in  peace
and  security ; there  you  are,  collecting  rushes  and  weeds  to  form  a large
matted  bed,  on  which  you  intend  to  deposit  your  pearly  eggs.  Labour
on,  mind  me  not,  I am  a true  friend  and  admirer  of  your  race.  I see  that
among  these  plants  you  have  fixed  your  tenement,  in  which  there  will
soon  be  five  eggs,  which,  although  tinged  with  green,  will  look  as  if  pure
white.  I wish  I knew  how  many  days  of  constant  heat  from  your  bodies
it  will  require  to  hatch  them.  Some  other  time  perhaps  you  may  tell  me.
Miniatures  of  yourselves  I now  see  swimming  gaily,  skipping,  springing,
gliding,  dipping,  just  like  yourselves.  So,  you  snatch  the  crawling  bug,
and  gorge  yourselves  with  leeches,  fish,  and  herbage.  How  fast  your
young  ones  grow,  changing  from  downy  to  hairy,  and  again  to  feathery
and  silky.  On  winglets  they  now  cross  the  clear  pool,  and  crawl  on  the
opposite  shore,  there  enjoying  the  warmth  of  the  bright  sunbeams.  Sep-
tember has  come ; plump  and  strong  seven  of  you  there  are ; the  even-
ing is  calm  and  beautiful ; you  spread  out  your  wings,  reach  with  some
difficulty  a proper  height,  and  swift  as  meteors  glide  through  the  air,  un-
til, meeting  with  warmer  waters,  you  alight  on  them,  and  there  remain
for  a season.


360


PIED-BILLED  DOBCHICK,


The  Pied-billed  Dobchick  may  be  met  with  in  almost  every  part  of  the
United  States,  at  one  season  or  other  : in  the  south  and  west  during  au-
tumn and  winter,  in  the  east  and  north-west  in  spring  and  summer,  mostly
on  fresh  waters  of  all  descriptions,  yet  when  these  are  covered  with  ice,
on  bays  and  estuaries,  where  it  searches  for  shrimps  and  fry,  although  un-
der other  circumstances  such  haunts  are  not  congenial  to  it.  It  is  found
in  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia,  but  I did  not  meet  with  it  in  La-
brador or  Newfoundland.

I had  the  good  fortune,  on  the  28th  of  June,  to  stumble  upon  a nest
of  this  bird  near  the  banks  of  the  Wabash  river,  above  Vincennes.  It
was  large  for  the  bird,  raised  several  inches  above  the  muddy  and  reedy
shores  of  a pond,  only  a few  feet  from  the  water,  and  composed  of  de-
cayed weeds,  rushes,  and  earth.  On  being  discovered,  the  sitting  bird
slid  over  the  mud,  along  a path  that  led  directly  to  the  water,  in  which  it
immediately  dived,  and  I saw  no  more  of  it  for  about  twenty  minutes.
The  eggs,  which  were  five,  measured  an  inch  and  a quarter,  by  seven  and  a
half-eighths,  were  smooth,  rather  rounded,  and  of  a light  greenish-white
colour.  On  breaking  one  of  them,  I found  it  to  contain  a chick  consider-
ably advanced,  which  induced  me  to  leave  the  rest  untouched,  and  before  I
departed  I saw  the  bird,  which  I believed  to  be  the  female,  swimming  low
at  a distance.  I watched  it  for  some  time,  but  could  not  discover  another,
and  walked  away  to  allow  it  to  resume  its  occupation.  The  nest  was  fi.xed
among  the  stalks  of  strong  reeds,  but  was  not  attached  to  any  of  them.
In  the  month  of  August,  while  on  the  Cayuga  lakes,  I saw  one  of  these
birds  with  a brood  of  young  about  half  grown,  but  could  not  obtain  a
single  specimen,  as  they  dived  with  extreme  quickness,  and  eluded  all
pursuit.

Few  birds  plunge  with  more  rapidity  than  this  species,  which,  during
submersion,  employs  its  wings,  as  I had  an  opportunity  of  observing  while
some  were  passing  under  a boat  when  I was  in  pursuit  of  them.  On  the
water  it  is  almost  impossible  to  catch  them,  unless  they  have  been  injured  in
the  wing,  when  they  are  unable  to  dive  without  difficulty.  The  curious
habit  which  they  have  of  sinking  gradually  backward  in  the  water,  at  the
sight  of  an  enemy,  is  very  pleasing  to  observe.  Not  a ripple  do  they
leave  on  the  spot  where  they  have  disappeared,  and  one  unacquainted
with  them  can  hardly  conceive  that  a bird  could  have  escaped  in  so  dex-
terous a manner.  My  friend  Thomas  MacCulloch  gave  me  an  account
of  one  which,  having  been  observed  on  a small  mill-dam,  was  pursued  by


PIED-BILLED  DOBCHICK.


361


the  miller’s  sons,  who,  after  chasing  it  fully  an  hour,  could  not  even  drive
it  on  shore.  Their  father,  however,  who  was  as  anxious  as  themselves  to
see  the  curious  creature,  drained  the  pond,  when  the  little  thing  Mas  seen
crawling  over  the  mud  in  a manner  not  unlike  that  of  a turtle.  It  was
now  easily  caught,  as  it  was  not  able  to  rise  on  wing,  the  species,  it  seems,
being  incapable  of  springing  from  the  ground,  and  was  afterwards  given
to  my  young  friend,  who  presented  it  beautifully  prepared  to  me.

While  I was  at  Philadelphia,  my  learned  and  staunch  friend  Dr
Richard  Harlan,  received  two  Pied-billed  Grebes  alive,  which  had  been
caught  in  a fishing-net  on  Brandywine  Creek.  We  placed  them  in  a large
tub  of  water,  Mdiere  we  could  see  all  their  subaqueous  movements.  They
swam  round  the  sides  of  the  tub  in  the  manner  of  the  Puffin,  moving
their  wings  in  accordance  with  their  feet,  and  continued  so  a much  longer
time  than  one  could  suppose  it  possible  for  them  to  remain  under  water,
coming  up  to  breathe,  and  plunging  again  with  astonishing  celerity.
When  placed  on  the  carpet,  they  ran  awkwardly  half  erect,  for  a distance
of  a few  feet,  tumbled  over,  and  scrambled  along  with  the  aid  of  their
wings.  Nothing  could  induce  them  to  eat,  and  after  a day  or  two  of  cap-
tivity, the  little  creatures  were  taken  to  the  Delaware,  and  set  at  liberty.

This  bird  retires  to  rest  on  the  floating  beds  of  rushes  met  with  in  ponds,
or  on  the  edges  of  the  shores  ; and  in  such  places  you  may  see  it  sitting  up-
right, and  dressing  its  plumage  in  the  sunshine.  They  are  extremely  un-
M'illing  to  rise  on  wing,  unless  during  their  migrations,  or  when  chasing
each  other  at  the  pairing  season,  which  commences  in  March,  when  they
manifest  a good  deal  of  pugnacity.  On  such  occasions,  the  males  fly,  dive,
and  rise  again  on  wing,  in  the  manner  of  the  Foolish  Guillemot.  While
travelling,  they  pass  rapidly  through  the  air,  at  times  at  a considerable  ele-
vation, when  the  movements  of  their  wings  produce  a sound  like  that  of  a
hawk  stooping  on  its  prey.  They  are  seldom  found  in  parties  of  more
than  six  or  seven.  The  idea  of  their  migrating  by  water  is  quite  absurd.
How  long  would  it  take  a Dobchick  to  swim  from  the  mouths  of  the  Mis-
sissippi to  the  head  waters  of  the  Ohio ; and  when  arrived  there,  after
six  or  seven  weeks  of  constant  paddling,  how  is  he  to  proceed  farther  ?
Yet  it  is  well  known  that  they  breed  farther  north,  and  are  general  on
the  southern  waters  early  in  October.

The  food  of  the  Pied-billed  Dobchick  consists  of  small  fry,  plants,  seeds,
aquatic  insects,  and  snails;  along  with  which  they  swallow  gravel.  On
opening  several  individuals,  in  different  parts  of  the  Union,  I observed  in


362


PIED-BILLED  DOBCHICK.


their  gizzards  a quantity  of  hair  and  feather-like  substance,  for  which  I
could  not  account,  but  which  I at  length  found  to  be  the  down  of  certain
plants,  such  as  thistles,  the  seeds  remaining  undigested  and  attached  to  it.
My  friend  Thomas  MacCulloch  made  the  same  observation  on  examin-
ing some  at  Pictou  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  I have  found  similar  substances  in
the  stomach  of  many  individuals  of  Podiceps  cristatus.

The  Pied-billed  Dobchicks  seem  to  form  particular  attachments  to  cer-
tain ponds  or  small  lakes,  where,  until  they  are  closed  by  ice,  you  may
always  observe  a pair  or  a family.  Opposite  Henderson  I regularly  saw
a couple  every  autumn,  and  my  friend  the  Reverend  John  Bachman  has
observed  a group  of  them  for  many  winters  in  a small  pond  a few  miles
distant  from  Charleston.  They  seem  to  have  a dislike  to  swift-running
sti'eams,  and  when  on  them  keep  to  the  eddies  along  the  shores.  The
curious  double  pectination  on  the  hind  part  of  their  tarsi,  seems  to  aid
them  greatly  while  sitting  upright  on  the  broad  leaves  of  water-lilies,  on
the  surface  of  which  I have  observed  indented  impressions  after  the  birds
had  plunged  into  the  water  from  them.  The  young  differ  in  colour  from
the  adult,  but  the  old  males  and  females  resemble  each  other,  only  the
former  are  larger.


Podiceps  carolinensis,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  785 — Ch,  Bonaparte,  Synops.

of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  418 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.

part  ii.  p.  412.

Pied-bill  Dobchick,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vql.  ii.  p.  259.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXLVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  stout,  deep,  compressed,  tapering.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  neaidy  straight  at  the  base,  curved  towards
the  end,  the  ridge  slightly  flattened  for  a short  space  at  the  base,  narrow
in  the  rest  of  its  extent,  the  sides  convex  towards  the  end,  the  edges  sharp,
inflected,  the  tip  obtuse,  a little  decurved.  Nasal  groove  broad,  and  ex-
tending beyond  the  middle  of  the  mandible ; nostrils  elliptical,  lateral,  sub-
medial,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  narrow,  the
sides  nearly  erect,  but  convex,  the  dorsal  line  very  short  and  sloping  up-
wards, the  edges  inflected,  the  tips  narrow,  the  gape-bne  nearly  straight.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed ; neck  rather  long ; body  de-
pressed. Feet  placed  far  behind,  short,  stout ; tibia  bare  for  a very  short
space  below;  tarsus  short,  much  compressed,  thin  before  and  behind,  an-


PIED-BILLED  DOBCHICK.


363


teriorly  scutellate,  on  the  sides  with  large  scutelhform  scales,  posteriorly
rough,  with  a double  row  of  very  small  scales.  Hind  toe  very  small  and
situated  high;  fourth  toe  longest,  third  a little  shorter,  second  much
shorter  ; anterior  toes  connected  by  webs,  which  beyond  the  second  joint
are  slit  and  rounded,  the  outer  edges  of  the  second  and  fourth  furnished
with  broad  lobed  membranes ; the  lobes  are  marked  with  parallel  grooves,
directed  a little  forwards.  Claws  of  fore  toes  depressed,  that  of  middle
toe  resembling  a human  nail.

Plumage  blended,  on  the  forehead  with  stiff  enlarged  shafts,  as  in  the
Rails,  on  the  back  shining  and  rather  hard,  as  well  as  on  the  lower  part
of  the  neck  anteriorly  and  laterally,  on  the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  glossy
and  hair-like.  Wings  very  small;  primary  quills  curved,  the  second
longest,  first  slightly  shorter,  third  longer  than  first;  secondary  short,
broad,  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  more  tapering.  Tail  a slight
tuft  of  loose  feathers.

Bill  pale  blue,  upper  mandible  dusky  along  the  ridge,  and  with  the
lower  having  a black  spot  beyond  the  middle.  Iris  brown.  Feet  greyish-
black.  Upper  part  of  the  head  and  the  throat  black  ; neck  and  sides  of
the  head  light  greyish-brown,  the  stiff  edges  of  the  feathers  on  the  lower
part  and  sides  of  the  neck  greyish-yellow;  back  brownish- black,  as  are
the  inner  secondaries ; the  outer  light  brown,  with  a reddish-white  spot
on  the  end  of  the  inner  web ; primaries  light  brown,  dusky  at  the  end.
The  breast  is  silvery  white,  the  abdomen  brownish-grey,  and  the  sides
mottled  with  the  same.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14  inches,  to  end  of  wings  12,  to  end  of  claws  18 ;
extent  of  wings  23:  wing  from  flexure  4j-§;  bill  along  the  ridge  ;
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1-^“*^  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  2,  its
claw  ^*5.  Weight  15  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXLVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  wants  the  black  band  on  the  bill ; but  is  in  other  respects
nearly  similar  to  the  male.  Weight  13  oz.


( 364  )


THE  TUFTED  PUFFIN.

Mormon  cirrhatus,  Temm.

PLATE  CCXLIX.  Male.

The  specimen  from  which  I drew  the  figure  of  this  singular  looking
bird,  was  procured  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kennebeck  River,  in  Maine.  It
was  shpt  by  a fisherman  gunner,  while  standing  on  some  floating  ice,  in
the  winter  of  1831-32.  No  other  individual  was  seen.  I could  not  obtain
any  information  respecting  its  habits ; but  as  the  bird  was  in  tolerable
order,  I hope  that  my  figures  of  it  will  prove  not  unacceptable.  It  was  a
male,  and  appeared  to  be  adult.  My  friend,  the  Prince  of  Musignano,
mentions  this  species  as  being  an  inhabitant  of  the  seas  between  North
America^'and  Kamtschatka,  being,  he  adds,  often  found  on  the  western
coasts  of  the  United  States  in  winter.


Alca  cikrhata,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  791.

Mormon  cirrhatus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  429.

Tufted  Mormon  or  Puffin,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  539.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXLIX.  Fig.  1,  2.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  nearly  as  high  as  long,  extremely
compressed,  at  the  base  as  high  as  the  head,  furrowed  on  the  sides.  Up-
per mandible  with  a horny  rim  along  the  basal  margin,  its  dorsal  line  con-
vex to  the  middle,  or  along  the  extent  of  a long,  narrow,  rounded  dorsal
prominence,  which  extends  from  the  base  to  the  first  groove,  afterwards
curved  in  the  fourth  of  a circle,  the  ridge  narrow,  in  its  basal  half  round-
ed, narrower  and  rather  sharp  towards  the  end,  the  sides  slightly  convex,
and  marked  with  four  curved  transverse  grooves,  between  the  nostril  and
the  tip,  the  edges  rather  blunt,  nearly  straight  until  close  to  the  decurved,
narrow,  obtuse  tip.  The  basal  rim  is  scrobiculate,  the  rest  of  the  mandi-
ble smooth.  The  nostrils  are  linear,  direct,  close  to  the  edge,  and  near
the  base.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  extremely  short  and  narrow,
the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  slightly  concave,
without  grooves,  the  ridge  narrow  but  convex,  the  tip  very  narrow,  ob-


TUFTED  PUFFIN.


365


liquely  truncate.  The  gape  extends  downwards  a little  beyond  the  base
of  the  bill,  and  is  furnished  with  a soft  corrugated  extensible  membrane.

Head  large,  oblong,  anteriorly  compressed ; eye  of  moderate  size,  with
the  edges  of  the  eyelids  bare  ; neck  short  and  thick  ; body  full  and  round-
ed. Feet  short,  rather  stout ; tibia  bare  for  a short  space  above  the  joint ;
tarsus  very  short,  anteriorly  with  a series  of  small  scutella,  the  rest  with
small  roundish  scales.  Hind  toe  wanting ; toes  of  moderate  length,  ra-
ther slender,  scutellate  above,  connected  by  reticulated  entire  membranes,
the  third  toe  longest,  the  fourth  little  shorter,  the  second  considerably
shorter,  with  a narrow  marginal  web.  Claws  strong,  of  moderate  length,
compressed,  arched,  that  of  the  inner  toe  much  curved,  of  the  middle  toe
with  a thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  close,  blended,  soft,  very  short  on  the  head,  where,  however,
along  a line  over  and  behind  the  eye,  there  is  on  each  side  a tuft  of  long,
very  slender,  acute  incurved  feathers,  of  a shining  hair-like  texture.
Wings  rather  short,  curved,  narrow,  acute ; primary  quills  narrow,  in-
curved, first  longest,  second  slightly  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ;
secondaries  very  short,  small  and  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  slightly
rounded,  of  sixteen  narrow  rounded  decurved  feathers.

Bill  light  yellowish-red,  the  basal  rim  and  the  ridge  towards  the  end
of  the  upper  mandible  bright  red,  as  is  the  edge  of  the  eyelids.  Iris  light
blue.  Feet  bright  red  ; webs  of  a deeper  tint ; claws  black.  Sides  of  the
head  white ; upper  part  brownish-black  ; the  elongated  feathers  behind
the  eye  pale  yellow.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  brownish-
black,  glossed  with  blue,  of  the  lower  deep  purplish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15  inches,  to  end  of  wings  14,  to  end  of  claws
14  ; extent  of  wings  22^  ; wing  from  flexure  ; tail  2^  ; bill  along  the
ridge  2|,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1|| ; tarsus  1/j  ; middle  toe
1^§,  its  claw  j\.


( 366  )


THE  ARCTIC  TERN.

Sterna  Arctica,  Temm.

PLATE  CCL.  Male.

Light  as  a sylph,  the  Arctic  Tern  dances  through  the  air  above  and
around  you.  The  graces,  one  might  imagine,  had  taught  it  to  perform
those  beautiful  gambols  which  you  see  it  display  the  moment  you  ap-
proach the  spot  which  it  has  chosen  for  its  nest.  Over  many  a league  of
ocean  has  it  passed,  regardless  of  the  dangers  and  difficulties  that  might
deter  a more  considerate  traveller.  Now  over  some  solitary  green  isle,
a creek  or  an  extensive  bay,  it  sweeps,  now  over  the  expanse  of  the
boundless  sea ; at  length  it  has  reached  the  distant  regions  of  the  north,
and  amidst  the  floating  icebergs  stoops  to  pick  up  a shrimp.  It  betakes
itself  to  the  borders  of  a lonely  sand-bank,  or  a low  rocky  island ; there
side  by  side  the  males  and  the  females  alight,  and  congratulate  each  other
on  the  happy  termination  of  their  long  journey.  Little  care  is  required
to  form  a cradle  for  their  progeny ; in  a short  time  the  variegated  eggs
are  deposited,  the  little  Terns  soon  burst  the  shell,  and  in  a few  days
hobble  towards  the  edge  of  the  water,  as  if  to  save  their  fond  parents
trouble  ; feathers  now  spi’out  on  their  wings,  and  gradually  invest  their
whole  body ; the  young  birds  at  length  rise  on  wing,  and  follow  their
friends  to  sea.  But  now  the  brief  summer  of  the  north  is  ended,  dark
clouds  obscure  the  sun, ‘ a snow-storm  advances  from  the  polar  lands,  and
before  it  skim  the  buoyant  Terns,  rejoicing  at  the  prospect  of  returning
to  the  southern  regions.

The  day  after  our  arrival  at  the  Magdaleine  Islands,  the  weather  was
beautiful,  although  a stiff  breeze  blew  from  the  south-west.  I landed
with  my  party  at  an  early  hour,  and  we  felt  as  if  at  a half-way  house
on  our  journey  from  Nova  Scotia  to  Labrador.  Some  of  us  ascended  the
more  elevated  parts  of  those  interesting  islands,  while  others  walked  along
the  shores.  A clean  sand-beach  lay  before  us,  and  we  proceeded  over
it,  until  having  reached  a kind  of  peninsula,  we  were  brought  to  a stand.
The  Piping  Plover  ran  and  flew  swiftly  before  us,  emitting  its  soft  and
mellow  notes,  while  some  dozens  of  Arctic  Terns  were  plunging  into
the  waters,  capturing  a tiny  fish  or  shrimp  at  every  dash.  Until  that


ARCTIC  TERN.


367


moment  this  Tern  had  not  been  familiar  to  me,  and  as  I admired  its  easy
and  graceful  motions,  I felt  agitated  with  a desire  to  possess  it.  Our
guns  were  accordingly  charged  with  mustard-seed  shot,  and  one  after
another  you  might  have  seen  the  gentle  birds  come  whirling  down  upon
the  waters.  But  previous  to  this  I had  marked  their  mode  of  flight,  their
manner  of  procuring  their  prey,  and  their  notes,  that  I might  be  able  to
finish  the  picture  from  life.  Alas,  poor  things  ! how  well  do  I remem-
ber the  pain  it  gave  me,  to  be  thus  obliged  to  pass  and  execute  sentence
upon  them.  At  that  very  moment  I thought  of  those  long-past  times,
when  individuals  of  my  own  species  were  similarly  treated  ; but  I excused
myself  with  the  plea  of  necessity,  as  I recharged  my  double  gun.  As
soon  as  a sufficient  number  of  males  and  females  lay  dead  at  our  feet,  we
retired  from  the  water’s  edge,  to  watch  the  motions  of  the  survivors,
among  whom  confusion  and  dismay  prevailed,  as  they  dashed  close  over
our  heads,  and  vociferated  their  maledictions.  We  did  not,  however,  de-
part until  we  had  tried  a curious  experiment  for  the  third  time.  A female
had  been  shot,  and  lay  dead  on  the  water  for  a considerable  while.  Her
mate,  whom  1 was  unwilling  to  destroy,  alighted  upon  her,  and  attempt-
ed to  caress  her,  as  if  she  had  been  alive.  The  same  circumstance  took
place  three  different  times,  on  our  throwing  the  dead  bird  on  the  water.
Something  of  the  same  nature  I have  related  in  my  article  on  the  Wild
Turkey.  All  this  happened  in  the  month  of  June  1833,  when  none  of
the  Arctic  Terns  had  yet  produced  eggs,  although  we  found  them  nearly
ready  to  lay,  as  were  the  Piping  Plovers.

Our  schooner  now  sailed  onward,  and  carried  us  to  the  dreary  shores
of  Labrador.  There,  after  some  search,  we  met  with  a great  flock  of
Arctic  Terns  breeding  on  a small  island  slightly  elevated  above  the  sea.
Myriads  of  these  birds  were  there  sitting  on  their  eggs.  The  individuals
were  older  than  those  which  we  had  seen  on  the  Magdeleine  Islands ; for
the  more  advanced  in  life  the  individuals  of  any  species  are,  the  more
anxious  are  they  to  reproduce,  the  sooner  do  they  proceed  to  their  summer
residence,  and  the  more  extensive  is  the  range  of  their  migration  north-
ward. On  the  other  hand,  the  younger  the  bird  is,  the  farther  south  it
removes  during  winter,  both  because  it  thus  enjoys  a milder  climate,  and
requires  less  exertion  in  procuring  its  food ; whereas  the  older  individuals
not  only  have  a stronger  constitution,  but  are  more  expert  in  discovering
and  securing  their  prey,  so  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  them  to  extend
their  journey  so  far.


368


ARCTIC  TERN.


The  Arctic  Tern  is  found  with  us  on  the  eastern  coasts  of  the  United
States  only,  where  it  appears,  from  the  shores  of  New  Jersey  northwards,
in  autumn,  and  whence  it  departs  in  early  spring.  No  sooner  have  the
Avinter  tempests  subsided,  than  it  is  observed  gliding  along  the  coast,  to-
gether with  many  other  birds.  In  the  beginning  of  March,  you  see  it
following  the  sinuosities  of  the  shores,  some  passing  directly  from  the
Sable  Islands  off  the  Bay  of  Fundy  and  Newfoundland  into  Baffin’s  Bay;
others,  younger,  and  unwilling  to  encounter  the  perils  of  a more  extended
flight,  passing  up  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  either  through  the  Straits  of
Cansso,  or  the  broader  channel  between  Cape  Breton  and  Newfound-
land, and  betaking  themselves  to  the  Magdaleine  Islands  and  the  coasts  of
Labrador.

While  at  American  Harbour  in  June  1833,  my  son  and  some  of  his
companions  met  with  a low  rocky  island,  on  which  hundreds  of  these
Terns  had  deposited  their  eggs.  No  other  species  was  seen  there ; the
birds  were  mostly  sitting,  and,  on  the  landing  of  the  party,  they  all  rose
as  if  in  the  greatest  consternation,  hovered  over  their  heads,  and  left  their
eggs  to  the  mercy  of  the  intruders  who  carried  off  a basketful  of  them,
with  a few  of  the  birds  themselves.

On  the  18th  of  the  same  month,  the  Arctic  Terns  were  found  breed-
ing on  another  island  in  considerable  numbers ; many  dozens  of  their  eggs
were  gathered,  and  delicious  food  indeed  they  proved  to  be.  The  full
number  of  their  eggs  is  three,  but  as  it  was  early  in  the  season  many  had
only  two.  Their  average  dimensions  were  an  inch  and  a quarter  in
length,  and  five-eighths  in  their  greatest  breadth ; they  were  oval,  but
rather  sharp  at  the  smaller  ends  ; their  ground-colour  a light-olive,  irre-
gularly covered  with  patches  of  dark  umber,  larger  towards  the  round
end.  They  were  deposited  on  the  rocks  wherever  there  Avas  any  grass,
but  no  nest  had  been  formed  for  their  reception.  They  differed  extreme-
ly in  their  colour,  indeed  quite  as  much  as  those  of  the  Sandwich  Tern.
As  we  approached  the  little  island,  they  all  rose  in  the  air,  and  flew  high
over  our  heads,  screaming  loudly,  which  they  continued  to  do  until  we
left  the  place.  Several  were  shot,  and  as  each  fell  the  rest  immediately
plunged  through  the  air  after  it.  Whenever  one  was  Avounded  so  slight-
ly as  to  be  able  to  make  off,  it  was  lost  to  us,  and  the  rest  followed  it.
Only  a very  feAV  of  those  Avhich  we  saAv  and  shot  had  the  bill  entirely  red,
and  those  Avhich  had  Avere  evidently  older  birds.  Some  exhibited  a con-
siderable portion  of  the  point  tinged  Avith  brownish-black,  yet  all  of  them


ARCTIC  TERN.


369


could  easily  be  distinguished  from  the  Sterna  Hirundo,  first  by  their
smaller  size,  shorter  tarsi,  more  delicate  bill , and  greater  curvature  of  the
outer  part  of  their  wings ; and  secondly,  by  the  leaden  tint  of  their  lower
parts,  from  the  neck  to  the  tail,  those  parts  in  Sterna  Hirundo  being
pure  white.  The  back  is  also  of  a deeper  blue  in  the  Arctic  Tern.
The  Ions;  tail-feathers  were  much  shorter  in  the  females  than  in  the  males,
but  M.  Temminck  is  wrong  in  saying  that  this  bird  has  the  tail  propor-
tionally longer  than  that  of  other  species,  the  Roseate  Tern  having  it  of
much  greater  length,  considering  its  diminutive  size.

At  the  beginning  of  the  first  autumn,  the  plumage  of  the  young  so  much
resembles  that  of  the  young  of  Sterna  Hirundo,  that  a person,  not  paying
attention  to  the  tarsi  and  feet,  might  readily  confound  them  together.  Yet
even  at  this  early  age,  there  are  strong  indications  of  the  bluish  tint  on  the
under  parts.  The  longest  tail-feathers  at  this  period  do  not  extend  more
than  two  inches  beyond  the  rest ; the  upper  parts  of  the  body  are  mottled
with  brown,  as  in  all  the  other  species,  and  in  Gulls.  The  mantle  of  this,  as
of  all  other  Terns,  assumes  its  permanent  hue  before  any  part  of  the  wings.
On  the  5th  of  August,  in  Labrador,  the  young  birds  were  gambolling
along  with  their  parents,  over  the  shores  of  Bras  d’Or  Harbour,  and  when
we  left  that  country  the  Terns  still  remained,  so  that  I am  unable  to
state  at  what  particular  period  they  commence  their  journey  southward.

The  notes  of  this  species  resemble  the  syllables  creek,  creek,  and  are
often  repeated  while  the  bird  is  on  wing.  During  autumn  it  follows
the  sinuosities  of  the  shores  of  the  bays  and  inlets,  ascending  against  the
ebb,  and^  returning  to  meet  the  tide,  which  enables  it  to  procure  its  food
in  succession  while  it  keeps  on  its  course.  I have  only  farther  to  mention
a curious  fact,  which  is,  that  all  the  Terns  which  breed  in  the  northern
parts  of  the  United  States,  and  in  regions  still  nearer  the  pole,  sit  closely
on  their  eggs,  while  the  small  species  that  breed  to  the  southward  incu-
bate only  during  night,  or  in  rainy  weather.


Sterna  arctica,  Temm.  Man.  d’Omith.  part  ii.  p.  742. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of

Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  354 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.

part  ii.  p.  414.

Arctic  Tern,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  275.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCL.

Bill  about  the  same  length  as  the  head,  slender,  tapering,  compressed,
nearly  straight,  very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slight-

A a


VOL.  III.


370


ARCTIC  TERN.


ly  arched,  the  ridge  rather  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrow  towards
the  end,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  acute.
Nasal  groove  extended  beyond  the  nostrils  nearly  to  the  tip  ; nostrils  ba-
sal, linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  extremely
narrow,  very  acute,  extending  beyond  the  middle,  the  dorsal  line  straight,
the  sides  erect  and  slightly  convex,  the  sharp  edges  inflected,  the  tip  ex-
tremely acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong ; neck  of  moderate  length ; body  very
slender.  Feet  very  small ; tibia  bare  for  a considerable  space ; tarsus  ex-
tremely short,  slender,  roundish,  covered  anteriorly  with  small  scutella,
laterally  and  behind  with  reticular  scales ; toes  very  small,  slender,  the
first  extremely  small,  the  third  longest,  the  fourth  nearly  as  long,  the  se-
cond much  shorter,  all  scutellate  above,  the  anterior  connected  by  reti-
culated webs  having  a concave  margin  ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,
that  of  hind  toe  smallest,  of  middle  toe  by  much  the  largest,  and  having
the  inner  edge  thin  and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  ;
the  feathers  in  general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  very  long,  narrow
and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,  slightly  curved  inwards,  the  first
longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondary  short,  broad,  incurved,
rounded,  the  inner  more  tapering.  Tail  long,  very  deeply  forked,  of
twelve  feathers,  of  which  the  outer  are  tapering,  the  middle  short  and
rounded.

Bill,  mouth,  and  feet  vermilion  tinged  with  carmine.  Iris  brown.
The  upper  part  of  the  head  and  elongated  occipital  feathers  greenish-
black  ; the  sides  of  the  head  and  chin  white ; the  upper  parts  pale  grey-
ish-blue, the  rump  lighter,  the  tail  white,  excepting  the  outer  webs  of  the
two  lateral  feathers  which  are  dusky  grey,  primaries  dusky  towards  the
ends,  the  two  outer  with  their  outer  webs  blackish,  all  with  the  greater
part  of  the  inner  web  white  ; secondaries  tipped  with  white.  Neck,  breast
and  sides  pale  greyish -blue,  like  the  upper  parts,  but  lighter ; abdomen,
under  tail-coverts,  and  lower  surfaces  of  wings  and  tail  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  13^,  to  end  of  claws
9f  ; extent  of  wings  32  ; wing  from  flexure  10^  ; tail  to  end  of  shortest
feathers  3^,  to  end  of  longest  7^  ; biU  along  the  ridge  1;^,  along  the  edge
of  lower  mandible  m ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  its  claw  f|.  Weight

^ 07..


( 371  )


A TOUGH  WALK  FOR  A YOUTH.


About  twelve  years  ago  I was  conveyed,  along  with  niy  son  Victor,
from  Bayou  Sarah  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  on  board  the  steamer  Mag-
net, commanded  by  Mr  M‘Knight,  to  whom  I here  again  offer  my  best
thanks  for  his  attentions.  The  very  sight  of  the  waters  of  that  beautiful
river  filled  me  with  joy  as  we  approached  the  little  village  of  Trinity,
where  we  were  landed  along  with  several  other  passengers,  the  water  be-
ing too  low  to  enable  the  vessel  to  proceed  to  Louisville.  No  horses  could
be  procured,  and  as  I was  anxious  to  continue  my  journey  without  delay,
I consigned  my  effects  to  the  care  of  the  tavern-keeper,  Avho  engaged  to
have  them  forwarded  by  the  first  opportunity.  My  son,  who  was  not
fourteen,  with  all  the  ardour  of  youth,  considered  himself  able  to  accom-
plish on  foot  the  long  journey  which  we  contemplated.  Two  of  the  pas-
sengers evinced  a desire  to  accompany  us,  “provided,”  said  ther tallest  and
stoutest  of  them,  “ the  lad  can  keep  up.  My  business,”  he  continued,
“ is  urgent,  and  I shall  push  for  Frankfort  pretty  fast.”  Dinner,  to
which  we  had  contributed  some  fish  from  the  river,  being  over,  my  boy
and  I took  a ramble  along  the  shores  of  Cash  Creek,  on  which  some  years
before  I had  been  detained  several  weeks  by  ice.  We  slept  at  the  tavern,
and  next  morning  prepared  for  our  journey,  and  were  joined  by  our  com-
panions, although  it  was  past  twelve  before  we  crossed  the  creek.

One  of  our  fellow-travellers,  named  Rose,  who  was  a delicate  and
gentlemanly  person,  acknowledged  that  he  was  not  a good  walker,  and
said  he  was  glad  that  my  son  was  with  us,  as  he  might  be  able  to  keep  up
with  the  lively  youth.  The  other,  a burly  personage,  at  once  pushed  for-
ward. We  walked  in  Indian  file  along  the  narrow  track  cut  through  the
canes,  passed  a wood-yard,  and  entered  the  burnt  forest,  in  which  we  met
with  so  many  logs  and  briars,  that  we  judged  it  better  to  make  for  the
river,  the  course  of  which  we  followed  over  a bed  of  pebbles,  my  son  some-
times a-head,  and  again  falling  back,  until  we  reached  America,  a village
having  a fine  situation,  but  with  a shallow  approach  to  the  shore.  Here
we  halted  at  the  best  house,  as  every  traveller  ought  to  do,  whether  pedes-
trian or  equestrian,  for  he  is  there  sure  of  being  well  treated,  and  will  not
liave  more  to  pay  than  in  an  inferior  place.  Now  we  constituted  Mr  Rose

A a 2


372


A TOUGH  WALK  FOR  A YOUTH.


purser.  We  had  walked  twelve  miles  over  rugged  paths  and  pebbly
shores,  and  soon  proceeded  along  the  edge  of  the  river.  Seven  tough
miles  ended,  we  found  a house  near  the  bank,  and  in  it  we  determined  to
pass  the  night.  The  first  person  we  met  with  was  a woman  picking  cot-
ton in  a small  field.  On  asking  her  if  we  might  stay  in  her  cabin  for  the
night,  she  answered  we  might,  and  hoped  we  could  make  a shift  with  the
fare  on  which  she  and  her  husband  lived.  While  she  went  to  the  house
to  prepare  supper,  I took  my  son  and  Mr  Rosk  to  the  water,  knowing
how  much  we  should  be  refreshed  by  a bath.  Our  fellow-traveller  re-
fused, and  stretched  himself  on  a bench  by  the  door.  The  sun  was  set-
ting ; thousands  of  robins  were  flying  southward  in  the  calm  and  clear
air ; the  Ohio  was  spread  before  us  smooth  as  a mirror,  and  into  its  wa-
ters we  leaped  with  pleasure.  In  a short  time  the  goodman  of  the  hut
called  us  to  supper,  and  in  a trice  we  were  at  his  heels.  He  was  a tall
raw-boned  fellow,  with  an  honest  bronzed  face.  After  our  frugal  meal,
we  all  four  lay  down  in  a large  bed  spread  on  the  floor,  while  the  good
people  went  up  to  a loft.

The  woodsman  having,  agreeably  to  our  instructions,  roused  us  at
day-break,  told  us  that  about  seven  miles  farther  we  should  meet  with  a
breakfast  much  better  than  the  last  supper  we  had.  He  refused  any  pe-
cuniary compensation,  but  accepted  from  me  a knife.  So  we  again  started.
My  dear  boy  appeared  very  weak  at  first,  but  soon  recovered,  and  our
stout  companion,  whom  I shall  call  S.,  evidently  shewed  symptoms  of
lassitude.  On  arriving  at  the  cabin  of  a lazy  man  blessed  with  an  indus-
trious wife  and  six  healthy  children,  all  of  whom  laboured  for  his  support,
we  were  welcomed  by  the  woman,  whose  motions  and  language  indicated
her  right  to  belong  to  a much  higher  class.  Better  breakfast  I never  ate :
the  bread  was  made  of  new  corn  ground  on  a tin-grater  by  the  beautiful
hands  of  our  blue-eyed  hostess ; the  chickens  had  been  prepared  by  one
of  her  lovely  daughters ; some  good  coffee  was  added,  and  my  son  had
fresh  milk.  The  goodwoman,  who  now  held  a babe  to  her  bosom,  seemed
pleased  to  see  how  heartily  we  all  ate ; the  children  went  to  work,  and  the
lazy  husband  went  to  tbe  door  to  smoke  a corn-cob  pipe.  A dollar  was
put  into  the  ruddy  hand  of  the  chubby  urchin,  and  we  bade  its  mother
farewell.  Again  we  trudged  along  the  beach,  but  after  a while  betook
ourselves  to  the  woods.  My  son  became  faint.  Dear  boy  ! never  can  I
forget  how  he  lay  exhausted  on  a log,  large  tears  rolling  down  his  cheeks.
I bathed  his  temples,  spoke  soothingly  to  him,  and  chancing  to  see  a fine


A TOUGH  WALK  FOR  A YOUTH.


373


turkey  cock  run  close  by,  directed  his  attention  to  it,  when,  as  if  sudden-
ly refreshed,  he  got  up  and  ran  a few  yards  towards  the  bird.  From  that
moment  he  seemed  to  acquire  new  vigour,  and  at  length  we  reached  Wil-
cox’s, where  we  stopped  for  the  night.  We  were  reluctantly  received  at
the  house,  and  had  little  attention  paid  to  us,  but  we  had  a meal  and  went
to  bed.

The  sun  rose  in  all  its  splendour,  and  the  Ohio  reflected  its  ruddy  beams.
A finer  view  of  that  river  can  scarcely  be  obtained  than  that  from  the
house  which  we  were  leaving.  Two  miles  through  intricate  woods  brought
us  to  Belgrade,  and  having  passed  Fort  Massacre,  we  halted  and  took
breakfast.  S.  gave  us  to  understand  that  the  want  of  roads  made  travel-
ling very  unpleasant ; he  was  not,  he  added,  in  the  habit  of  “ skulking
through  the  bushes  or  tramping  over  stony  bars  in  the  full  sunshine,”
but  how  else  he  had  travelled  was  not  explained.  Mr  Rose  kept  up
about  as  well  as  Victor,  and  I now  led  the  way.  Towards  sunset  we
reached  the  shores  of  the  river,  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Cumberland,
On  a hill,  the  property  of  a Major  B.,  we  found  a house,  and  a solitary
woman,  wretchedly  poor,  but  very  kind.  She  assured  us,  that  if  we
could  not  cross  the  river,  she  would  give  us  food  and  shelter  for  the  night,
but  said  that  as  the  moon  was  up,  she  could  get  us  put  over  when  her
skiff  came  back.  Hungry  and  fatigued  we  laid  us  down  on  the  brown
grass,  waiting  either  a scanty  meal,  or  the  skiff  that  was  to  convey  us
across  the  river.  I had  already  grated  the  corn  for  our  supper,  run  down
the  chickens,  and  made  a fire,  when  a cry  of  “ Boat  coming”  roused  us
all.  We  crossed  half  of  the  Ohio,  walked  over  Cumberland  Isle,  and
after  a short  ferry  found  ourselves  in  Kentucky,  the  native  land  of  my
beloved  sons.  I was  now  within  a few  miles  of  the  spot  where,  some
years  before,  I had  a horse  killed  under  me  by  lightning.

It  is  unnecessary  to  detain  you  with  a long  narrative,  and  state  every
occurrence  until  we  reached  the  banks  of  Green  River.  We  had  left
Trinity  at  12  o’clock  of  the  15th  October,  and  on  the  morning  of  the
18th  four  travellers  descending  a hill,  were  admiring  the  reflection  of  the
sun’s  rays  on  the  forest-margined  horizon.  The  frost  which  lay  thick
on  the  ground  and  the  fences,  glittered  in  the  sheen,  and  dissolved  away ;
all  nature  seemed  beautiful  in  its  calm  repose ; but  the  pleasure  which  I
felt  on  gazing  on  the  scene  was  damped  by  the  fatigue  of  my  son,  who
now  limped  like  a lamed  turkey,  although,  as  the  rest  of  the  party  were
not  much  better  oft',  he  smiled,  straightened  himself,  and  strove  to  keep


374


A TOUGH  WALK  FOR  A YOUTH.


up  with  us.  Poor  S.  was  panting  many  yards  behind,  and  was  talking
of  purchasing  a horse.  We  had  now,  however,  a tolerably  good  road,  and
in  the  evening  got  to  a house  where  I inquired  if  we  could  have  a supper
and  beds.  When  I came  out,  Victor  was  asleep  on  the  grass,  Mr  Rose
looking  at  his  sore  toes,  and  S.  just  finishing  a jug. of  monongahela.
Here  we  resolved  that,  instead  of  going  by  Henderson,  we  should  take  a
cut  across  to  the  right,  and  make  direct  for  Smith’s  Ferry,  by  way  of
Highland  Lick  Creek.

Next  day  we  trudged  along,  but  nothing  very  remarkable  occurred
excepting  that  we  saw  a fine  black  wolf  quite  tame  and  gentle,  the  owner
of  which  had  refused  a hundred  dollars  for  it.  Mr  Rose,  who  was  an
engineer,  and  a man  of  taste,  amused  us  with  his  flageolet,  and  frequent-
ly spoke  of  his  wife,  his  children,  and  his  fireside,  which  increased  my
good  opinion  of  him.  At  an  orchard  we  filled  our  pockets  with  October
peaches,  and  when  we  came  to  Trade  Water  River  we  found  it  quite  low.
The  acorns  were  already  drifted  on  its  shallows,  and  the  Wood  Ducks
were  running  about  picking  them  up.  Passing  a flat  bottom,  we  saw  a
large  Buflalo  Lick.  Where  now  are  the  bulls  which  erst  scraped  its
earth  away,  bellowing  forth  their  love  or  their  anger  ?

Good  Mr  Rose’s  feet  became  sorer  and  sorer  each  succeeding  day ;
Mr  S.  at  length  nearly  gave  up  ; my  son  had  grown  brisker.  The  20th
was  cloudy,  and  we  dreaded  rain,  as  we  knew  the  country  to  be  flat  and
clayey.  In  Union  County,  we  came  to  a large  opening,  and  found  the
house  of  a Justice,  who  led  us  kindly  to  the  main  road,  and  accompanied
us  for  a mile,  giving  us  excellent  descriptions  of  brooks,  woods  and  barrens,
notwithstanding  which  we  should  have  been  much  puzzled,  had  not  a
neighbour  on  horseback  engaged  to  shew  us  the  way.  The  rain  now  fell
in  torrents,  and  rendered  us  very  uncomfortable,  but  at  length  we  reached
Highland  Lick,  where  we  stumbled  on  a cabin,  the  door  of  which  we
thrust  open,  overturning  a chair  that  had  been  placed  behind  it.  On  a
dirty  bed  lay  a man,  a table  with  a journal  or  perhaps  a ledger  before  him,
a small  cask  in  a corner  near  him,  a brass  pistol  on  a nail  over  his  head,
and  a long  Spanish  dagger  by  his  side.  He  rose  and  asked  what  was
Avanted.  “ The  way  to  a better  place,  the  road  to  Suggs’s.”  “ Follow  the
road,  and  you’ll  get  to  his  house  in  about  five  miles  !”  My  party  were
waiting  for  me,  warming  themselves  by  the  fires  of  the  salt-kettles.  The
being  I had  seen  Avas  an  overseer.  By-and-by  Ave  crosssed  a creek ; the


A TOUGH  WALK  FOR  A YOUTH.


375


country  was  hilly,  clayey  and  slippery  ; Mr  S.  was  cursing,  Rose  limped
like  a lame  duck,  but  Victor  kept  up  like  a veteran.

Another  day,  kind  Reader,  and  I shall  for  a while  shut  my  journal.
The  morning  of  the  21st  was  beautiful;  we  had  slept  comfortably  at
Suggs’s,  and  we  soon  found  ourselves  on  pleasant  barrens,  with  an  agree-
able road.  Rose  and  S.  were  so  nearly  knocked  up,  that  they  proposed
to  us  to  go  on  without  them.  We  halted  and  talked  a few  minutes  on
the  subject,  when  our  companions  stated  their  resolution  to  proceed  at  a
slower  pace.  So  we  bade  them  adieu.  I asked  my  son  how  he  felt ; he
laughed  and  quickened  his  steps ; and  in  a short  time  our  former  asso-
ciates were  left  out  of  sight.  In  about  two  hours  we  were  seated  in  the
Green  River  ferry-boat,  with  our  legs  hanging  in  the  water.  At  Smith’s
Ferry  this  stream  looks  like  a deep  lake  ; and  the  thick  cane  on  its  banks,
the  large  overhanging  willows,  and  its  dark  green  waters,  never  fail  to
form  a fine  picture,  more  especially  in  the  calm  of  an  autumnal  evening.
Mr  Smith  gave  us  a good  supper,  sparkling  cider,  and  a comfortable  bed.
It  was  arranged  that  he  should  drive  us  to  Louisville  in  his  dearborne ;
and  so  here  ended  our  walk  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  Should  you
wish  to  accompany  us  during  the  remainder  of  our  journey,  I have  only
to  refer  you  to  the  article  “ Hospitality  in  the  Woods,”  which  you  wil
find  in  a former  volume.


( 376  )


THE  BROWN  PELICAN.

Pelecanus  fuscus,  Linn.

PLATE  ecu.  Male.

The  Brown  Pelican,  which  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  our  Ame-
rican birds,  is  a constant  resident  in  the  Floridas,  where  it  resorts  to  the
Keys  and  the  salt-water  inlets,  but  never  enters  fresh-water  streams,  as  the
White  Pelican  is  wont  to  do.  It  is  rarely  seen  farther  eastward  than
Cape  Hatteras,  but  is  found  to  the  south  far  beyond  the  limits  of  the
United  States.  Within  the  recollection  of  persons  still  living,  its  num-
bers have  been  considerably  reduced,  so  much  indeed  that  in  the  inner  Bay
of  Charleston,  where  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago  it  was  quite  abundant,
very  few  individuals  are  now  seen,  and  these  chiefly  during  a continuance
of  tempestuous  weather.  There  is  a naked  bar,  a few  miles  distant  from
the  main  land,  between  Charleston  and  the  mouth  of  the  Santee,  on  which
my  friend  John  Bachman  some  years  ago  saw  a great  number  of  these
birds,  of  which  he  procured  several ; but  at  the  present  day,  few  are
known  to  breed  farther  east  than  the  salt-water  inlets  running  parallel  to
the  coast  of  Florida,  forty  or  fifty  miles  south  of  St  Augustine,  where  I
for  the  first  time  met  with  this  Pelican  in  considerable  numbers.

My  friend  John  Bollow,  Esq.  took  me  in  his  barge  to  visit  the  Ha-
lifax, which  is  a large  inlet,  and  on  which  we  soon  reached  an  island
where  the  Brown  Pelicans  had  bred  for  a number  of  years,  but  where,  to
my  great  disappointment,  none  were  then  to  be  seen.  The  next  morning,
being  ten  or  twelve  miles  farther  down  the  stream,  we  entered  another  in-
let, where  I saw  several  dozens  of  these  birds  perched  on  the  mangroves,
and  apparently  sound  asleep.  I shot  at  them  from  a very  short  distance,
and  with  my  first  barrel  brought  two  to  the  water,  but  although  many  of
them  still  remained  looking  at  us,  I could  not  send  the  contents  of  my
second  barrel  to  them,  as  the  shot  had  unluckily  been  introduced  into  it
before  the  powder.  They  all  flew  off*  one  after  another,  and  still  worse,
as  the  servants  approached  those  which  had  fallen  upon  the  water,  they
also  flew  away.

On  arriving  at  the  Keys  of  Florida,  on  board  the  Marion  Revenue
Cutter,  I found  the  Pelicans  pretty  numerous.  They  became  more  abun-


BROWN  PELICAN.


377


dant  the  farther  south  vve  proceeded,  and  I procured  specimens  at  diffe-
rent places,  but  nowhere  so  many  as  at  Key  West.  There  you  would
see  them  flying  within  pistol-shot  of  the  wharfs,  the  boys  frequently  try-
ing to  knock  them  down  with  stones,  although  I believe  they  rarely  suc-
ceed in  their  efforts.  The  Marion  lay  at  anchor  several  days  at  a short
distance  from  this  island,  and  close  to  another.  Scarcely  an  hour  of
daylight  passed  without  our  having  Pelicans  around  us,  all  engaged  at
their  ordinary  occupations,  some  fishing,  some  slumbering  as  it  were  on
the  bosom  of  the  ocean,  or  on  the  branches  of  the  mangroves.  This
place  and  all  around  for  about  forty  miles,  seemed  to  be  favourite  resorts
of  these  birds ; and  as  I had  excellent  opportunities  of  observing  their
habits,  I consider  myself  qualified  to  present  you  with  some  account  of
them.

The  flight  of  the  Brown  Pelican,  though  to  appearance  heavy,  is  re-
markably well  sustained,  that  bird  being  able  not  only  to  remain  many
hours  at  a time  on  wing,  but  also  to  mount  to  a great  height  in  the  air  to
perform  its  beautiful  evolutions.  Their  ordinary  manner  of  proceeding,
either  when  single  or  in  flocks,  is  by  easy  flappings  and  sailings  alternat-
ing at  distances  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  yards,  when  they  glide  along
with  great  speed.  They  move  in  an  undulated  line,  passing  at  one  time
high,  at  another  low,  over  the  water  or  land,  for  they  do  not  deviate  from
their  course  on  coming  upon  a key  or  a point  of  land.  When  the  waves
run  high,  you  may  see  them  “ troughing,”  as  the  sailors  say,  or  directing
their  course  along  the  hollows.  While  on  wing  they  draw  in  their  head
between  their  shoulders,  stretch  out  their  broad  webbed  feet  to  their  whole
extent,  and  proceed  in  perfect  silence.

When  the  weather  is  calm,  and  a flood  of  light  and  heat  is  poured
down  upon  nature  by  the  genial  sun,  they  are  often,  especially  during
the  love  season,  seen  rising  in  broad  circles,  flock  after  flock,  until  they
attain  a height  of  perhaps  a mile,  when  they  gracefully  glide  on  con-
stantly expanded  wings,  and  course  round  each  other,  for  an  hour  or
more  at  a time,  after  which,  in  curious  zigzags,  and  with  remarkable  ve-
locity, they  descend  towards  their  beloved  element,  and  settle  on  the
water,  on  large  sand-bars  or  on  mangroves.  It  is  interesting  beyond  de-
scription to  observe  flocks  of  Brown  Pelicans  thus  going  through  their
aerial  evolutions.

Now,  Reader,  look  at  those  birds  standing  on  their  strong  column-like
legs,  on  that  burning  sand-bar.  How  dexterously  do  they  wield  that


BROWN  PELICAN.


5 78

great  bill  of  theirs,  as  they  trim  their  plumage  ! Now  along  each  broad
quill  it  passes,  drawing  it  out  and  displaying  its  elasticity ; and  now  with
necks  stretched  to  their  full  length,  and  heads  elevated,  they  direct  its
point  in  search  of  the  insects  that  are  concealed  along  their  necks  and
breasts.  Now  they  droop  their  wings  for  a while,  or  stretch  them  alter-
nately to  their  full  extent ; some  slowly  lie  down  on  the  sand,  others
remain  standing,  quietly  draw  their  head  over  their  broad  shoulders,
raise  one  of  their  feet,  and  placing  their  bill  on  their  back,  compose  them-
selves to  rest.  There  let  them  repose  in  peace.  Had  they  alighted  on
the  M'aters,  you  might  have  seen  them,  like  a fleet  at  anchor,  riding  on
the  ever-rolling  billows  as  unconcernedly  as  if  on  shore.  Had  they
perched  on  yon  mangroves,  they  would  have  laid  themselves  flat  on  the
branches,  or  spread  their  wings  to  the  sun  or  the  breeze,  as  Vultures  are
wont  to  do.

But  see,  the  tide  is  advancing  ; the  billows  chase  each  other  towards
the  shores ; the  mullets  joyful  and  keen  leap  along  the  surface,  as  they
fill  the  bays  with  their  multitudes.  The  slumbers  of  the  Pelicans  are
over ; the  drowsy  birds  shake  their  heads,  stretch  open  their  mandibles
and  pouch  by  way  of  yawning,  expand  their  ample  wings,  and  simvdta-
neously  soar  away.  Look  at  them  as  they  fly  over  the  bay ; listen  to  the
sound  of  the  splash  they  make  as  they  drive  their  open  bills,  like  a pock-
net,  into  the  sea,  to  scoop  up  their  prey  ; mark  how  they  follow  that
shoal  of  porpoises,  and  snatch  up  the  frightened  fishes  that  strive  to  escape
from  them.  Down  they  go,  again  and  again.  What  voracious  creatures
they  are  !

The  Brown  Pelicans  are  as  well  aware  of  the  time  of  each  return  of
the  tide,  as  the  most  watchful  pilots.  Though  but  a short  time  before
they  have  been  sound  asleep,  yet  without  bell  or  other  warning,  they
suddenly  open  their  eyelids,  and  all  leave  their  roosts,  the  instant  when
the  waters,  which  have  themselves  reposed  for  a while,  resume  their  mo-
tion. The  Pelicans  possess  a knowledge  beyond  this,  and  in  a degree
much  surpassing  that  of  man  with  reference  to  the  same  subject : they
can  judge  with  certainty  of  the  changes  of  weather.  Should  you  see
them  fishing  all  together,  in  retired  bays,  be  assured,  that  a storm  will
burst  forth  that  day  ; but  if  they  pursue  their  finny  prey  far  out  at  sea,
the  weather  will  be  fine,  and  you  also  may  launch  your  bark  and  go  to
the  fishing.  Indeed,  most  sea-birds  possess  the  same  kind  of  knowledge,
as  I have  assured  myself  by  repeated  observation,  in  a degree  correspond-


BROWN  PELICAN.


379


ing  to  their  necessities  ; and  the  best  of  all  prognosticators  of  the  weather,
are  the  Wild  Goose,  the  Gannet,  the  Lestris,  and  the  Pelican.

This  species  procures  its  food  on  wing,  and  in  a manner  quite  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  White  Pelican.  A flock  will  leave  their  resting
place,  proceed  over  the  waters  in  search  of  fish,  and  when  a shoal  is  per-
ceived, separate  at  once,  when  each,  from  an  elevation  of  from  fifteen  to
twenty-five  feet,  plunges  in  an  oblique  and  somewhat  winding  direction,
spreading  to  the  full  stretch  its  lower  mandible  and  pouch,  as  it  reaches
the  water,  and  suddenly  scoops  up  the  object  of  its  pursuit,  immersing
the  head  and  neck,  and^  sometimes  the  body,  for  an  instant.  It  im-
mediately swaUow's  its  prey,  rises  on  wing,  dashes  on  another  fish,  seizes
and  devours  it,  and  thus  continues,  sometimes  plunging  eight  or  ten
times  in  a few  minutes,  and  always  with  unerring  aim.  When  gorged,  ,
it  rests  on  the  water  for  a while,  but  if  it  has  a brood,  or  a mate  sit-
ting on  her  eggs,  it  flies  off  at  once  towards  them,  no  matter  how  heavily
laden  it  may  be.  The  generally  received  idea  that  Pelicans  keep  fish  or
water  in  their  pouch,  to  convey  them  to  their  young,  is  quite  erroneous.
The  water  which  enters  the  pouch  when  it  is  immersed,  is  immediately
forced  out  between  the  partially  closed  mandibles,  and  the  fish,  unless
larger  than  those  on  which  they  usually  feed,  is  instantly  swallowed,  to
be  afterwards  disgorged  for  the  benefit  of  the  young,  either  partially
macerated,  or  whole,  according  to  the  age  and  size  of  the  latter.  Of
all  this  I have  satisfied  myself,  when  within  less  than  twenty  yards  of
the  birds  as  they  were  fishing ; and  I never  saw  them  fly  without  the
pouch  being  closely  contracted  towards  the  lower  mandible.  Indeed,  al-
though I now  much  regret  that  I did  not  make  the  experiment  when  I
had  the  means  of  doing  so,  I doubt  very  much  if  a Pelican  could  fly  at
all  with  its  burden  so  much  out  of  trim,  as  a sailor  would  say.

They  at  times  follow  the  porpoise,  when  that  animal  is  in  pursuit  of
prey,  and  as  the  fishes  rise  from  the  deep  water  towards  the  surface,  come
in  cunningly  for  their  share,  falling  upon  the  frightened  shoal,  and  seizing
one  or  more,  which  they  instantly  gobble  up.  But  one  of  the  most  curi-
ous traits  of  the  Pelican  is,  that  it  acts  unwittingly  as  a sort  of  purveyor
to  the  Gulls  just  as  the  Porpoise  acts  towards  itself.  The  Black-headed
Gull  of  Wilson,  which  is  abundant  along  the  coast  of  the  Floridas  in
spring  and  summer,  watches  the  motions  of  the  Pelicans.  The  latter
having  plunged  after  a shoal  of  small  fishes,  of  which  it  has  caught  a
number  at  a time,  in  letting  off  the  water  from  amongst  them,  some-


380


BROWN  PELICAN.


times  allows  a few  to  escape ; but  the  Gull  at  that  instant  alights  on  the  bill
of  the  Pelican,  or  on  its  head,  and  seizes  the  fry  at  the  moment  they  were
perhaps  congratulating  themselves  on  their  escape.  This  every  body
on  board  the  Marion  observed  as  well  as  myself,  while  that  vessel  was
at  anchor  in  the  beautiful  harbour  of  Key  West,  so  that  it  is  not  again
necessary  for  me  to  lay  before  you  a certificate  with  numerous  signa-
tures. To  me  such  sights  were  always  highly  interesting,  and  I doubt
if  in  the  course  of  my  endeavours  to  amuse  you,  I ever  felt  greater  plea-
sure than  I do  at  this  moment,  when,  with  my  journal  at  my  side,  and
the  Gulls  and  Pelicans  in  my  mind’s  eye  as  distinctly  as  I could  wish,  I
ponder  on  the  faculties  which  Nature  has  bestowed  on  animals  which  we
merely  consider  as  possessed  of  instinct.  How  little  do  we  yet  know  of
the  operations  of  the  Divine  Power  ! On  the  occasions  just  mentioned,
the  Pelicans  did  not  manifest  the  least  anger  towards  the  Gulls.  It  is
said  that  the  Frigate  Pelican  or  Man-of-war  Bird,  forces  the  Brown  Pe-
lican to  disgorge  its  food,  but  of  this  I never  saw  an  instance ; nor  do  I
believe  it  to  be  the  case,  considering  the  great  strength  and  powerful  bill
of  the  Pelican  compared  with  those  of  the  other  bird.  Indeed,  if  I bad
been  told  that  when  the  Frigate  Bird  assails  the  Pelican,  the  latter  opens
its  large  pouch  and  swallows  it  entire,  I might  as  soon  have  believed  the
one  stoiy  as  the  other.  But  of  this  moi-e  anon,  when  we  come  to  the
habits  of  the  bird  in  question.

On  the  ground  this  species  is  by  no  means  so  active,  for  it  walks
heavily,  and  when  running,  which  it  now  and  then  does  while  in  play,  or
during  courtship,  it  looks  extremely  awkward,  as  it  then  stretches  out  its
neck,  partially  extends  its  wings,  and  reels  so  that  one  might  imagine  it
ready  to  fall  at  each  step.  If  approached  when  wounded  and  on  the
water,  it  swims  otf  with  speed,  and  when  overtaken,  it  suddenly  turns
about,  opens  its  large  bill,  snaps  it  violently  several  times  in  succession,
causing  it  to  emit  a smart  noise  in  the  manner  of  owls,  strikes  at  you,  and
bites  very  severely.  While  I was  at  Mr  Bullow’s,  his  Negro  hunter  waded
after  one  whose  wing  had  been  broken.  The  Pelican  could  not  be  seized
without  danger,  and  I was  surprised  to  see  the  hunter  draw  his  butcher’s
knife,  strike  the  long  blade  through  the  open  pouch  of  the  bird,  hook  it,
as  it  were,  by  the  lower  mandible,  and  at  one  jerk  swing  it  up  into  the  air
with  extreme  dexterity,  after  which  he  broke  its  neck  and  dragged  it  a-
shore.

The  pouch  measures  from  six  to  ten  inches  in  depth,  according  to  the


BROWN  PELICAN.


381


age  of  the  bird  after  the  first  moult.  The  superb  male  whose  portrait  is
before  you,  and  which  was  selected  from  among  a great  number,  had  it
about  the  last  mentioned  size,  and  capable  of  holding  a gallon  of  water,
were  the  mandibles  kept  horizontal.  This  membrane  is  dried  and  used
for  keeping  snuff,  gunpowder  and  shot.  When  fresh  it  may  be  extended
so  as  to  become  quite  thin  and  transparent,  like  a bladder.

This  Pelican  seldom  seizes  fish  that  are  longer  than  its  bill,  and  the
size  of  those  on  which  it  ordinarily  feeds  is  much  smaller.  Indeed,  seve-
ral which  I examined,  had  in  the  stomach  upwards  of  a hundred  fishes,
which  were  only  from  two  to  three  inches  in  length.  That  organ  is  long,
slender,  and  rather  fleshy.  In  some  I found  a great  number  of  live  blue-
coloured  worms,  measuring  two  and  a half  inches  in  length,  and  about
the  thickness  of  a crow-quill.  The  gut  is  about  the  size  of  a swan’s  quill,
and  from  ten  to  twelve  feet  in  length,  according  to  the  age  of  the  indi-
vidual.

At  all  periods  the  Brown  Pelican  keeps  in  flocks,  seldom  amounting
to  more  than  fifty  or  sixty  individuals  of  both  sexes,  and  of  different
ages.  At  the  approach  of  the  pairing  time,  or  about  the  middle  of  April,
the  old  males  and  females  separate  from  the  rest,  and  remove  to  the
inner  keys  or  to  large  estuaries,  well  furnished  with  mangroves  of  goodly
size.  The  young  birds,  which  are  much  more  numerous,  remain  along
the  .shores  of  the  open  sea,  unless  during  heavy  gales.

Now  let  us  watch  the  full  grown  birds.  Some  skirmishes  have  taken
place,  and  the  stronger  males,  by  dint  of  loud  snappings  of  their  bill,
some  hard  tugs  of  the  neck  and  head,  and  some  heavy  beats  with  their
wings,  have  driven  away  the  weaker,  which  content  themselves  with  less
prized  belles.  The  females,  although  quiet  and  gentle  on  ordinary  oc-
casions, are  more  courageous  than  the  males,  who,  however,  are  assiduous
in  their  attentions,  assist  in  forming  the  nest,  feed  their  mates  while  sit-
ting, and  even  share  the  labour  of  incubation  with  them.  Now  see  the
mated  birds,  like  the  citizens  of  a newly  laid  out  town  in  some  part  of
our  western  country,  breaking  the  dry  sticks  from  the  trees,  and  convey-
ing them  in  their  bills  to  yon  mangrove  isle.  You  see  they  place  all  their
mansions  on  the  south-west  side,  as  if  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  all  the  heat
of  that  sultry  climate.  Myriads  of  mosquitoes  buzz  around  them,  and
alight  on  the  naked  parts  of  their  body,  but  this  seems  to  give  them  no
concern.  Stick  after  stick  is  laid,  one  crossing  another,  until  a strong
platform  is  constructed.  Now  roots  and  withered  plants  are  brought,


382


BROWN  PELICAN.


with  which  a basin  is  formed  for  the  eggs.  Not  a nest,  you  observe,  is
placed  very  low ; the  birds  prefer  the  tops  of  the  mangroves,  although
they  do  not  care  how  many  nests  are  on  one  tree,  or  how  near  the  trees
are  to  each  other.  The  eggs,  of  which  there  are  never  more  than  three,
are  rather  elliptical,  and  average  three  inches  and  one-eighth  in  length,
by  two  inches  and  one-eighth  in  their  greatest  breadth.  The  shell  is  thick
and  rather  rough,  of  a pure  white  colour,  with  a few  faint  streaks  of  a
rosy  tint,  and  blotches  of  a very  pale  hue,  from  the  centre  towards  the
crown  of  the  egg.

The  young  are  at  first  covered  with  cream-coloured  down,  and  have
the  bill  and  feet  disproportionately  large.  They  are  fed  with  great  care,
and  so  abundantly,  that  the  refuse  of  their  food,  putrid  and  disgusting,
lies  in  great  quantities  round  them ; but  neither  young  nor  old  regard
this,  however  offensive  it  may  be  to  you.  As  the  former  grow  the  latter
bring  larger  fish  to  them.  At  first  the  food  is  dropped  in  a well  mace-
rated state  into  their  extended  throats ; afterwards  the  fish  is  given  to  them
entire ; and  finally  the  parent  birds  merely  place  it  on  the  edge  of  the
nest.  The  young  increase  in  size  at  a surprising  rate.  When  half  fledged
they  seem  a mere  mass  of  fat,  their  partially  indurated  bill  has  acquired
considerable  length,  their  wings  droop  by  their  sides,  and  they  would  be
utterly  unable  to  walk.  The  Vultures  at  this  period  often  fall  upon  them
and  devour  them  in  the  absence  of  their  parents.  The  Indians  also  carry
them  off  in  considerable  numbers  ; and  farther  eastward,  on  the  Halifax
river,  for  instance,  the  Negroes  kill  all  they  can  find,  to  make  gombo
soup  of  them  during  winter.  The  crows,  less  powerful,  but  quite  as  cun-
ning, suck  the  eggs ; and  many  a young  one  which  has  accidentally  fallen
from  the  nest,  is  sure  to  be  picked  up  by  some  quadruped,  or  devoured
by  the  Shark  or  Balacuda.  When  extensive  depredations  have  thus
been  made,  the  birds  abandon  their  breeding  places,  and  do  not  return
to  them.  The  Pelicans  in  fact  are,  year  after  year,  retiring  from  the
vicinity  of  man,  and  although  they  afford  but  very  unsavoury  food  at
any  period  of  their  lives,  will  yet  be  hunted  beyond  the  range  of  civiliza-
tion, just  as  our  best  of  all  game,  the  Wild  Turkey,  is  now,  until  to
meet  with  them  the  student  of  nature  will  have  to  sail  round  Terra  del
Fuego,  while  he  may  be  obliged  to  travel  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  before
he  find  the  other  bird.  Should  you  approach  a settlement  of  the  Pelicans
and  fire  a few  shots  at  them,  they  all  abandon  the  place,  and  leave  their
eggs  or  young  entirely  at  your  disposal.


BROWN  PELICAN.


383


At  all  seasons,  the  Negroes  of  the  plantations  on  the  eastern  coast  of
the  Floridas  lie  in  wait  for  the  Pelicans.  There,  observe  that  fellow,
who,  with  rusty  musket,  containing  a tremendous  charge  of  heavy  shot,
is  concealed  among  the  palmettoes,  on  the  brink  of  a kind  of  embank-
ment formed  by  the  shelly  sand.  Now  comes  a flock  of  Pelicans,  forcing
their  way  against  the  breeze,  unaware  of  the  danger  into  which  they  rush,
for  there,  a few  yards  apart,  several  Negroes  crouch  in  readiness  to  fire ;
and  let  me  tell  you,  good  shots  they  are.  Now  a blast  forces  the  birds
along  the  shore ; off  goes  the  first  gun,  and  down  comes  a Pelican  ; shot
succeeds  shot ; and  now  the  Negroes  run  up  to  gather  the  spoil.  They
skin  the  birds  like  so  many  racoons,  cut  off  the  head,  wings  and  feet ;
and  should  you  come  this  way  next  year,  you  may  find  these  remains
bleached  in  the  sun.  Towards  night,  the  sable  hunters  carry  off  their
booty,  marching  along  in  Indian  file,  and  filling  the  air  with  their  ex-
temporaneous songs.  At  home  they  perhaps  salt,  or  perhaps  smoke  them ;
but  in  whatever  way  the  Pelicans  are  prepared,  they  are  esteemed  good
food  by  the  sons  of  Africa.

The  Brown  Pelican  is  a strong  and  tough  bird,  although  not  so  weighty
as  the  white  species.  Its  flesh  is,  in  my  opinion,  always  impure.  It  seems
never  satisfied  with  food,  and  it  mutes  so  profusely,  that  not  a spot  of  ver-
dure can  be  seen  on  the  originally  glossy  and  deep-coloured  mangroves  on
which  it  nestles ; and  I must  say  that,  much  as  I admire  it  in  some  re-
spects, I should  be  sorry  to  keep  it  near  me  as  a pet.

During  winter,  when  the  mullets,  a favourite  fish  with  the  Brown
Pelican,  as  it  is  with  me,  retires  into  deeper  water,  these  birds  advance
farther  to  seaward,  and  may  be  seen  over  all  parts  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
and  between  the  Florida  B,eefs  and  the  opposite  isles,  especially  during
fine  weather.  They  are  very  sensible  to  cold,  and  in  this  respect  are  ten-
der birds.  Now  and  then,  at  this  season,  they  are  seen  on  Lake  Borgne
and  over  Lake  Pontchar train,  but  never  on  the  Mississippi  beyond  the
rise  of  the  tides,  the  space  higher  up  being  abandoned  to  the  White  Peli-
can. The  keenness  of  their  sight  is  probably  equal  to  that  of  any  hawk,
and  their  hearing  is  also  very  acute.  They  are  extremely  silent  birds,
but  when  excited  they  utter  a loud  and  rough  grunt,  which  is  far  from
musical.  The  young  take  two  years  to  attain  maturity.  Several  persons
in  the  Floridas  assured  me  that  the  Brown  Pelicans  breed  at  all  seasons
of  the  year ; but  as  I observed  nothing  to  countenance  such  an  idea,  I
would  give  it  as  my  opinion  that  they  raise  only  one  brood  in  the  season.


384


BROWN  PELICAN.


Their  bodies  are  greatly  inflated  by  large  air-cells  ; their  bones,
though  strong,  are  very  light;  and  they  are  tough  to  kill.


Pelecanus  fusces,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  215. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  883.

— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  401.

Brown  Pelican,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  476.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLI.

Bill  more  than  twice  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  stout,  straight,  de-
pressed towards  the  end.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight
as  far  as  the  unguis,  the  ridge  broad  and  convex,  separated  from  the  side
by  a groove  on  each  side,  broader  and  more  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed
and  flattened  towards  the  unguis,  which  is  curved,  stout,  convex  above,
sharp-edged,  acute ; sides  of  the  bill  perpendicular  at  the  base,  narrowed
towards  the  middle,  widened  and  approaching  to  horizontal  towards  the
end ; edges  sharp,  with  a broad  furrowed  groove  beneath  for  the  recep-
tion of  those  of  the  lower  mandible.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  ex-
tending to  less  than  half  an  inch  from  the  tip,  and  filled  by  a bare  mem-
brane, the  sides  nearly  erect  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp,  the  tip  com-
pressed, deflected,  obtuse.  The  membrane  of  the  lower  mandible  extends
down  the  fore  neck  in  the  form  of  a wrinkled  pouch.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong  ; neck  long,  stout ; body  rather  slender.
Feet  short,  stout,  nearly  central ; tibia  bare  at  its  lower  part,  covered  all
round  with  small  scales ; tarsus  short,  stout,  compressed,  covered  all
round  with  hexagonal  scales,  of  which  the  anterior  are  much  larger  ; toes
in  the  same  plane,  all  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  the  first  shortest,
the  third  and  fourth  nearly  equal,  reticulate  at  the  base,  scutellate  along
the  rest  of  the  upper  surface,  claws  short,  strong,  curved,  rather  acute,
that  of  hind  toe  with  a sharp  pectinate  inner  edge.

Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  exceedingly  small  and  slender,  of  the
fore  part  of  the  head  stiff’,  hair-like  and  glossy  ; of  the  upper  middle  part
of  the  neck  behind  a little  larger  and  soft,  forming  a slight  longitudinal
crest  ; of  the  sides  and  hind  part  of  the  neck  soft  and  downy.  The
feathers  of  the  upper  parts  in  general  are  remarkably  small,  narrow,
tapering  to  a point ; of  the  lower  part  of  the  neck  stiff  and  pointed,  of
the  breast  and  sides  somewhat  larger  than  those  above,  and  softer.  Wings
long,  rounded ; primaries  much  curved,  with  strong  square  shafts ; the
second  longest,  the  third  very  little  shorter,  the  first  a little  longer  than


BROWN  PELICAN.


385


the  fifth,  secondaries  very  numerous,  rather  small,  rounded,  the  inner
longer  and  more  tapering.  Tail  short,  slightly  rounded,  of  twenty-two
feathers.

Bill  greyish-white,  tinged  with  brown,  and  marked  with  irregular
spots  of  pale  carmine ; upper  mandible  dusky  towards  the  end,  lower
blackish  from  the  middle  to  near  the  end.  Bare  space  between  the  bill
and  the  eye  deep  blue ; eyelids  pink  ; iris  white.  Feet  black.  The
gular  pouch  is  greenish -black,  the  ridges  of  its  wrinkles  lighter.  The
hairlike  feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  light  yellow,  the  rest  of
the  head  white  ; a stripe  of  the  same  margining  the  pouch  to  the  middle
of  the  neck,  and  extending  a little  beyond,  a short  space  between  these
two  lines  anteriorly,  and  the  whole  of  the  posterior  and  lateral  parts  of
the  neck  of  a dark  chestnut  brown,  the  small  crest  paler.  The  back
and  wings  are  dusky,  each  feather  with  the  central  part  greyish-white ;
the  latter  colour  prevails  on  the  scapulars  and  larger  wing-coverts.  Pri-
maries and  their  coverts  brownish-black,  secondaries  greyish-brown,  their
outer  edges  greyish- white ; tail  light  grey  ; the  shafts  of  the  quills  and
tail-feathers  are  white  in  their  basal  half,  black  towards  the  end.  The
lower  parts  are  brownish-grey  ; the  sides  of  the  neck  and  body  with  nar-
row longitudinal  white  lines.  On  the  fore  neck,  below  the  dark  chest-
nut spot  is  a smaller  pale  yellow  mark,  behind  which  the  feathers  for  a
short  space  are  blackish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  52  inches,  to  end  of  wings  52,  to  end  of  claws
SBj ; extent  of  wings  80  ; bill  along  the  ridge  13|^,  along  the  edge  of  lower
mandible  14;^  ; depth  of  gular  pouch  10,  its  extent  along  the  neck  13  ;
wing  from  flexure  24;  tail  7;  tarsus  2^;  middle  toe  SjJ,  its  claw
Weight  6 lb.  4|  oz.

The  Female,  which  is  considerably  larger,  resembles  the  male  in
colour,  only  that  the  neck  is  yellowish- white  in  its  whole  extent,  without
any  brown,  and  its  feathers  are  stiff  and  not  downy  as  in  the  male.  Weight
7 lb.  12  oz.


B b


vot..  nr.


38G


BROWN  PELICAN.


The  Mangrove.


Rhizophora  Mangle,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  ii.  p.  325.

The  species  of  Mangrove  represented  in  the  plate  is  very  abundant
along  the  coast  of  Florida  and  on  almost  all  the  Keys,  excepting  the  Tor-
tugas.  Those  islands  which  are  named  Wet  Keys  are  entirely  formed
of  Mangroves,  which  raising  their  crooked  and  slender  stems  from  a bed
of  mud,  continue  to  increase  until  their  roots  and  pendent  branches  afford
shelter  to  the  accumulating  debris,  when  the  earth  is  gradually  raised
above  the  surface  of  the  water.  No  sooner  has  this  taken  place  than  the
Mangroves  in  the  central  part  of  the  island  begin  to  decay,  and  in  the
course  of  time  there  is  only  an  outer  fringe  or  fence  of  trees,  while  the  in-
terior becomes  overgrown  with  grass  and  low  bushes.  “ Meantime  the
Mangroves  extend  towards  the  sea,  their  hanging  branches  taking  root
wherever  they  come  in  contact  with  the  bottom,  and  their  seeds  also
springing  up.  I am  at  a loss  for  an  object  with  which  to  compare  these
trees,  in  order  to  afford  you  an  idea  of  them ; yet  if  you  will  figure  to
yourself  a tree  reversed,  and  standing  on  its  summit,  you  may  obtain  a
tolerable  notion  of  their  figure  and  mode  of  growth.  The  stem,  roots
and  branches  are  very  tough  and  stubborn,  'and  in  some  places  the  trees
are  so  intertwined  that  a person  might  find  it  as  easy  to  crawl  over  them
as  to  make  his  way  between  them.  They  are  evergreen,  and  their  tops
afford  a place  of  resort  to  various  species  of  birds  at  all  seasons,  while
their  roots  and  submersed  branches  give  shelter  to  numberless  testaceous
mollusca  and  small  fishes.  The  species  represented  is  rarely  observed  on
the  coast  of  Florida  of  a greater  height  than  twenty-five  or  thirty  feet,
and  its  average  height  is  not  above  fifteen  feet.  The  Land  Mangrove,  of
which  I have  seen  only  a few,  the  finest  of  which  were  on  Key  West,  is
a tall  tree,  much  larger  and  better  shaped  than  the  other,  with  narrower
leaves  and  shorter  fruits.


( :387  )


THE  FLORIDA  CORMORANT.

Phalacrocorax  floridanus.

PLATE  CCLII.  Male.

Few  birds  inhabiting  the  United  States  are  so  little  known,  or  have
been  so  incorrectly  described,  as  the  Cormorants.  Nay  even  some  of  the
European  species  of  this  genus  are  yet  not  well  understood,  so  imperfectly
have  they  been  studied  by  writers  who,  although  they  have  defined  their
forms,  have  not  sufficiently  studied  them  in  the  places  to  which  they  re-
sort during  the  breeding  season.  Of  the  three  species  of  which  I shall
speak  in  this  volume,  only  one  has  been  accurately  described.  I allude
to  the  Double-crested  Cormorant,  P.  dilophus,  which  was  met  with  by  the
intrepid  Dr  Richardson  in  the  course  of  his  Arctic  journeys,  and  intro-
duced to  the  scientific  world  in  the  Fauna  Boreali-Americana,  but  with-
out a figure,  a circumstance  to  be  regretted,  as  good  representations  of
birds  are  fully  as  necessary  as  good  descriptions.  When  the  student  has
perused  both,  he  cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  species  in  whatever  part  of
the  world  he  may  afterwards  meet  with  it.

Our  Cormorants  are  by  no  means  great  travellers,  although  they  all
migrate  more  or  less  at  particular  seasons.  The  three  species  to  which
only  I shall  at  present  allude,  are  each  restricted  to  a comparatively  small
portion  of  North  America.  The  Large  Cormorant,  p.  Carbo,  rarely  goes
farther  north  than  the  southern  coast  of  Labrador,  and  is  seldom  seen  as
far  south  as  the  Bay  of  New  York.  The  Double-crested,  P.  dilophus,
which  is  next  in  size,  proceeds  farther  in  both  directions,  having  been  met
with  by  Dr  Richardson,  although  my  amiable  friend  Captain  James
Clark  Ross,  R.  N.  does  not  mention  having  seen  any  birds  of  this
family  in  the  course  of  his  voyages  in  the  arctic  seas.  It  breeds  in  great
numbers  in  Labrador,  and  during  winter  proceeds  along  our  eastern  coasts
sometimes  as  far  as  Charleston  in  South  Carolina.  The  Florida  Cormo-
rant, P.  floridanus,  is  a constant  resident  in  the  southern  parts  of  the
country  from  which  it  derives  its  name,  and  is  more  especially  abundant
there  in  early  spring  and  summer,  breeding  on  the  keys  and  along  the
salt-water  inlets  of  the  southern  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  from  which
considerable  numbers  are  now  known  to  visit  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi

B b 2


388


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


and  even  of  the  Ohio,  while  others  proceed  as  far  eastward  as  Cape  Hat-
teras,  all  returning  to  the  Floridas  on  the  approach  of  cold  weather.

The  Florida  Cormorant  seldom  goes  far  out  to  sea,  but  prefers  the
neighbourhood  of  the  shores,  being  found  in  the  bays,  inlets,  and  large
rivers.  I never  met  with  one  at  a greater  distance  from  land  than  five
miles.  It  is  at  all  seasons  gregarious,  although  it  is  not  always  found  in
large  flocks.  The  birds  of  ihis  species  never  suffer  others  of  the  same
genus  to  resort  to  their  breeding  places,  although  they  sometimes  as-
sociate with  individuals  belonging  to  different  genera.  The  P.  Carbo
appropriates  to  itself  the  upper  shelves  of  the  most  rugged  and  elevated
rocks,  whose  bases  are  washed  by  the  sea ; P.  diloplius  breeds  on  flat
rocky  islands  at  some  distance  from  the  shores  of  the  mainland  ; and  the
Florida  Cormorant  nestles  on  trees.  In  the  many  breeding  places  of  all
these  species  which  I have  visited,  I never  found  individuals  of  one  in-
termingled with  those  of  another,  although  the  Large  Cormorant  did  not
seem  averse  from  having  the  Peregrine  Falcon  in  its  vicinity,  while  the
Double- crested  allowed  a few  Gannets  or  Guillemots  to  nestle  beside  it,
and  the  Florida  Cormorant  associated  with  Herons,  Frigate  Pelicans,
Grakles,  or  Pigeons.

This  species  seldom  flies  far  over  land,  but  follows  the  sinuosities  of  the
shores  or  the  waters  of  rivers,  although  its  course  towards  a given  point
should  thus  be  three  times  as  long.  It  is  the  only  one  of  the  three  species
that,  in  as  far  as  I have  observed  in  America,  alights  on  trees.  My  learned
friend,  the  Prince  of  Musignano,  mentions  in  his  valuable  Synopsis  of
the  Birds  of  the  United  States,  a species  of  Cormorant  under  the  name
of  P.  Graculus,  wLich  he  describes  as  being  when  adult  greenish-black,
with  a few  scattered  white  streaks  on  the  neck,  in  winter  bronzed,  and
having  a golden-green  crest,  the  head,  neck,  and  thighs  with  short  small
white  feathers,  and  adds  that  it  “ inhabits  both  continents  and  both  he-
mispheres ; not  uncommon  in  spring  and  autumn  in  the  Middle  States :
very  common  in  the  Floridas,  where  it  breeds,  though  very  abundant  in
the  arctic  and  antarctic  circles.”  Unfortunately  no  dimensions  are  given,
except  of  the  bill,  which  is  said  to  be  three  and  a half  inches  long.  The
Florida  Cormorant,  however,  does  not  at  any  season  present  these  charac-
ters, and  therefore  conceiving  it  to  be  different  from  any  hitherto  de-
scribed, I have  taken  the  liberty  of  giving  it  a name,  while  the  figure  and
description  will  enable  the  scientific  to  form  a distinct  idea  of  it,  and  thus


FLORIDA  CORMORANT


389


to  confirm  the  species,  or  restore  to  it  its  previous  appellation,  should  it
have  received  one.

On  the  26th  of  April  1832,  1 and  my  party  visited  several  small
Keys,  not  many  miles  distant  from  the  harbour  in  which  our  vessel  lay.
Mr  Thrfston  had  given  us  his  beautiful  barge,  and  accompanied  us
with  his  famous  pilot,  fisherman  and  hunter,  Mr  Egan.  The  Keys  were
separated  by  narrow  and  tortuous  channels,  from  the  surface  of  the  clear
waters  of  which  were  reflected  the  dark  mangroves,  on  the  branches  of
which  large  colonies  of  Cormorants  had  already  built  their  nests,  and
were  sitting  on  their  eggs.  There  were  many  thousands  of  these  birds,
and  each  tree  bore  a greater  or  less  number  of  their  nests,  some  five  or
six,  others  perhaps  as  many  as  ten.  The  leaves,  branches,  and  stems  of
the  trees,  were  in  a manner  white-washed  with  their  dung.  The  tempe-
rature in  the  shade  was  about  90°  Fahr.,  and  the  effluvia  which  im-
pregnated the  air  of  the  channels  were  extremely  disagreeable.  Still  the
mangroves  were  in  full  bloom,  and  the  Cormorants  in  perfect  vigour.
Our  boat  being  secured,  the  people  scrambled  through  the  bushes,  in
search  of  the  eggs.  Many  of  the  birds  dropped  into  the  water,  dived,
and  came  up  at  a safe  distance ; others  in  large  groups  flew  away  af-
frighted ; while  a great  number  stood  on  their  nests  and  the  branches,  as
if  gazing  upon  beings  strange  to  them.  But  alas  ! they  soon  became  too
well  acquainted  with  us,  for  the  discharges  from  our  guns  committed
frightful  havock  among  them.  The  dead  were  seen  floating  on  the  water,
the  crippled  making  towards  the  open  sea,  which  here  extended  to  the
very  Keys  on  which  we  were,  while  groups  of  a hundred  or  more  swam
about  a little  beyond  reach  of  our  shot,  awaiting  the  event,  and  the  air
was  filled  with  those  whose  anxiety  to  return  to  their  eggs  kept  them
hovering  over  us  in  silence.  In  a short  time  the  bottom  of  our  boat  was
covered  with  the  slain,  several  hats  and  caps  were  filled  with  eggs;  and
we  may  now  intermit  the  work  of  destruction.  You  must  try  to  excuse
these  murders,  which  in  truth  might  not  have  been  nearly  so  numerous,
had  I not  thought  of  you  quite  as  often  while  on  the  Florida  Keys,  with
a burning  sun  over  my  head,  and  my  body  oozing  at  every  pore,  as  I do
now  while  peaceably  scratching  my  paper  with  an  iron-pen,  in  one  of
the  comfortable  and  quite  cool  houses  of  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the
cities  of  old  Scotland.

The  Florida  Cormorant  begins  to  pair  about  the  first  of  April,  and
commences  the  construction  of  its  nest  about  a fortnight  after.  Many  do


390


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


not  lay  quite  so  early,  and  I found  some  going  through  their  preparations
until  the  middle  of  May.  Their  courtships  are  performed  on  the  water.
On  the  morning,  beautiful  but  extremely  hot,  of  the  8th  of  that  month,
while  rambling  over  one  of  the  Keys,  I arrived  at  the  entrance  of  a nar-
row and  rather  deep  channel,  almost  covered  over  by  the  boughs  of  the
mangroves  and  some  tall  canes,  the  only  tall  canes  I had  hitherto  ob-
served among  those  islands.  I paused,  looked  at  the  water,  and  obser-
ving it  to  be  full  of  fish,  felt  confident  that  no  shark  was  at  hand.  Cock-
ing both  locks  of  my  gun,  I quietly  Avaded  in.  Curious  sounds  now
reached  my  ears,  and  as  the  fishes  did  not  appear  to  mind  me  much,  I
proceeded  onward  among  them  for  perhaps  a hundred  yards,  when  I ob-
served that  they  had  all  disappeared.  The  sounds  were  loud  and  con-
^ stantly  renewed,  as  if  they  came  from  a joyous  multitude.  The  inlet
suddenly  became  quite  narrow,  and  the  water  reached  to  my  arm-pits.
At  length  I placed  myself  behind  some  mangrove  trunks,  whence  I could
see  a great  number  of  Cormorants  not  more  than  fifteen  or  twenty  yards
from  me.  None  of  them,  it  seemed,  had  seen  or  heard  me ; they  were
engaged  in  going  through  their  nuptial  ceremonies.  The  males  while
swimming  gracefully  round  the  females,  Avould  raise  their  wings  and  tail,
draw  their  head  over  their  back,  swell  out  their  neck  for  an  instant,  and
with  a quick  forward  thrust  of  the  head  utter  a rough  guttural  note,  not
unlike  the  cry  of  a pig.  The  female  at  this  moment  would  crouch  as
it  were  on  the  water,  sinking  into  it,  when  her  mate  would  sink  over
her  until  nothing  more  than  his  head  was  to  be  seen,  and  soon  afterwards
both  sprung  up  and  swam  joyously  round  each  other,  croaking  all  the
while.  Twenty  or  more  pairs  at  a time  were  thus  engaged.  Indeed,  the
water  was  covered  with  Cormorants,  and,  had  I chosen,  I might  have
shot  several  of  them.  I now  advanced  slowly  towards  them,  when  they
stared  at  me  as  you  might  stare  at  a goblin,  and  began  to  splash  the
water  with  their  wings,  many  diving.  On  my  proceeding  they  aU  dis-
persed, either  plunging  beneath  or  flying  off,  and  making  rapidly  to-
Avards  the  mouth  of  the  inlet.  Only  a few  nests  were  on  the  mangroves,
and  I looked  upon  the  spot  as  analogous  to  the  tournament  grounds  of
the  Pinnated  Grouse,  although  no  battles  took  place  in  my  presence.  A
few  beautiful  Herons  were  sitting  peaceably  on  their  nests,  the  musquitoes
Avere  very  abundant,  large  ugly  blue  land-crabs  crawled  among  the  man-
groves, hurrying  towards  their  I’etreats,  and  I retired,  as  I had  arrived,
in  perfect  silence.  While  proceeding  I could  not  help  remarking  the  in-


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


391


stinctive  knowledge  of  the  fishes,  and  thought  how  curious  it  was  that,  as
soon  as  they  had  observed  the  Cormorants’  hole,  none  had  gone  farther,
as  if  they  were  well  aware  of  the  danger,  but  preferred  meeting  me  as  I
advanced  towards  the  birds.  I emerged  from  the  water  almost  exhausted
Avith  heat,  my  eyes  aching  from  the  perspiration  ; but  the  refreshing  sea-
breeze  now  reached  me,  and  cooled  my  feverish  frame.  Thankful,  Reader,
did  I then  feel,  and  thankful  do  I feel  now,  having  survived  so  many  en-
counters of  this  kind.

The  nest  of  the  Florida  Cormorant  is  of  rather  a small  size,  being  onlv
eight  or  nine  inches  in  diameter.  It  is  formed  of  sticks  crossing  each  other,
and  is  flat,  without  any  appearance  of  finishing.  All  the  nests  are  placed
on  a western  exposure,  and  are  usually  completely  covered  with  excre-
ment, as  are  also  frequently  the  eggs,  which  are  three  or  four,  and  differ
in  size,  their  average  length,  however,  being  two  inches  and  a quarter,
their  greatest  breadth  one  inch  and  three  and  a half  eighths.  They
are  rendered  rather  rough  by  the  coating  of  calcareous  matter  Avhich
surrounds  them ; but  when  this  is  removed,  the  real  shell  is  found  to  be
of  a uniform  fine  light  bluish-green  tint.  I was  unable  to  ascertain  the
period  of  incubation.  The  young  are  at  first  blind,  naked,  black,  and
extremely  uncouth.  On  placing  some  which  were  quite  small  on  the  wa-
ter, they  instantly  dived,  rose  again,  and  swam  about  at  random,  diving
on  the  least  noise.  If  you  approach  them  when  about  a month  old,  they
throw  themselves  from  the  nest  and  plunge  into  the  water.  When  un-
disturbed, they  remain  in  the  nest  until  they  are  fully  fledged  and  able
to  fly,  after  which  they  undergo  various  changes,  and  are  not  perfect  until
nearly  two  years  old.

Soon  after  they  are  left  to  shift  for  themselves,  great  numbers  go  to
search  for  food  in  the  quiet  waters  of  inland  streams.  Thousands  may
now  be  seen  on  the  lakes  of  the  interior  of  the  Floridas,  and  on  the  large
rivers  there.  At  this  season  many  proceed  as  far  as  the  Capes  of  North
Carolina,  the  Mississippi,  the  Arkansas,  the  Yazoo,  and  other  streams,
including  the  fair  Ohio,  on  which  they  are  at  times  seen  early  in  October,
when  they  begin  to  return  to  the  places  of  their  nativity.  During  seve-
ral weeks  which  I spent  on  the  St  John’s  River,  while  on  board  the  United
States’  schooner- of-war  the  Spark,  I was  surprised  to  see  the  number  of
these  Cormorants  already  returning  towards  the  keys,  so  much  so  that
bad  I been  the  di.scovercr  of  tliat  stream  under  similar  circumstances,  I


392


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


should  in  all  probability  have  named  it  Cormorant  River.  While  we  were
at  anchor  near  its  mouth,  they  passed  close  to  us  in  long  single  files  almost
continually,  and,  on  reaching  the  sea,  bore  away  towards  the  south  along
the  shores.

On  the  Mississippi,  in  the  month  of  October,  when  the  temperature  is
considerably  lower  than  in  the  Floridas,  you  see  these  birds  during  the
day  standing  in  their  usual  inclined  positioti,  on  the  sawyers  and  planters,
as  if  resting  there — so  at  least  was  the  casein  the  autumn  of  1820, — or  on
the  dead  branches  of  trees  along  the  shores.  In  cloudy  days  they  sail-
ed high  in  the  air,  and  in  wide  circles,  after  which,  as  if  aware  of  cold
weather  being  at  hand,  they  swiftly  followed  in  long  lines  the  meandering
course  of  the  stream,  at  a considerable  elevation.  While  sailing  aloft,
they  frequently  uttered  a note  not  unlike  that  of  the  raven  in  similar  cir-
cumstances. When  approached  while  standing  on  a planter,  instead  of
taking  to  wing  at  once,  although  elevated  several  feet  above  the  water,
they  prefer  plunging  first  into  the  stream,  when  they  almost  instantly  rise
to  the  surface,  paddle  with  their  feet,  and  beat  with  their  wings  for  twenty
or  thirty  yards,  and  then  rise  into  the  air.  Now  and  then,  when  of  a
sudden  the  weather  becomes  cold  at  night,  you  see  them  at  early  dawn
join  in  numbers  of  fifty  or  perhaps  a hundred,  rise  high  in  the  air,  arrange
themselves  in  angular  double  files,  and  fly  swiftly  southward.

When  in  fresh  water  streams  they  fish  principally  in  the  eddies,  and
as  soon  as  one  of  them  is  depopulated,  or  proves  unworthy  of  their  far-
ther search,  they  rise  and  fly  about  a foot  above  the  surface  to  another
place,  where  they  continue  to  fish.  In  the  inner  lakes  of  the  Floridas
they  fish  at  random  any  where,  and  this  is  equally  the  case  around  the
Keys,  and  on  the  bays  and  inlets  along  the  coast.  In  fine  calm  weather,
when  the  sun  is  pouring  down  a flood  of  light  and  heat,  the  Cormorants
in  flocks  betake  themselves  to  some  clean  sand-bar  or  rocky  isle,  or  alight
on  trees,  where  they  spread  out  their  wings,  and  bask  at  times  for  hours,
in  the  manner  of  Vultures  and  Pelicans.

The  Florida  Cormorant,  like  all  the  other  species  with  which  I am
acquainted,  swims  deep,  and  dives  with  great  expertness,  so  that  it  is  al-
most useless  to  follow  one  when  wounded,  unless  it  has  heen  greatly  in-
jured. On  seeing  an  enemy  approach,  it  first  beats  the  water  with  its
wings,  as  if  in  play,  or  as  it  would  do  if  washing  itself,  raises  both  wings
for  a minute  or  more,  then  paddles  ofl‘,  and  takes  to  wing.  When  on  a


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


393


lake,  they  prefer  diving  to  flying,  swim  with  all  but  the  neck  and  head
under  water,  in  the  manner  of  the  Anhinga  or  Snake-bird,  and  easily
dive  without  shewing  their  backs.

They  procure  their  food  entirely  by  diving  from  the  surface  of  the
water,  never  from  on  wing,  as  some  compilers  assert ; nay,  the  very  form
of  their  bill,  and  the  want  of  air-cells,  such  as  plunging  birds  are  usually
provided  with,  prevent  them  from  darting  from  above  into  the  water,  as
is  the  habit  of  Gannets  and  other  birds,  which  seek  for  food  on  wing,  go
far  out  to  sea,  and  stand  gales  such  as  the  Cormorant,  which  rarely  ven-
ture out  of  sight  of  the  shores,  does  not  dare  to  encounter,  or  of  those
which,  like  Gulls,  pass  swiftly  in  curved  lines  over  the  surface,  picking
up  their  prey.  On  emerging,  these  Cormorants  usually  swallow  their
prey  if  it  has  been  so  seized  as  to  enable  them  to  do  so  with  ease  ; if  not,
they  throw  it  up  to  a short  distance  in  the  air,  receive  it  with  open  bill,
and  gulp  it  head  foremost.  If  the  fish  is  large,  they  swim  or  fly  to  the
shore,  or  alight  on  a tree  with  it,  and  there  beat  and  tear  it  to  pieces,
after  which  they  swallow  it.  Their  appetite  is  scarcely  satiable,  and  they
gorge  themselves  to  the  utmost  at  every  convenient  opportunity.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  perhaps  more  rapid  than  that  of  the  others
mentioned  above,  and  is  performed  by  continued  flappings  when  the  bird
is  travelling,  but  by  alternate  flappings  and  sailings  of  great  elegance
during  the  beginning  of  the  breeding  season,  or  when  they  collect  in  large
flocks  in  lowering  weather,  sometimes  also  when  about  to  alight.  Their
food  consists  chiefly  of  fish,  and  they  generally  prefer  those  of  small
size.  While  on  the  Florida  Keys,  I procured  five  specimens  of  the  Hip-
pocampus, fresh  and  uninjured,  from  the  gullets  of  some  of  these  Cor-
morants. They  are  hard  to  kill,  and  live  to  a great  age.

They  are  easily  treated  in  captivity ; but  their  awkward  movements
on  the  ground,  where  they  often  use  the  tail  as  a support,  render  them
less  pleasing  objects  than  other  feathered  pets.  Besides,  they  eat  and
mute  inordinately,  and  instead  of  charming  you  with  songs,  utter  no
sound  excepting  a grunt.  Their  flesh  is  dark,  generally  tough,  and  has
a rank  fishy  taste,  which  can  suit  the  palate  only  of  refined  epicures,  some
of  whom  I have  heard  pronounce  it  excellent.  The  Indians  and  Negroes
of  the  Floridas  kill  the  young  when  nearly  able  to  fly,  and  after  skinning
them,  salt  them  for  food.  I have  seen  them  offered  for  sale  in  the  New
Orleans  market,  the  poorer  people  there  making  gombo  soup  of  them.


394


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


A bird  of  this  species,  which  I shot  near  its  breeding  place,  and  which,
on  being  examined,  proved  to  be  a female,  had  the  feathers  of  the  tail
covered  with  delicate  slender  sea-weeds  of  a bright  green  colour,  such  as
I have  often  observed  on  marine  turtles,  and  which  appeared  to  have  ac-
tually grown  there.

The  slender  feathers  on  the  sides  of  the  head  fall  off  by  the  time  in-
cubation has  commenced,  and  do  not  appear  during  winter,  as  is  alleged
by  authors  when  speaking  of  the  crests  or  appendages  of  Cormorants,  nor
do  they  last  more  than  a few  weeks,  as  is  also  the  case  in  the  Egrets  and
Herons.


Phalacrocorax  floridanus.

Plate  CCLII.  Adult  Male  in  spring.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  somewhat  compressed,
straight,  with  the  tip  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly
concave,  until  near  the  tip,,  when  it  is  decurved,  the  ridge  convex,  and
separated  from  the  sides  by  a narrow  groove,  tbe  sides  erect,  convex,  the
edges  sharp  and  straight  as  far  as  the  unguis,  which  is  strong,  convex  above,
incurved,  acute.  No  external  nostrils  when  full-grown.  Lower  mandible
with  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow  towards  the  end,  filled  by  an  ex-
tensible membrane,  which  extends  a short  way  down  the  throat,  its  dorsal
line  a little  convex,  the  sides  erect  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  in-
flected, the  tip  compressed  and  obliquely  truncate.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  long  and  slender.
Body  rather  full,  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  far  behind ; tibia
feathered  in  its  whole  length  ; tarsus  very  short,  strong,  much  compressed,
covered  all  round  with  scales,  of  which  the  anterior  and  lateral  are  large
and  subhexagonal,  the  posterior  very  small  and  roundish.  Toes  all  placed
in  the  same  plane,  and  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  covered  above  with
very  numerous  oblique  scutella ; first  toe  smallest,  fourth  longest.  Claws
rather  small,  strong,  compressed,  acute,  rounded  above,  arched,  that  of
the  third  toe  pectinated  on  its  inner  edge.

Plumage  of  the  head,  neck,  lower  parts,  and  posterior  portion  of  the
back  glossy,  blended,  and  silky,  of  the  fore  part  of  the  back  and  wings
compact,  the  feathers  with  narrow  loose  glossy  margins.  From  behind  the
eye  to  the  length  of  an  inch  and  a half  on  each  side,  a line  of  extremely


FLORIDA  CORMORANT.


J395


slender  loose  elongated  feathers.  Space  around  the  eye,  and  to  a large
extent  along  the  base  of  the  bill,  together  with  the  small  gular  sac,  bare.
Wings  rather  small ; primaries  very  strong,  curved,  rather  narrow,  taper-
ing and  obtuse,  second  longest,  third  almost  equal,  first  longer  than  fourth ;
secondaries  decurved,  broad,  broadly  rounded,  the  inner  narrower.  Tail
of  moderate  length,  very  narrow,  much  rounded,  or  cuneate,  of  twelve
narrow  rounded  feathers,  having  extremely  strong  shafts.

Upper  mandible  black,  along  the  basal  margins  bright  blue ; lower
bright  blue,  curiously  spotted  with  white.  Iris  light  green,  margins  of  eye-
lids light  blue,  spotted  with  white.  Bare  space  on  the  head  and  gular  sac  rich
orange.  Feet  and  claws  greyish-black.  All  the  silky  part  of  the  plumage
is  greenish-black,  at  a distance  appearing  black,  but  at  hand  in  a strong
light  green.  The  imbricated  feathers  of  the  back  and  wings  greyish-
brown,  tinged  with  purple,  their  fringe-like  margins  greenish-black.  Pri-
mary quills  brownish-black,  secondary  like  the  other  feathers  of  the  wing.
Tail  brownish-black.  The  shafts  of  all  the  feathers  brownish-black.

Length  to  end  of  tail  29f  inches,  to  end  of  wings  25^,  to  end  of
claws  28^ ; extent  of  wings  46^;  wing  from  flexure  Ilf;  tail  6;  bill
along  the  back  2j%,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  2 ;

outer  toe  its  claw  y|.  Weight  lb.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  male.

The  young,  after  their  first  moult,  have  the  bill  dull  yellow,  the  ridge
of  the  upper  mandible  dusky,  the  unguis  or  hook  horn-colour ; the  naked
parts  about  the  base  of  the  bill  rich  yellow,  the  iris  light  green,  the  feet
as  in  the  adult.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  are  blended,  but  not
silky ; the  upper  part  of  the  head  and  the  hind  neck  are  brownish-black,
tinged  with  green,  the  throat  greyish-white,  the  fore  neck  and  anterior
part  of  the  breast  variegated  with  pale  brownish-grey  and  black.  The
rest  of  the  plumage  is  as  in  the  adult,  but  the  imbricated  feathers  of  the
upper  parts  are  of  a lighter  colour,  but  not  bronzed.

This  species  differs  from  the  Double-crested  Cormorant  principally  in
being  smaller,  and  in  having  the  elongated  feathers  behind  the  eye  much
fewer.  The  two  species  will  be  more  particularly  compared  when  the
latter  is  described.


( 396  )


THE  POMARINE  JAGER.

Lestris  pomarinus,  Temm.

PLATE  CCLIII.  Female.

This  bird  I never  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  until  I visited
Labrador ; nor  am  I able  to  give  you  much  information  respecting  its
habits  as  obtained  by  my  own  observation,  and  therefore  I shall  take  the
liberty  of  adding  to  my  description  such  notices  as  I may  judge  interest-
ing, taken  from  the  works  of  authors  who,  having  seen  for  themselves,  are
entitled  to  credit.

While  sailing  towards  the  harbour  of  Little  Macatina,  and  yet  about
forty  miles  distant  from  it,  although  not  far  from  the  shore,  we  observed
a bird  of  this  species  approaching  the  vessel.  It  flew  in  the  manner  of  the
Pigeon  Hawk,  to  my  account  of  which  I may  refer  you,  alighted  on  the
water  like  a Gull,  and  fed  on  some  cod-fish’s  liver  that  had  been  thrown
overboard  for  the  purpose  of  attracting  it.  Several  small  Petrels  joined
it,  but  it  did  not  come  within  shot,  and  the  sea  was  too  rough  for  even
our  whale-boat.  On  the  30th  of  July  the  young  men  of  my  party  brought
me  a fine  adult  female,  in  excellent  order,  from  which  I drew  the  figure
in  the  plate.  A few  days  after  we  experienced  a very  heavy  gale  while
in  the  harbour  of  Bras  d’Or,  during  the  continuance  of  which  twenty  or
thirty  of  these  birds  came  about  us,  although  none  of  them  approached
within  shot,  and  no  boat  could  have  ridden  the  furious  waves  without  im-
minent danger.  On  that  occasion,  however,  I was  enabled  to  observe
some  of  their  habits.  They  flew  wildly  about,  yet  with  much  grace,  mov-
ing rapidly  to  and  fro,  now  struggling  against  the  blast,  now  bearing  off
and  drifting  to  a considerable  distance.  Many  Gulls  were  flying  about,
having  also  made  for  the  harbour  to  obtain  some  shelter  from  the  storm.
The  Lestris  chased  the  smaller  species  with  effect,  but  never  approached
the  Great  Black-backed  Gulls,  nor  even  their  young,  which  were  also  fly-
ing with  the  rest.  The  Kittiwakes  and  the  Ring-billed  Gulls  were  the
species  which  we  saw  them  attack,  although  they  did  not  procure  much
food  from  them,  the  weather  being  such  that  they  could  not  fish.  They
were  therefore  contented,  as  was  the  Lestris,  with  the  fishes  that  had  been
thrown  on  shore.  At  times  the  Jagers  would  ramble  over  the  land.


POMARINE  JAGER.


397


flying  close  upon  the  rocks,  and  proceeding  at  a rapid  rate  even  against
the  wind.  They  remained  in  our  neighbourhood  until  the  tempest  abated,
when  they  went  olF  to  sea,  and  I saw  no  more  of  them  until  we  reached
St  George’s  Bay  in  Newfoundland.

There,  on  a squally  afternoon,  two  or  three  of  them  were  observed
flying  around,  but  keeping  at  such  a distance  that  we  could  not  shoot  any
of  them.  The  following  day,  after  setting  sail,  we  encountered  a heavy
gale,  which,  although  foretold  by  me  from  the  appearance  of  the  birds  in
the  harbour,  our  good  captain  would  not  believe  as  likely  to  happen.  We
were  obliged  to  lie-to,  and  were  tossed  about  for  three  nights  and  days,
but  escaped  with  little  other  damage  than  the  loss  of  a pet  Gull,  which
was  washed  overboard.

On  our  return  to  Eastport,  Captain  Emery  told  me  that  he  had  seen
a great  number  of  these  Jagers  near  Cape  Sable  ; and  at  Halifax,  in  Nova
Scotia,  I was  assured  that  they  breed  on  Sable  Island,  which  is  sixty  or
seventy  miles  distant  from  the  coast.  I never  observed  one  of  these  birds
along  the  shores  of  the  United  States,  although  some  of  the  genus  go  as
far  south  in  winter  as  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.

Nothing  is  known  with  certainty  respecting  the  changes  which  this
species  undergoes  as  it  advances  toward  maturity.  Captain  James  Clark
Ross,  R.  N.  has  informed  me  that  a nest  containing  two  eggs  was  found
by  him  near  Fury  Point,  close  by  the  edge  of  a small  lake.  I have  no
doubt  that  this  bird  breeds  in  Labrador,  as  the  female  which  I obtained
in  J uly  appeared  as  if  it  had  young  at  the  time.

My  friend  Mr  Selby  states  that  he  is  not  aware  that  an  adult  bird
has  yet  been  killed  in  Britain.  M.  Temminck  says  it  forms  a rude  nest
of  grass  and  moss,  which  is  placed  on  a tuft  in  the  marshes,  or  on  a rock,
and  lays  two  or  three  very  pointed  eggs,  of  a greyish-olive  colour,  marked
with  a few  blackish  spots.  Dr  Richardson  has  the  following  notice  re-
specting it  in  the  Fauna  Boreali- Americana : — “ The  Pomarine  Jager  or
Gull-hunter  is  not  uncommon  in  the  Arctic  seas  and  northern  outlets  of
Hudson’s  Bay,  where  it  subsists  on  putrid  fish  and  other  animal  sub-
stances thrown  up  by  the  sea,  and  also  on  the  matters  which  the  Gulls
disgorge  when  pursued  by  it.  It  retires  from  the  north  in  the  winter,
and  makes  its  first  appearance  at  Hudson’s  Bay  in  May,  coming  in  from
seaward.”


.398


POMARINE  JAGER.


liESTEis  poMARiNus,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  793.

Lestris  pomarina,  Pomarine  Jager,  Ch.  Boriaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the
United  States,  p.  364 — Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  429.

Pomarine  Jager,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  315.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLIII.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  strong,  slightly  compressed,  straight,  the
tip  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight,  to-
ward the  tip  curved,  the  ridge  broad  and  convex  with  a slight  central  de-
pression, the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  compres-
sed, rather  rounded  but  sharp.  Nasal  groovp  long,  narrow,  curved  ;
nostrils  in  its  fore  part,  medial,  lateral,  longitudinal,  broad  before,  ex-
tremely narrow  behind,  open  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  long  and  narrow,  a slight  prominence  at  its  extremity,  beyond
which  the  dorsal  line  is  slightly  concave,  the  sides  erect,  and  slightly
convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  obliquely  truncate.

Head  rather  large.  Neck  of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  full.
Feet  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender ; tibia  bare  at  its  lower  part,  and
rough  all  round  with  small  convex  scales ; tarsus  compressed  behind,  an-
teriorly covered  with  decurved  scutella,  the  sides  reticulated,  the  hind
part  rough  with  small  pointed  scales  ; hind  toe  extremely  small  and  ele-
vated, the  fore  toes  of  moderate  size,  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  which
have  their  margins  convex  ; the  third  toe  longest,  the  fourth  nearly  as  long,
all  scutellate  above.  Claws  strong,  curved,  very  acute,  compressed,  that
of  third  toe  with  a sharp  inner  edge.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  soft  and  blended;  the  fea-
thers on  the  back  and  wings  rather  compact  and  distinct.  Wings  very
long,  rather  broad,  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering  and  rounded,  the
first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondary  rather  short,  rounded.
Tail  of  moderate  length,  the  feathers,  which  are  twelve,  are  broad  and
rounded,  the  two  middle  an  inch  longer  than  the  next.

Bill  blackish-brown  at  the  end,  dingy  yellow  towards  the  base.  Iris
brown.  Tibia,  toes,'webs,  and  lower  half  of  tarsus  black,  the  upper  half
light  blue  ; claws  black.  Upper  part  and  sides  of  the  head  anteriorly
brownish-black  ; upper  part  of  neck  all  round  yellowish- white ; the  rest
of  the  neck  white,  barred  with  brownish-black,  each  feather  having  two
transverse  bands  of  that  colour ; breast  white  ; sides,  abdomen  and  lower
tail-coverts  white,  barred  with  brownisli-black,  as  aie  the  upper  tail-


POMARINE  JAGER.


399


coverts.  Back  and  wings  brownish-black ; primary  quills  of  the  same
colour,  white  on  the  inner  webs  towards  the  base,  as  are  the  secondaries
and  tail-feathers,  lower  surface  of  wings  mottled  and  barred  with  white
and  dusky.

Length  to  end  of  tail  20^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  20j,  to  end  of  claws
19i- ; extent  of  wings  48  ; wing  from  flexure  14;  tail  ; bill  along  the
back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe
its  claw  Weight  1^  lb.


( 400  )


WILSON’S  PHALAROPE.

Phalaropus  Wilsonii,  Sabine.

PLATE  CCLIV.  Male  and  Young.

The  habits  of  this  beautiful  species  are  little  known,  for  so  irregularly
does  it  perform  its  migrations,  and  so  rarely  does  it  settle  for  any  length  of
time  in  any  part  of  the  United  States,  that  at  present  few  opportunities  of
studying  them  occur.  Although  I have  found  individuals  in  various  places
along  our  eastern  coast,  from  Boston  to  New  Jersey,  as  well  as  in  Ken-
tucky and  other  portions  of  the  Union,  I have  not  seen  its  nest,  nor  even
its  eggs.  Mr  Drummond,  whose  zeal  as  a student  of  nature  must  be
known  to  every  one  devoted  to  natural  history,  had  the  good  fortune  to
find  its  nest  in  the  course  of  his  rambles  among  the  Rocky  Mountains,
but  he  has  given  no  information  respecting  its  habits.  A person  who
shewed  me  the  skins  of  two  specimens  procured  in  July  near  Cape  May
in  New  Jersey,  assured  me  that  he  shot  them  near  their  nests,  and  that
they  had  four  eggs.  While  I was  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  in  the
month  of  June  1829,  a fisherman  gunner,  with  whom  I was  at  the  time
residing  at  Great  Egg  Harbour,  brought  me  a pair  which  he  had  just
killed.  He  represented  them  as  very  gentle  and  easily  approached,  and
said  that  on  going  towards  them  they  affected  to  be  lame,  and  opened
their  wings  as  if  to  induce  him  to  run  after  them  ; instead  of  doing  which,
however,  he  immediately  fired  and  killed  them  both.  Having  put  away
the  birds  in  a safe  place,  he  and  I took  to  his  boat  and  went  to  the  island
where  he  had  found  them.  He  shewed  me  the  spot  on  which  they  had
been  shot ; but  although  we  searched  most  diligently  for  the  nest,  we
could  not  find  it.  On  examining  the  birds  when  we  returned,  I saw  that
the  female  must  have  been  sitting.  About  the  same  period  my  son  pro-
cured two  specimens  of  this  Phalarope  out  of  a flock  of  five,  on  the  rocks
at  the  rapids  of  the  Ohio  below  Louisville.  Late  in  the  summer  of  1824
I shot  three  of  them  near  Buffalo  Creek  on  I.ake  Erie.  My  generous
friend  Edward  Harris,  Esq.  presented  me,  at  New  York,  with  a young
bird  in  autumnal  plumage,  from  which  I made  the  figure  in  the  plate ;
and  another,  in  a most  emaciated  state,  was  given  me  at  Boston  in  the
vinter  by  my  young  friend  John  Bethune,  Esq.


WILSON’S  PHALAROPE.


401


Those  which  I procured  near  Lake  Erie  were  engaged  in  feeding
around  the  borders  and  in  the  shallows  of  a pond  of  small  extent.  When
I first  observed  them  at  some  distance,  I thought  they  were  Yellow-shanks
(Totanus Jlavipes),  so  much  did  their  motions  resemble  those  of  that  spe-
cies. Like  it,  this  Phalarope  wades  in  the  water  up  to  its  body,  picks  for
food  right  and  left,  turns  about,  and  performs  all  its  motions  with  viva-
city and  elegance.  They  kept  closer  together  than  the  Yellow-shanks
usually  do,  but,  like  them,  they  would  for  a few  moments  raise  their  wings
as  if  apprehensive  of  getting  into  too  deep  water  and  being  obliged  to  fly.
They  preferred  flying  to  swimming  on  such  occasions,  although  from  the
general  character  of  the  tribe  one  might  expect  otherwise.  After  watch-
ing them  about  a quarter  of  an  hour,  during  which  time  they  did  not  utter
a single  note,  I fired  at  them  when  they  were  all  close  together,  and  killed
the  whole.  On  opening  them  I found  their  stomachs  to  contain  small
worms  and  fragments  of  very  delicate  shells.  The  birds  seen  at  the  Falls
of  the  Ohio  flew  in  the  manner  of  the  Common  Snipe,  proceeding  at  first
in  an  undulating  or  zigzag  line,  but  more  steadily  after  reaching  a certain
elevation,  when  they  came  pretty  close  together,  wheeled  a few  times,  and
alighted  again  near  the  same  shallow  pools.

Dr  Richaruson,  who  found  this  species  breeding  on  the  Saskatchewan,
says  “ it  lays  two  or  three  eggs  among  the  grass  on  the  margins  of  small
lakes : they  are  very  obtuse  at  one  end,  taper  much  at  the  other,  and  have
a colour  intermediate  between  yellowish-grey  and  cream-yeUow,  inter-
spersed with  small  roundish  spots  and  a few  larger  blotches  of  umber-
brown,  more  crowded  at  the  obtuse  end.  The  eggs  measure  sixteen  lines
and  a half  in  length  and  eleven  across.”

I observed  scarcely  any  difference  in  the  colouring  of  the  sexes,  the
female  being  merely  larger  than  the  male.

Phai.aropus  Wilsonii,  C/j.  JSoraajoarfe,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  342.

Gray  Phalarope,  Phalaropus  lobatus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ix.  p.  72.  pi.  73.

fig.  2.

Wilson’s  Phalarope,  Phalaropus  Wilsonii,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  voh  iv.
p.  59.  pi.  24.  fig.  1.  Adult ; and  pi.  25.  fig.  1.  Young.

Phalaropus  Wilsonii,  Wilson’s  Phalarope,  Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.
Amer.  part  ii.  p.  405,  pi.  69.

American  Phalarope,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  245.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  long,  very  slender,  flexible,  flattened  towards  the  end.  Upper

c c


VOL.  III.


402


WILSON’S  PHALAROPE.


mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  ridge  flattened,  the  sides  at  the
base  sloping,  but  towards  the  end  nearly  horizontal,  the  edges  obtuse,  the
tip  narrow.  Nasal  groove  linear,  long ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.
Lower  mandible  wdth  the  angle  very  long  and  extremely  narrow,  the  sides
slightly  convex,  the  tip  narrowed.

Head  small,  with  the  fore  part  high  and  rounded ; eyes  of  moderate
size.  Neck  rather  long  and  slender.  Body  slender.  Feet  rather  long,
slender  ; tibia  bare  a considerable  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  extremely
compressed,  narrowed  before,  very  thin  behind,  covered  anteriorly  with
numerous  scutella,  posteriorly  with  two  series  of  scutella  meeting  with  a
sharp  edge ; toes  slender,  first  very  small,  free,  with  a slight  membrane
beneath,  second  slightly  shorter  than  fourth,  third  considerably  longer ;
all  scutellate  above,  margined  on  both  sides  with  narrow,  slightly  lobed,
crenate  membranes,  which  are  united  at  the  base  so  as  to  form  short  webs,
of  which  the  outer  is  longer.  Claws  very  small,  compressed,  arched,  that
of  the  middle  toe  with  the  inner  edge  sharp.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Feathers  of  the  back  and  wings  distinct.
Wings  long  and  pointed,  primary  quills  tapering  but  rounded,  the  first
longest,  the  second  scarcely  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secon-
dary quills  rather  short,  broad,  obliquely  rounded,  with  a small  tip,  the
inner  tapering  and  elongated,  so  as  nearly  to  equal  the  longest  primaries
when  the  wing  is  closed.  Tail  rather  short,  nearly  even  but  with  the
two  middle  feathers  longer,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers,  of  which  the  outer
are  incurved.

Bill  black.  Iris  brown.  Feet  bluish-grey,  claws  black.  The  general
colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  brownish-grey,  the  hind  neck  and  upper  tail-
coverts  greyish-white,  the  top  of  the  head  ash-grey.  A white  line  over
the  eye ; a band  of  black  along  the  lore,  under  the  eye,  and  down  the
side  of  the  neck,  on  which  it  becomes  broader  and  changes  into  chestnut-
brown,  when  it  proceeds  along  the  scapulars  of  a brownish-red  colour ;
another  brownish-red  band  across  the  wing  and  including  part  of  the  inner
secondaries.  Quills  greyish-brown,  the  outer  primaries  and  their  coverts
darker.  Tail-feathers  pale  brownish-grey  on  the  outer,  white  more  or  less
mottled  on  the  inner  webs.  Throat  and  cheeks  white;  fore  neck  orange-
brown,  fading  below,  and  extending  paler  along  the  sides  of  the  body ;
breast,  abdomen  and  lower  wing-coverts  white ; lower  surface  of  wings
pale  grey,  of  tail  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10  inches,  to  end  of  claws  11  ; extent  of  wings


<1


WILSON’S  PHALAROPE.  403

17^  ; wing  fi'om  flexure  ; tail  9.^^ ; bill  along  the  back  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  ; bare  part  of  tibia  f ; tarsus  1^  ; middle  toe
l/j,  its  claw  Weight  2^  oz.

The  Female,  which  is  somewhat  larger,  is  in  colour  precisely  similar
to  the  Male.  Weight  3 oz.

Young  in  autumn.  Plate  CCLIV.  Fig.  2.

The  young  bird  after  the  first  moult  has  the  bill  brownish-black,  the
iris  brown,  the  feet  greenish-yellow,  the  claws  black.  The  upper  parts
are  variegated  with  bi'ownish-black  and  light  greenish-yellow,  the  central
part  of  each  feather  being  of  the  former  colour ; primary  quills  brownish-
black  ; tail-feathers  as  in  the  adult.  The  lower  parts  are  white.


c c 2


( 404  )


THE  RED  PHAL4ROPE.

Phalaropus  fulicarius,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCLV.  Adult  Male  and  Female  in  Summer,  and  Adult  in  Winteiu

My  first  drawing  of  the  Red  Phalarope  was  made  at  Louisville  in
Kentucky,  a few  weeks  after  my  removal  to  that  place,  in  1808.  One  af-
ternoon, while  returning  from  the  house  of  my  hospitable  friend  General
Ceoghan,  I observed  a large  flock  of  birds  proceeding  along  the  shores
of  the  Ohio.  They  were  quite  unknown  to  me,  and  therefore  extremely
anxious  I was  to  procure  some  of  them.  I therefore  ran  through  the
woods  until  I got  ahead  of  them,  went  to  the  margin  of  the  river,  and
concealed  myself  at  some  distance  from  them.  They  swam  beautifully,
played  about,  picked  up  substances  floating  on  the  water,  now  dispersed,
and  again  came  close  together,  until  at  length  coming  opposite  to  a small
sand-bar  stretching  out  from  the  shore  to  the  distance  of  a few  yards,
they  directed  their  course  towards  it,  and  waded  out.  When  just  land-
ing, they  were  so  close  to  each  other  that  I could  not  withstand  the  temp-
tation, and  so  levelled  my  gun,  pulled  both  triggers,  and  saw  that  I had
made  considerable  havock  among  them.  Those  which  had  not  been  bitten,
flew  off  in  a compact  body,  while  the  birds  that  had  been  but  slightly
wounded  made  for  the  water,  and  swam  away  so  fast  that  they  seemed  to
be  running  on  the  surface.  I picked  up  seventeen,  which  I found  so
beautiful  and  withal  so  plump,  that  I felt  quite  delighted,  and  resolved
to  shoot  as  many  more  as  I could.  But  I did  not  succeed  in  killing  more
than  other  five  that  day.

I had  never  until  then  seen  a Phalarope  of  any  kind,  although  I
had  inspected  some  shocking  figures  of  these  elegant  birds,  figures  so  un-
like the  originals  that  even  with  the  aid  of  a name  printed  beneath,  you
could  not  recognise  them.  Such  of  my  acquaintances  at  Louisville  as  had
been  accustomed  to  shoot  birds,  had  never  seen  one  of  this  species  on  the
Ohio,  or  in  any  part  of  the  country.  It  was  then  and  there  that  I made
my  first  drawing  of  the  Red  Phalarope,  which  I shewed  to  Alexander
Wilson  during  his  visit  to  Louisville.  It  being  late  in  October,  the
specimens  which  I had  procured  were  all  in  their  grey  livery,  and  proved
capital  eating.  As  I was  anxious  to  watch  the  rest  of  the  flock,  which  I


BED  PHALAROPE.


405


think  must  have  been  composed  of  at  least  a hundred  individuals,  I went
to  the  same  place  on  the  following  afternoon.  As  I crossed  Bear  Grass
Creek,  near  its  junction  with  the  Ohio,  I observed  eight  or  ten  of  them
walking  over  the  green  moss  on  the  surface  of  the  water  near  the  shore.
Of  these  I succeeded  in  killing  three.  In  the  course  of  a walk  of  two  miles
along  the  banks  of  the  river,  I could  see  none ; and  some  Blue-winged
Teals  happening  to  pass  over  from  the  stream  in  the  direction  of  a pond
between  it  and  Kieger’s  Ferry-house,  I went  in  pursuit  of  them.  Before
I got  up  they  had  flown  away,  or  had  passed  over  without  alighting.  There,
however,  to  my  great  joy,  I found  all  the  Phalaropes  swimming  along  the
margins  and  picking  up  the  seeds  of  grasses.  They  were  much  less  shy
than  when  I met  with  them  on  the  river,  so  that  I soon  procured  eight
more  at  a single  shot.  The  rest  rose,  emitting  quick  sharp  cries,  performed
a few  evolutions  at  a considerable  height,  and  went  off  to  the  westward.

On  the  1st  of  September  1831,  while  on  board  the  packet  ship  Co-
lumbia, commanded  by  my  good  friend  Joseph  Delano,  Esq.  Nantucket
being  distant  about  sixty  miles,  we  came  upon  an  extensive  bank  of  sea-
weeds and  froth,  about  a mile  in  length,  which  I was  told  was  produced
by  the  action  of  the  tides.  On  this  bed  were  hundreds  of  Phalaropes
of  this  species,  walking  as  unconcernedly  as  if  on  land.  As  we  approached
it,  they  rose  and  flew  around  the  vessel  for  a few  minutes,  and  when  we
had  passed  through  we  saw  them  re-alight.

I have  not  seen  the  Red  Phalarope  alive  on  any  other  occasion  than
those  mentioned  above ; and  I am  indebted  to  my  generous  friend  Cap-
tain James  Clark  Ross  for  the  beautiful  specimens  in  summer  plumage,
from  which  the  figures  in  the  plate  were  taken.

None  of  those  which  I had  wounded  attempted  to  dive.  When  caught
and  held  in  the  hand,  they  merely  fluttered  and  tried  to  escape,  like  other
small  birds.  Their  flight  was  rapid,  resembling  that  of  the  Red-backed
Sandpiper,  Tringa  alpina,  and  they  performed  various  evolutions,  some-
times skimming  over  the  water,  when  they  kept  more  apart  than  either
when  rising  at  first,  or  when  they  reached  a certain  height,  on  attaining
which  they  pursued  their  course,  with  alternate  inclinations  to  either  side.

According  to  Captain  J.  C.  Ross,  these  birds  breed  in  great  numbers
far  north.  The  eggs,  of  which  he  has  favoured  me  with  some,  measure
an  inch  and  a quarter  by  seven-eighths ; tlieir  ground  colour  is  dull  green
i.sh-yellow,  irregularly  blotched  and  dotted  with  reddish-brown.


406


RED  PHALAROPE.


Phalaropus  FULicARius,  C/i.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  341.

Red  Phalarope,  Phalaropus  hvperboreus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ix.  p.  75.
pi.  74,  fig.  4.

Phalaropus  fulicarius,  Flat-billed  Phalarope,  Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna.
Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  407.

Red  Phalarope,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  236.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCL V.  Fig.  1 .

Bill  scarcely  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  slender,  nearly  cylindrical,
towards  the  end  broader  and  flattened,  the  tip  narrow.  Upper  mandible
with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  excepting  at  the  end,  where  it  is  a little
curved,  the  ridge  convex,  flattened  at  the  broad  part,  the  sides  slightly
sloping,  the  edges  rounded,  and  near  the  slightly  curved  obtuse  tip  in-
flected. Nasal  groove  hnear,  extending  to  near  the  tip ; nostrils  basal,
linear-elliptical.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,
the  sides  convex,  the  tip  narrowed,  obtuse.

Head  small,  with  the  fore  part  high  and  rounded ; eyes  small.  Neck
of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  fuU.  Feet  rather  short,  slender;  tibia
bare  a short  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  much  compressed,  narrowed  be-
fore and  behind,  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous  scutella ; toes  very  slen-
der, first  extremely  small,  free,  with  a slight  membrane  beneath,  second
shorter  than  third,  which  is  a little  longer ; all  scutellate  above,  the  anterior
margined  on  both  sides  with  lobed  and  pectinated  membranes,  which  are
united  at  the  base,  so  as  to  render  the  foot  nearly  half-webbed,  the  outer
web  much  longer  than  the  inner.  Claws  very  smaU,  compressed,  arched,
obtuse,  that  of  the  middle  toe  with  an  inner  sharp  edge.

Plumage  soft  and  slender,  the  feathers  on  the  back  and  wings  some-
what distinct.  Wings  long  and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,  but
rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  second  a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  gra-
duated ; secondary  quills  rather  short,  obliquely  truncate,  the  inner  ta-
pering and  elongated,  so  as  nearly  to  equal  the  longest  primaries  when
the  wing  is  closed.  Tail  of  moderate  length,  much  rounded,  of  twelve
feathers.

Bill  greenish-yellow,  black  at  the  point.  Iris  brown.  Feet  pale
greyish-blue.  Upper  part  of  the  head  black  ; loral  space  and  chin  black-
ish-grey ; sides  of  the  head,  and  a band  round  the  occiput,  white.  Sides
and  fore  part  of  tlie  neck,  breast,  abdomen,  and  lower  tail-coverts  deej)
orange-red.  Fore  jiart  of  the  back,  scapulars,  and  inner  secondaries,  black.


RED  PHALAROPE.


407


the  feathers  edged  with  whitish  ; wing-coverts  deep  ash-grey  ; quills  dark
greyish-brown,  their  shafts  and  basal  parts  white ; the  ends  of  the  se-
condary and  primary  coverts,  and  the  basal  part  of  the  outer  webs  of  the
primaries,  being  white,  a band  of  that  colour  is  seen  on  the  wing  when
it  is  extended.  Upper  tail-coverts  orange-red;  tail  deep  grey,  darker  to-
wards the  end,  slightly  tipped  with  reddish.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7^  inches,  to  end  of  claws  6f  ; extent  of  wings
13  ; wing  from  flexure  5 ; tail  ; bill  along  the  back  {I,  along  the  edge
of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  ^§,  its  claw

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  CCLV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  has  the  upper  part  variegated  with  light  red  and  brown-
ish-black, the  central  part  of  each  feather  being  of  the  latter  colour,  the
upper  tail-coverts  entirely  of  the  former.  Wings  greyish-black,  with  a
transverse  white  band ; tail  deep  grey  as  in  the  male.  The  lower  parts
are  of  a less  pure  red  than  those  of  the  male,  being  paler  and  tinged  with
grey.

Adult  in  winter.  Plate  CCLV.  Fig.  3.

The  winter  plumage  of  the  adult  is  very  different  in  colour.  The  bill
is  nearly  black,  the  feet  as  in  summer.  The  upper  part  of  the  head,
cheeks,  fore  part  and  sides  of  the  neck,  breast,  abdomen,  lower  and  upper
tail-coverts,  and  a band  across  the  wing,  are  white  ; a brownish-black  line
from  the  eye  to  the  occiput,  which  is  of  the  same  colour,  as  well  as  the
middle  of  the  hind  neck.  The  back,  scapulars,  and  inner  secondaries,  are
ash-grey,  the  wings  as  in  summer.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7|  inches.


( 408  )


BREAKING  UP  OF  THE  ICE.

W HXLE  proceeding  up  the  Mississippi  above  its  j unction  with  the  Ohio,

I found,  to  my  great  mortification,  that  its  navigation  was  obstructed  by
ice.  The  chief  conductor  of  my  bark,  who  was  a Canadian  Frenchman,
was  therefore  desired  to  take  us  to  a place  suitable  for  winter-quarters,
which  he  accordingly  did,  bringing  us  into  a great  bend  of  the  river  called
Tawapatee  Bottom.  The  waters  were  unusually  low,  the  thermometer
indicated  excessive  cold,  the  earth  all  around  was  covered  with  snow,  dark
clouds  were  spread  over  the  heavens,  and  as  all  appearances  were  unfa-
vourable to  the  hope  of  a speedy  prosecution  of  our  voyage,  we  quietly
set  to  work.  Our  bark,  which  was  a large  keel-boat,  was  moored  close
to  the  shore,  the  cargo  was  conveyed  to  the  woods,  large  trees  were
felled  over  the  water,  and  were  so  disposed  as  to  keep  off  the  pressure
of  the  floating  masses  of  ice.  In  less  than  two  days,  our  stores,  bag-
gage, and  ammunition,  were  deposited  in  a great  heap  under  one  of  the
magnificent  trees  of  which  the  forest  was  here  composed,  our  sails  were
spread  over  all,  and  a complete  camp  was  formed  in  the  wilderness.  Every
thing  around  us  seemed  dreary  and  dismal,  and  had  we  not  been  endowed
with  the  faculty  of  deriving  pleasure  from  the  examination  of  nature,  we
should  have  made  up  our  minds  to  pass  the  time  in  a state  similar  to  that
of  bears  during  their  hybernation.  We  soon  found  employment,  how-
ever, for  the  woods  were  full  of  game ; and  deer,  turkeys,  racoons,  and
opossums  might  be  seen  even  around  our  camp ; while  on  the  ice  that  now
covered  the  broad  stream  rested  flocks  of  swans,  to  surprise  which  the
hungry  wolves  were  at  times  seen  to  make  energetic  but  unsuccessful
efforts.  It  was  curious  to  see  the  snow-white  birds  all  lying  flat  on  the
ice,  but  keenly  intent  on  watching  the  motions  of  their  insidious  enemies,
until  the  latter  advanced  within  the  distance  of  a few  hundred  yards,  when
the  swans,  sounding  their  trumpet-notes  of  alarm,  would  all  rise,  spread
out  their  broad  wings,  and  after  running  some  yards  and  battering  the
ice  until  the  noise  was  echoed  like  thunder  through  the  woods,  rose  ex-
ultingly  into  the  air,  leaving  their  pursuers  to  devise  other  schemes  for
gratifying  their  craving  appetites.

The  nights  being  extremely  cold,  we  constantly  kept  up  a large  fire,
formed  of  the  best  wood.  Fine  trees  of  ash  and  hickory  were  felled,  cut


BREAKING  UP  OF  THE  ICE.


409


up  into  logs  of  convenient  size,  and  rolled  into  a pile,  on  the  top  of  which,
with  the  aid  of  twigs,  a fire  was  kindled.  There  were  about  fifteen  of
us,  some  hunters,  others  trappers,  and  all  more  or  less  accustomed  to  live
in  the  woods.  At  night,  when  all  had  returned  from  their  hunting-
grounds,  some  successful  and  others  empty-handed,  they  presented  a pic-
ture in  the  strong  glare  of  the  huge  fire  that  illuminated  the  forest,  which
it  might  prove  interesting  to  you  to  see,  were  it  copied  by  a bold  hand  on
canvass.  Over  a space  of  thirty  yards  or  more,  the  snow  was  scraped
away,  and  piled  up  into  a circular  wall,  which  protected  us  from  the  cold
blast.  Our  cooking  utensils  formed  no  mean  display,  and  before  a week
had  elapsed,  venison,  turkeys,  and  racoons  hung  on  the  branches  in  pro-
fusion. Fish,  too,  and  that  of  excellent  quality,  often  graced  our  board,
having  been  obtained  by  breaking  holes  in  the  ice  of  the  lakes.  It  was
observed  that  the  opossums  issued  at  night  from  holes  in  the  banks  of  the
river,  to  which  they  returned  about  day-break ; and  having  thus  dis-
covered their  retreat,  we  captured  many  of  them  by  means  of  snares.

At  the  end  of  a fortnight  our  bread  failed,  and  two  of  the  party  were
directed  to  proceed  across  the  bend,  towards  a village  on  the  western
bank  of  the  Mississippi,  in  quest  of  that  commodity ; for  although  we
had  a kind  of  substitute  for  it  in  the  dry  white  flesh  of  the  breast  "of  the
wild  turkey,  bread  is  bread  after  all,  and  more  indispensable  to  civilized
man  than  any  other  article  of  food.  The  expedition  left  the  camp  early
one  morning  ; one  of  the  party  boasted  much  of  his  knowledge  of  woods,

■ while  the  other  said  nothing,  but  followed.  They  walked  on  all  day,  and
returned  next  morning  to  the  camp  with  empty  wallets.  The  next  at-
tempt, however,  succeeded,  and  they  brought  on  a sledge  a barrel  of  flour
and  some  potatoes.  After  a while,  we  were  joined  by  many  Indians,  the
observation  of  whose  manners  afforded  us  much  amusement.

Six  weeks  were  spent  in  Tawapatee  Bottom.  The  waters  had  kept
continually  sinking,  and  our  boat  lay  on  her  side  high  and  dry.  On  both
sides  of  the  stream,  the  ice  had  broken  into  heaps,  forming  huge  walls.
Our  pilot  visited  the  river  daily,  to  see  what  prospect  there  might  be  of
a change.  One  night,  while,  excepting  himself,  all  were  sound  asleep,  he
suddenly  roused  us  with  loud  cries  of  “ the  ice  is  breaking  ! get  up,  get
up,  down  to  the  boat  lads,  bring  out  your  axes,  hurry  on,  or  we  may  lose
her,  here  let  us  have  a torch  !”  Starting  up,  as  if  we  had  been  attacked
by  a band  of  savages,  we  ran  pell-mell  to  the  bank.  The  ice  was  indeed
breaking  up  ; it  split  with  reports  like  those  of  heavy  artillery,  and  as  the


410


BREAKING  UP  OF  THE  ICE.


water  had  suddenly  risen  from  an  overflow  of  the  Ohio,  the  two  streams
seemed  to  rush  against  each  other  with  violence,  in ‘consequence  of  which
the  congealed  mass  was  broken  into  large  fragments,  some  of  which  rose
nearly  erect  here  and  there,  and  again  fell  with  thundering  crash,  as  the
wounded  whale,  when  in  the  agonies  of  death,  springs  up  with  furious
force,  and  again  plunges  into  the  foaming  waters.  To  our  surprise,  the
weather,  which  in  the  evening  had  been  calm  and  frosty,  had  become  wet
and  blowy.  The  water  gushed  from  the  fissures  formed  in  the  ice,  and
the  prospect  was  extremely  dismal.  When  day  dawned,  a spectacle
strange  and  fearful  presented  itself : the  whole  mass  of  water  was  violent-
ly agitated,  its  covering  was  broken  into  small  fragments,  and  although
not  a foot  of  space  was  without  ice,  not  a step  could  the  most  daring  have
ventured  to  make  upon  it.  Our  boat  was  in  imminent  danger,  for  the  trees
which  had  been  placed  to  guard  it  from  the  ice  were  cut  or  broken  into
pieces,  and  were  thrust  against  her.  It  was  impossible  to  move  her ; but
our  pilot  ordered  every  man  to  bring  down  great  bunches  of  cane,  which
were  lashed  along  her  sides ; and  before  these  were  destroyed  by  the  ice,
she  was  afloat  and  riding  above  it.  While  we  were  gazing  on  the  scene,
a tremendous  crash  was  heard,  which  seemed  to  have  taken  place  about
a mile  below,  when  suddenly  the  great  dam  of  ice  gave  way.  The  cur-
rent of  the  Mississippi  had  forced  its  way  against  that  of  the  Ohio  ; and
in  less  than  four  hours,  we  witnessed  the  complete  breaking  up  of  the  ice.

During  that  winter,  the  ice  was  so  thick  on  the  Mississippi,  that  op-
posite St  Louis,  horses  and  heavy  waggons  crossed  the  river.  Many,
boats  had  been  detained  in  the  same  manner  as  our  own,  so  that  provi-
sions and  other  necessary  articles  had  become  very  scarce,  and  sold  at  a
high  price.  This  happened  about  twenty-eight  years  ago.


( 411  )


THE  REDDISH  EGRET.

Ardea  rufescens,  Gmel.

PLATE  CCLVI.  Adult  and  Young.

While  sailing  towards  the  Florida  Keys,  my  mind  was  agitated  with
anticipations  of  the  delight  I should  experience  in  exploring  a region
whose  productions  were  very  imperfectly  known.  Often  did  I think  of
the  Heron  named  after  Titian  Peale,  by  my  learned  friend  the  Prince
of  Musignano.  Mr  Peale  had  procured  only  a single  specimen,  and  in
the  winter  season,  but  whether  or  not  the  species  was  abundant  on  the
Keys  of  Florida  remained  to  be  discovered.  No  sooner  had  I been  landed
and  formed  an  acquaintance  with  Mr  Egan,  the  pilot  of  whom  I have
often  spoken,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  haunts  of  many  of  the
birds  of  those  islands,  than  I asked  him  respecting  the  various  Herons
which  might  be  found  there  or  on  the  shores  of  the  mainland.  Before  an-
swering me,  he  counted  his  fingers  slowly,  and  then  said  that  he  could
recollect  only  “ twelve  sorts “ but,”  added  he,  “ these  birds  change
their  colours  so  curiously,  that  it  is  past  wonder  with  me  to  believe  that
any  one  rnan  could  know  them  without  watching  them  as  I have  done  for
many  years.”  I then  inquired  if  I was  in  good  time  to  procure  all  the
sorts  which  he  knew.  He  answered  in  the  affirmative ; but  felt  some
doubt  as  to  my  procuring  the  eggs  of  one  kind  at  least,  which  breed
earlier  than  the  rest,  and  was  pure  white  from  the  shell,  and  the  largest
of  all.  Thinking  the  species  to  which  he  alluded  might  be  the  Ardea
alba  of  Linn^cs,  I asked  if  it  had  long  thread-like  feathers  over  the  tail
during  the  breeding  season.  “ Oh  no.  Sir,”  said  he,  “ it  never  has ; it  is
as  tall  as  yourself,  and  when  you  see  some  on  the  wing,  you  will  be  pleased,
for  their  wings  are  as  large  as  those  of  the  Brown  Pelican.  The  one  I guess
you  mean,  mostly  goes  farther  to  the  eastward  to  breed,  along  with  a very
small  one,  also  always  white,  with  the  feathers  over  the  tail  as  you  say,
and  curled  upwards.  These  are  the  only  three  sorts  that  are  white.”
I begged  him  to  describe  the  colours  of  the  others,  which  he  did  so  well
that  I recognised  ten  species  in  ail ; but  the  large  white  one,  and  another
of  a grey  and  purple  colour,  were  unknown  to  me,  and  I told  him  so,
stating  at  the  same  time  how  anxious  I was  to  procure  them  if  possible.


412


REDDISH  EGRET.


“If  possible  ! nothing  in  the  world  can  be  more  easy,  for  if  they  have  no
eggs  left,  they  have  young  ones  enough  to  load  your  schooner.  I can
take  you  straight  to  their  breeding  place.”

Y ou  may  suppose,  Reader,  how  my  spirits  were  raised  by  this  intelli-
gence, and  how  surprised  I was  that  Peale’s  Egret  was  not  in  the  number
of  the  Florida  Herons.  We  speedily  embarked  in  Mr  Thhoston’s  boat,
spread  our  sails  to  the  breeze,  and  passed  several  keys,  on  which  we  pro-
cured two  young  birds  of  the  large  white  species,  which  I saw  at  once
was  unknown  to  me,  but  of  which  you  will  find  an  account  in  this  volume.
As  we  approached  the  next  island,  I saw  twenty  or  thirty  pairs  of  Herons,
some  of  which  were  pure  white,  others  of  a light  blue  colour,  but  so  much
larger  than  the  Blue  Heron,  Ardea  cosrulca,  that  I asked  the  pilot  what
they  were,  when  he  answered,  “ the  very  fellows  I want  to  shew  you,  and
you  may  soon  see  them  close  enough,  as  you  and  I will  shoot  a few  by
way  of  amusement.”  Before  half  an  hour  had  elapsed,  more  than  a dozen
were  lying  at  my  feet.  Some  of  them  were  as  white  as  driven  snow,  the
rest  of  a delicate  purplish  tint,  inclining  to  grey  on  the  back  and  Avings,
with  heads  and  necks  of  a curious  reddish  colour.  Males  and  females
there  were,  but  they  were  all  of  one  species,  for  my  companion  assured
me  that  “ this  sort  bred  before  they  turned  to  their  natural  colours,”  by
which  he  meant  before  attaining  their  full  plumage  at  the  age  of  three
years.  Well,  the  immature  birds  were  the  very  same  as  the  individual  to
which,  as  the  representative  of  a new  species,  the  name  of  Peale’s  Egret
had  been  given.  This  I saw  at  once,  for  so  good  is  the  representation  of
it  in  the  fourth  volume  of  Bonaparte’s  American  Ornithology,  that  from
the  mere  recollection  of  it  I was  enabled  to  recognise  the  bird  at  once.
You  may  imagine  the  pleasure  I felt,  as  well  as  that  which  I experienced
on  becoming  better  acquainted  with  this  species,  which  I found  in  many
places  both  with  eggs  and  with  young.

The  Reddish  Egret  is  a constant  resident  on  the  Florida  Keys,  to  which
it  is  so  partial  at  all  seasons  that  it  never  leaves  them.  Some  individuals  are
seen  as  far  east  as  Cape  Florida,  and  westward  along  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.
Whether  it  may  ever  betake  itself  to  fresh  water  I cannot  say,  but  I never
found  one  in  such  a situation.  It  is  a more  plump  bird  for  its  size  than
most  other  Herons,  and  in  this  respect  resembles  the  Night  Heron  and  the
Yellow-crowned  species,  but  possesses  all  the  gracefulness  of  the  tribe  to
which  it  belongs.  In  walking  it  lifts  its  feet  high,  and  proceeds  at  a
quiet  pace,  but  sometimes  briskly ; it  alights  with  ease  on  trees,  and  walks


REDDISH  EGRET.


413


well  on  the  larger  branches.  It  rarely  feeds  from  the  edges  of  the  water,
but  resorts  to  the  shallows  of  the  extensive  mud  or  sand  flats,  so  nume-
rous about  the  keys.  There,  twenty  or  thirty,  sometimes  so  many  as  a
hundred,  may  be  seen  wading  up  to  the  heel  (or  knee-joint  as  it  is  usually
called)  in  pursuit  of  prey,  or  standing  in  silence  awaiting  the  approach
of  an  animal  on  which  it  feeds,  when  it  strikes  it,  and  immediately  swal-
lows it,  if  not  too  large ; but  if  so,  it  carries  it  to  the  shore,  beats  it,  and
tears  it  to  pieces,  rarely,  however,  using  its  feet  for  that  purpose,  and  cer-
tainly never  employing  its  pectinated  claws,  which  no  Heron  that  I know
ever  uses  for  any  other  object  than  that  of  scratching  its  head,  or  per-
haps of  securing  its  steps  on  rocky  bottoms.  These  birds  remain  on
.the  flats  thus  employed,  until  the  advance  of  the  tide  forces  them  to  the
land.

The  flight  of  this  Heron  is  more  elevated  and  regular  than  that  of
the  smaller  species.  During  the  love  season,  it  is  peculiarly  graceful  and
elegant,  especially  when  one  unmated  male  is  pursuing  another,  a female
being  in  sight.  They  pass  through  the  air  with  celerity,  turn  and  cut
about  in  curious  curves  and  zigzags,  the  stronger  bird  frequently  erecting
its  beautiful  crest,  and  uttering  its  note,  at  the  moment  when  it  expects
to  give  its  rival  a thrust.  When  these  aerial  combats  take  place  between
old  and  immature  birds,  their  different  colours  form  a striking  contrast,
extremely  pleasing  to  the  beholder.  While  travelling  to  and  from  their
feeding  grounds,  or  from  one  key  to  another,  they  propel  themselves  by
easy,  well-sustained,  and  regular  flappings  of  their  extended  wings,  the
neck  reposing  on  the  shoulders,  the  legs  stretched  out  behind  like  a rud-
der, while  their  beautiful  thready  trains  float  in  the  breeze.  On  ap-
proaching a landing  place,  they  seldom  fail  to  perform  a few  circumvolu-
tions, in  order  to  see  that  all  around  is  quiet,  for  they  are  more  shy  and
wary  than  the  smaller  Herons,  and  almost  as  suspicious  as  the  two  larger
species,  Jrdea  occidentalism  and  A.  Herodias ; and  this  becomes  apparent
as  soon  as  they  discontinue  the  feeding  of  their  young,  when  you  find  it
extremely  difficult  to  approach  them.  After  this  period  I rarely  shot  one,
unless  I happened  to  come  upon  it  unawares,  or  while  it  was  passing  over
me  when  among  the  mangroves.

About  the  beginning  of  April,  these  Herons  begin  to  pair.  The
males  chase  each  other  on  the  ground,  as  well  as  in  the  air,  and  on  re-
turning to  their  chosen  females  erect  their  crest  and  plumes,  swell  out
their  necks,  pass  and  repass  before  them,  and  emit  hollow  rough  sounds,


414


REDDISH  EGRET.


which  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe.  It  is  curious  to  see  a party  of
twenty  or  thirty  on  a sand-bar,  presenting  as  they  do  a mixture  of  colours
from  pure  white  to  the  full  hues  of  the  old  birds  of  either  sex ; and  still
more  curious  perhaps  it  is  to  see  a purple  male  paying  his  addresses  to  a
white  female,  while  at  hand  a white  male  is  caressing  a purple  female,  and
not  far  off  are  a pair  of  white,  and  another  of  purple  birds.  Nay,  reader,
until  I had  witnessed  these  remarkable  circumstances,  I felt  some  distrust
respecting  the  statement  of  the  worthy  pilot.  I am  even  now  doubtful
if  all  the  young  breed  the  first  spring  after  their  birth,  and  am  more  in-
clined to  think  that  they  do  not,  on  account  of  the  large  flocks  of  white
birds  of  this  species  which  during  the  breeding  time  kept  apart  from  those
that  had  nests,  but  which  on  examination  were  not  found  to  be  barren
birds,  although  they  had  the  crests  and  pendent  feathers  less  elongated
than  those  white  individuals  that  were  actually  breeding.

By  the  middle  of  April,  they  construct  their  nests,  which  they  place
for  the  most  part  on  the  south-western  sides  of  the  mangroves  immediately
bordering  the  keys,  never  on  the  trees  at  a distance  from  the  water,  and
rarely  very  close  together.  Some  are  placed  on  the  top  branches,  others
a foot  or  two  above  the  highest  tide-mark  ; many  of  them  are  annually
repaired,  perhaps  all  that  stand  the  winter  gales.  The  nest,  which  is  quite
flat,  is  large  for  the  size  of  the  bird,  and  is  formed  of  dry  sticks,  inter-
spersed with  grass  and  leaves.  The  eggs  are  three,  average  an  inch  and
three  quarters  in  length,  one  and  three-eighths  in  breadth,  have  an  elliptical
form,  and  a smooth  shell,  of  a uniform  rather  pale  sea-green  colour.  They
afford  excellent  eating.  Both  sexes  incubate,  but  I did  not  ascertain  the
time  required  for  hatching.

The  young  while  yet  naked  are  of  a dark  colour,  there  being  only  a
few  scanty  tufts  of  long  soft  down  on  the  head  and  other  parts ; but
when  the  feathers  begin  to  sprout  they  became  white.  Being  abundantly
and  carefully  fed,  at  first  by  regurgitation,  they  grow  fast,  and  soon  be-
come noisy.  When  about  a month  old,  they  are  fed  less  frequently,  and
the  fish  is  merely  dropt  before  them,  or  into  their  open  throats ; soon  af-
ter they  sit  upright  on  the  nest,  with  their  legs  extended  forward,  or
crawl  about  on  the  branches,  as  all  other  Herons  are  wont  to  do.  They
are  now  sensible  of  danger,  and  when  a boat  is  heai’d  coming  towards  them
they  hide  among  the  branches,  making  towards  the  interior  of  the  keys,
where  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  follow  them.  On  one  occasion,  when  I
was  desirous  of  procuring  some  of  them  alive,  to  take  to  Charleston,  it


REDDISH  EGRET.


415


took  more  than  an  hour  to  catch  eight  or  nine  of  them,  for  they  moved  so
fast  and  stealthily  through  the  mangroves,  always  making  for  the  closest
and  most  tangled  parts,  that  a man  was  obliged  to  keep  his  eyes  constantly
on  a single  individual,  which  it  was  very  difficult  to  do,  on  account  of  the
number  of  birds  crossing  each  other  in  every  direction.  They  do  not  fly
until  they  are  six  or  seven  weeks  old,  and  even  then  do  not  venture  be-
yond the  island  on  which  they  have  been  reared.  In  captivity,  those
which  we  had  procured  feed  freely,  and  soon  became  tolerably  docile.
They  were  supplied  with  pieces  of  green  turtle  and  other  species  of  the
tribe,  and  some  of  them  reached  Charleston  in  good  health.  One  con-
tinued alive  for  neai’ly  two  years  with  my  friend  the  Rev.  John  Bach-
man. It  was  allowed  to  walk  in  the  garden  and  poultry-yard,  and  ate
an  enormous  quantity  of  small  fish  and  all  sorts  of  garbage,  contenting
itself,  when  better  food  was  scarce,  with  the  entrails  of  fowls,  and  even
fed  freely  on  moistened  corn-meal  or  mush.  It  caught  insects  with  great
dexterity,  and  was  very  gentle  and  familiar,  frequently  going  into  the
kitchen,  where  it  was  a great  favourite.  It  had  acquired  a crest  and  a
few  of  the  pendent  feathers  of  the  back  by  the  month  of  January,  when
about  twenty-two  months  old.  One  cold  night,  it  was  accidentally  neglect-
ed, and  in  the  morning  was  found  dead,  having  shared  the  fate  of  so  many
thousands  of  pet  birds  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  On  being  opened,  it  was
found  to  be  a male.  Although  I have  not  been  able  to  trace  the  gradual
changes  of  colour  which  this  species  undergoes,  I have  little  doubt  that
it  will  be  found  to  attain  maturity  the  third  spring  after  birth.

The  Reddish  Egret  rarely  associates  with  others  ; nor  does  it  suffer
them  to  nestle  on  the  same  island  with  itself.  In  this  respect,  it  differs
from  all  other  Herons  with  which  I am  acquainted;  for  although  the  Great
White  Heron,  A.  occidentalis,  has  a decided  antipathy  to  the  Great  Blue
Heron,  still  it  now  and  then  allows  a few  to  breed  on  the  north  side  of  its
island.  The  present  species  is  as  strictly  marine  as  the  Great  White
Heron ; and  these  are  the  only  two  that  are  so,  for  all  the  others  feed  on
fresh-water  fishes,  not  less  than  on  those  obtained  in  salt-water,  as  well  as
on  other  food  of  various  kinds.  Like  all  others,  the  Reddish  Egret
loses  its  ornaments  soon  after  incubation,  when  old  and  young  mix,  and
follow  their  occupations  together.  When  wounded,  it  strikes  with  its  bill,
scratches  with  its  claws,  and,  throwing  itself  on  its  back,  emits  its  rough
and  harsh  notes,  keeping  all  the  while  its  crest  erected  and  expanded,
and  its  feathers  swelled  out.  Its  principal  food  consists  of  fishes  of  vari-


416


REDDISH  EGRET.


ous  sizes,  of  which  it  consumes  a great  number,  and  of  which  it  finds  no
difficulty  in  procuring  a sufficiency,  as  all  the  waters  of  those  portions  of
the  Floridas  that  are  inhabited  by  it  are  very  profusely  stocked.  I was
told  that,  although  still  plentiful  in  the  Floridas,  this  species  was  much
more  so  when  the  keys  were  first  settled.  I was  present  when  a person
killed  twenty-eight  in  succession  in  about  an  hour,  the  poor  birds  hover-
ing above  their  island  in  dismay,  and  unaware  of  the  destructive  power
of  their  enemy.

The  remarkable  circumstance  of  this  bird’s  changing  from  white  to
purple  will  no  doubt  have  some  tendency  to  disconcert  the  systematists,
who,  it  seems,  pronounce  all  the  birds  which  they  name  Egrets  to  be  al-
ways white ; but  how  much  more  disconcerted  must  they  be  when  they
see  that  among  the  Herons  peculiarly  so  named,  which  they  say  are  al-
ways coloured,  the  largest  known  to  exist  in  the  United  States  is  pure
white.  It  is  not  at  present  my  intention  to  say  what  an  Egret  is,  or  what
a Heron  is  ; but  it  can  no  longer  be  denied  that  the  presence  or  absence
of  a loose  crest,  floating  plume,  and  a white  colour,  are  insufficient  for
establishing  essential  characters  separating  Egrets  from  Herons,  which  in
fact  display  the  most  intimate  connection,  the  one  group  running  into  the
other  in  an  almost  imperceptible  gradation.  Hoping  that  an  account  of
the  extent  of  the  migrations  of  the  twelve  species  of  Heron  that  occur  in
the  United  States,  and  whose  habits  I have  studied  for  many  years  under
the  most  favourable  circumstances,  may  prove  acceptable,  I now  lay  one
before  you,  arranging  the  species  according  to  size,  without  regard  to  the
rank  they  hold  in  systematic  works.

1.  The  Great  White  Heron.  Ardea  occidentalis.  A constant  resi-
dent on  the  southern  keys  of  Florida ; entirely  maritime ; never  goes
farther  eastward  than  Cape  Florida,  though  in  winter  the  younger  birds
migrate  southward,  and  perhaps  pass  beyond  the  extremities  of  the  Gulf
of  Mexico.

2.  The  Great  Blue  Heron.  Ardea  Herodias.  A constant  resident
in  the  Floridas ; migrates  tliroughout  the  Union,  and  as  far  along  the
Atlantic  coast  as  the  southernmost  islands  of  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence  in
summer  ; breeds  in  all  the  districts,  and  at  the  approach  of  winter  returns
to  the  Southern  States.

3.  The  White  Heron.  Ardea  alba.  Resident  in  the  Floridas ; mi-
grates to  the  eastward  sometimes  as  far  as  Massachusetts,  and  up  the
Mississippi  as  far  as  the  city  of  Natchez  ; never  seen  far  inland.


REDDISH  EGRET.


417


4.  The  Purple  Heron.  Ardea  rufescens.  Resident  on  the  Florida
Keys  ; entirely  maritime ; never  seen  farther  eastward  than  Cape  Florida ;
the  young  sometimes  remove  southward  in  winter.

5.  The  American  Bittern.  Ardea  minor.  A winter  resident  in  the
Floridas ; many  migrate  over  the  greater  part  of  the  Union  and  beyond
its  northern  limits  ; never  seen  in  Kentucky ; return  before  winter  to  the
Southern  States.

6.  The  Night  Heron.  Ardea  Nycticorax.  Resident  in  the  Floridas ;
migrates  eastward  as  far  as  Maine,  up  the  Mississippi  as  high  as  Memphis ;
none  seen  in  Kentucky  ; returns  to  the  Southern  States  at  the  approach
of  winter,  and  occurs  at  the  distance  of  a hundred  miles  inland.

7.  The  Yellow-crowned  Heron.  Ardea  violacea.  A few  spend  the
winter  in  the  Floridas ; it  rarely  migrates  farther  eastward  than  New
Jersey ; proceeds  up  the  Mississippi  to  Natchez  ; never  goes  far  inland  ;
the  greatest  number  winter  beyond  the  southern  limits  of  the  United
States.

8.  The  Blue  Heron.  Ardea  ccerulea.  Resident  in  the  Floridas  ; mi-
grates eastward  as  far  as  Long  Island ; proceeds  up  the  Mississippi  about
a hundred  miles  above  Natchez  ; never  goes  far  inland.

9.  The  Louisiana  Heron.  Ardea  Ludoviciana.  Resident  in  the  Flo-
ridas ; rarely  seen  as  far  east  as  New  Jersey ; seldom  passes  Natchez  on
the  Mississippi ; never  goes  far  inland.

10.  The  White  Egret.  Ardea  candidissima.  Resident  in  the  Flo-
ridas ; migrates  eastward  as  far  as  New  York,  up  the  Mississippi  as  far
as  Memphis ; never  goes  far  inland ; returns  to  the  Southern  States  as
soon  as  the  young  are  able  to  travel.

11.  The  Green  Heron.  Ardea  virescens.  Resident  in  the  Floridas;
disperses  over  the  Union  ; goes  far  inland  ; the  greater  number  return  at
the  approach  of  winter  to  the  Southern  States.

12.  The  Least  Bittern.  Ardea  exilis.  Resident  in  the  Floridas;
migrates  as  far  as  Maine,  and  throughout  the  Western  Country,  far  up
the  Missouri ; returns  early  in  autumn  to  the  Southern  States.

You  will  see  from  the  above  statement,  that  the  Herons  are  almost
similar  to  our  Pigeons  in  respect  to  the  extent  of  their  migrations,  which
must  appear  the  more  remarkable  on  account  of  their  comparative  size,
Ardea  Herodias  and  A.  virescens  corresponding  in  a great  degree  to  the
Columba  mig-ratoria  and  C.  carolinensis.

D d


VOL.  III.


418


REDDISH  EGRET.


L’Aigkette  eousse,  Buffon,  Ois.  voL  vii.  p.  378.JP1.  Enl.  902.

Ardea  rufescens,  Gmel.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  628. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  694.

Reddish  Egret,  Arct.  Zool.  vol.  ii.  N.  348 Lath.  Gen.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  88.

Peale’s  Egret  Herou,  Ardea  Pealii,  Ch.  Bonajta/rte,  Amer.  Ornith.  voL  iv.  p.  96,
pi.  xxvi.  fig.  1,  the  Young  Bird.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering,  the
mandibles  nearly  equal  in  size.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  hne
nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  afterwards  very
narrow,  a groove  from  the  base  to  near  the  end,  beneath  which  the  sides
are  convex,  the  edges  thin  and  sharp,  with  a notch  on  each  side  close  to
the  narrow  but  obtuse  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,  longitudinal.  Lower
mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  extremely  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  be-
yond it  ascending  and  very  slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  slightly
inflected,  the  tip  very  narrow  but  obtuse.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  very  long  and  slender.
Body  slender  and  compressed.  Feet  very  long  ; tibia  elongated  and
slender,  its  lower  half  bare,  covered  all  round  with  angular  scales ; tar-
sus elongated,  slender,  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous
large  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  angular  scales.  Toes  of  moderate
length,  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  reticularly  granulate  beneath ;
third  toe  considerably  longer  than  the  fourth,  which  is  in  nearly  the  same
proportion  longer  than  the  second,  the  first  much  shorter,  but  strong ;
claws  rather  small,  strong,  arched,  compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  hind  toe
much  larger,  the  inner  edge  of  that  of  the  third  regularly  pectinated.

Space  between  the  bill  and  eye,  and  around  the  latter,  bare,  as  is  the
lower  half  of  the  tibia.  Plumage  soft,  generally  loose.  Feathers  of  the
upper  and  hind  part  of  the  head,  and  of  the  neck  generally,  especially  on
the  sides  and  at  the  lower  part  anteriorly,  much  elongated  very  narrow,
loose,  with  linear  compact  extremities.  The  feathers  of  the  back  are  si-
milar but  broader  at  their  base,  and  those  from  the  middle  of  the  back
are  so  elongated  as  to  extend  several  inches  beyond  the  tail,  forming  a
train  of  which  the  filaments  are  hair-like  and  rather  stiff.  Wings  of  mo-
derate length  ; primaries  broad,  tapering,  the  inner  broadly  rounded,  with
an  acumen,  as  are  the  very  broad  secondaries ; first  quill  longest,  second
almost  equal,  third  and  fourth  slightly  shorter,  the  rest  of  the  primaries
rapidly  graduated  ; the  inner  secondaries  extend  to  nearly  an  inch  of  the


REDDISH  EGRET.


419


tip  of  the  wing,  when  the  latter  is  closed.  Tail  very  short,  slightly
rounded,  of  twelve  rather  weak  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black  on  its  terminal  third,  the  rest  and  the  bare  space  on  the
head  pale  flesh-colour.  Iris  white.  Legs  and  feet  ultramarine  blue,  the
scutella  bluish-black,  as  are  the  claws.  Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck
light  reddish-brown,  tinged  with  lilac,  the  tips  fading  to  brownish-white.
Back  and  wings  dull  greyish-blue ; the  long  feathers  of  the  train  yellow-
ish towards  the  tips ; all  the  lower  parts  are  greyish-blue  paler  than  that
of  the  upper.

Length  to  end  of  tail  SI  inches,  to  end  of  wings  32  ; to  end  of  claws
40 ; extent  of  wings  46  ; wing  from  flexure  14^  ; tail  4^  ; bill  along  the
back  4,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  4j5,  depth  at  the  base  1 ; bare
part  of  tibia  ; tarsus  6 ; middle  toe  3,  its  claw  Weight  1|  lb.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  Male  in  colour,  but  is  rather
smaller.

Young  nearly  two  years  old.  Plate  CCLVI.  Fig  2.

The  bill  is  coloured  as  in  the  adult,  as  is  the  iris,  but  the  feet  are
dark  olive-green,  the  soles  greenish-yellow.  The  plumage  presents  the
same  form  as  in  the  adult,  but  is  entirely  pure  white.

In  this  state  the  bird  has  been  described  as  a distinct  species  under
the  name  of  Peale’s  Egret  Heron,  but  must  now  be  restored  to  its  proper
species,  the  adult  having  been  described  and  figured  by  Buffon  under  the
name  of  Aigrette  rousse,  and  named  by  Latham  the  Reddish  Egret.

This  species  may  be  distinguished  at  the  first  glance  from  all  others
that  occur  in  the  United  States,  by  the  peculiar  form  of  the  feathers  of
the  head  and  neck,  which  are  loose,  pendent,  and  fringe-like,  at  all  sea-
sons, excepting  in  the  young  bird  before  the  first  moult.

The  number  of  young,  as  in  all  other  species,  much  exceeds  that  of
adult  or  coloured  birds ; and  I have  procured  them  in  the  proportion  of
three  to  one.  I carried  upwards  of  fifty  specimens  of  this  Heron  to
Charleston,  where,  as  well  as  in  Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  London,  I
presented  some  to  my  friends  and  to  public  institutions.  I also  sent  seve-
ral to  my  friend  P.  J.  Selby,  Esq.  of  Twizel,  Northumberland,  and  lately
gave  a pair  to  the  Museum  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  Several  spe-
cimens, which  I presented  to  His  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Sussex,
have  been  by  him  given  to  the  British  Museum.


D d 2


( 420  )


the  DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.

Phalacrocorjx  dilophus.

PLATE  CCLVII.  Male.

The  objects  that  more  especially  attract  the  notice  of  the  voyager,  as  he
draws  near  the  south-west  coast  of  Labrador,  are  the  numerous  low  islands
covered  with  countless  multitudes  of  birds,  that  have  assembled  there  for
the  purpose  of  reproduction.  Some  miles  farther,  you  see  a ridge  of  craggy
and  desolate  cliffs,  emerging  from  the  sea,  and  presenting  the  appearance  of
a huge  granite  wall.  This  forms  a partition  between  the  waters  of  the  great
St  Lawrence  and  many  fine  harbours  hidden  here  and  there  behind  it,
along  with  numerous  inlets  and  bays,  coves  and  small  creeks,  in  which
the  bark  of  the  adventurer  may  ride  in  comparative  safety.  From  the
hoary  summit  of  this  bulwark  the  view  is  grand  beyond  description  ; val-
leys richly  carpeted  with  moss  and  thickets  of  low  shrubs  glow  in  tints  of
the  richest  green  ; clear  blue  lakes  bear  on  their  bosom  numerous  birds
of  varied  wing,  while  around  their  margins  the  females  are  seated  on  their
eggs  or  carefully  leading  about  their  young ; banks  of  perennial  snow  ar-
rest your  eye  for  a moment,  and  perhaps  produce  an  involuntary  chill ;
onward  towards  the  horizon,  mountains  heaped  confusedly  behind  moun-
tains, mingle  their  gloomy  tints  with  those  of  the  cold  sky.  In  that  land,
man  may  for  weeks,  even  months,  seek  for  his  kind  in  vain.  The  deep
silence  that  reigns  around  him  during  a calm,  seldom  fails  to  bring  sad-
ness to  his  heart,  as  his  eye  grows  dim  with  gazing  on  the  wilderness.
Should  the  northern  gale  issue  from  its  snowy  chambers,  darkness  fol-
lows in  its  train,  and  should  its  whole  fury  pour  upon  you,  melancholy
indeed  must  be  your  lot.

To  the  low  islands  above  alluded  to,  the  beautiful  Cormorant  repre-
sented in  the  plate  before  you,  resorts  each  spring,  for  the  purpose  of
breeding.  It  arrives  from  the  south  about  the  beginning  of  May,  or  as
soon  as  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  are  sufficiently  free  of  ice  to  enable  it  to
procure  food.  The  winter  it  spends  on  our  eastern  coasts,  but  it  rarely
proceeds  farther  south  than  the  Capes  of  North  Carolina,  about  which  it
meets  its  southern  friend  the  Florida  Cormorant,  on  whose  dominions,
however,  it  does  not  venture.


DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.


421


While  with  us,  the  Double-crested  Cormorants  are  seen  flying  in  long
lines,  sometimes  forming  angles,  and  passing  low  over  the  water,  at  no
great  distance  from  the  shore.  They  enter  our  large  bays,  rivers  and
creeks,  going  up  as  far  as  the  tide,  but  are  seldom  or  never  seen  fishing
in  fresh-water.  Their  stay  along  the  Middle  Districts  continues  from  the
beginning  of  October  to  the  middle  of  April ; farther  east  they  are  seen
a month  earlier,  and  disappear  a fortnight  later.  A good  number  breed
on  the  Seal  Islands  off  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  but  the  greater  part  return  to
Labrador  and  Baffin’s  Bay,  where  Dr  Richardson  found  this  species.
To  that  excellent  man  and  intrepid  traveller,  we  are  indebted,  among
other  valuable  fruits  of  his  labours,  for  the  first  good  description  of  this
bird.  From  his  account  and  the  information  which  I have  received  from
Captain  James  Clark  Ross,  I believe  that  it  does  not  go  much  farther
north  than  the  place  where  it  was  observed  by  the  first  mentioned  traveller ;
and  no  Cormorants  were  seen  during  the  late  voyage  to  the  Arctic  circle.
It  is  probable  that  neither  the  Double-crested  nor  the  Florida  Cormorants
occur  in  any  part  of  Europe ; at  least,  if  they  have  been  described  as
birds  of  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  I can  find  no  account  sufficiently  cor-
rect to  enable  me  to  recognise  them.

A few  miles  from  one  of  the  entrances  of  the  Harbour  of  Whapatiguan,
is  a low  and  flat  island  about  a mile  in  length,  on  which  the  present  species
breeds.  As  we  sailed  past  it,  we  could  easily  observe  the  birds  on  their
nests,  all  over  the  rock,  which  was  completely  white- washed  with  their  ex-
crement, that  emitted  a disagreeable  odour  to  a great  distance.  I had  seen
several  islands  near  the  Harbour  of  Great  Macatina  inhabited  by  these
Cormorants,  but  being  anxious  to  complete  the  examination  of  one  sub-
ject at  a time,  and  knowing  that  we  should  see  a greater  number  as  we
approach  the  Straits  of  Belle  Isle,  I put  off  the  investigation  until  I should
have  leisure  to  prosecute  it  satisfactorily.

My  son,  accompanied  by  the  captain  and  four  sailors,  sailed  for  Cor-
morant Island,  on  which,  however,  they  found  great  difficulty  in  landing,
for  the  surf  broke  so  fearfully  as  to  call  into  requisition  all  the  judgment
and  good  management  of  Mr  Emery.  The  moment  they  landed,  al-
most all  the  birds  of  the  island  rose  on  wing,  darkening  the  air,  and
alighted  at  some  distance  on  the  water  in  large  bodies.  They  were  so  shy
that  it  was  not  without  considerable  difficulty  that  ten  of  them  were  ob-
tained. At  the  first  shot,  hundreds  of  young  ones  scrambled  out  of  their
nests,  and  huddled  together  in  packs  of  fifteen  or  twenty.  When  the  men


422


DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.


approached  them,  they  opened  their  bills,  squeaked,  hissed,  and  puffed  in
a most  outrageous  manner ; and  the  noise  produced  by  the  multitudes  on
the  island  was  not  merely  disagreeable,  but  really  shocking.  Some  of  the
nests  contained  eggs,  and  the  young  were  of  all  sizes,  from  the  newly
hatched  up  to  those  able  to  fly  ; none,  however,  even  of  the  largest,  at-
tempted to  gain  the  water,  but  all  preferred  hiding  themselves  in  the  fis-
sures of  the  rocks,  or  behind  the  nests.  It  was  curious  to  see  them  crawl
flat  on  the  rock,  assisting  themselves  with  their  bill,  feet  and  wings,  em-
ploying the  first  in  the  manner  of  Parrots,  and  the  wings  like  the  oars  of
a boat  or  the  flappers  of  turtles.  When  approached,  they  curved  and
twisted  their  necks  in  the  most  curious  manner,  reminding  one  of  the
writhings  of  a snake,  and  when  seized  they  muted  so  profusely  as  to  excite
disgust.  A dozen  or  more  of  different  sizes,  however,  were  thrust  into  a
bag,  and  carried  on  board  the  vessel.  The  materials  and  dimensions  of
the  nests  were  noted  on  the  spot,  and  a hatful  of  eggs  was  brought  to  me.

The  Double-crested  Cormorant  forms  its  nest  of  sea- weeds,  some  sticks,
moss,  and  clods  of  earth,  with  grass  adhering  to  them,  which  it  piles  up
into  a solid  mass,  often  as  high  as  three  feet  from  the  rock,  with  a diame-
ter of  fifteen  or  eighteen  inches  at  the  top,  and  of  two  and  a half  feet  at
the  base.  The  whole  has  an  appearance  of  solidity  seldom  seen  in  the
nests  of  water-birds.  The  nests  are  placed  as  near  each  other  as  the
nature  of  the  ground  will  permit,  and  a great  number  which  appeared  to
have  stood  out  against  the  winter  storms,  had  been  enlarged  and  repaired
that  season.  Many,  however,  lay  scattered  over  the  rocks,  having  been
demolished  by  heavy  gales  or  the  breaking  of  the  surf  during  tempests.
The  whole  surface  of  the  rock  resembled  a mass  of  putridity : feathers,
broken  and  rotten  eggs,  and  dead  young,  lay  scattered  over  it ; and  I
leave  you  to  guess  how  such  a place  must  smell  in  a calm  warm  day.  The
eggs  are  three  or  four,  average  two  and  a half  inches  in  length  by  one
inch  and  four  and  a half  eighths  in  breadth,  and  have  an  elongated  form.
They  are  covered  with  a calcareous  coating,  which  is  more  or  less  soiled
with  filth,  but  when  carefully  scraped,  shews  a fine  light  greenish-blue  tint.

The  young  when  just  hatched,  are  of  a bluish-black  colour  tinged
with  purple,  and  look  extremely  odd.  They  remain  blind  for  several
days,  and  for  about  a fortnight  are  fed  by  the  parents  with  the  greatest
care,  the  food  being  regurgitated  into  their  open  throats.  They  appear
to  grow  rapidly,  for  in  the  course  of  eight  or  ten  days  we  found  some  the
size  of  a pullet,  which,  when  marked,  were  scarcely  half  that  size.  They


DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.


423


are  covered  with  long  down  of  a brownish-black  colour,  and  do  not  leave
the  nest,  unless  they  are  intruded  on,  until  they  are  able  to  fly,  when
their  parents,  who  long  before  had  ceased  to  feed  them  by  dropping  the
fish  into  their  bill,  and  had  merely  placed  it  on  the  ground  near  them,
leave  them  to  shift  for  themselves.  By  the  middle  of  August  all  these
birds  remove  southward,  along  Newfoundland,  by  Cape  Breton  Island,
and  the  shores  of  Nova  Scotia,  scarcely  any  remaining  on  the  coast  of
the  first  during  winter,  when  indeed  not  many  are  seen  farther  east  than
the  Bay  of  Halifax.

The  fishermen  and  eggers  never  gather  their  eggs,  they  being  unfit
for  being  eaten  by  any  other  animals  than  Gulls  or  Jagers ; but  they
commit  great  havock  among  the  young,  which  they  salt  for  food  or  bait.
The  old  birds  are  too  shy  to  be  killed  in  great  numbers,  otherwise  their
feathers,  although  they  smell  strongly  of  fish,  might  be  turned  to  account.
I have  never  eaten  Cormorant’s  flesh,  and  intend  to  refrain  from  tasting
it  until  nothing  better  can  be  procured.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  strong  and  well  sustained,  although  not
so  rapid  as  that  of  the  Florida  Cormorant.  It  sails  at  times  in  a beauti-
ful manner,  and  at  a great  height  above  the  waters.  Like  other  species,
the  Double-crested  Cormorants  are  fond  of  sunning  themselves,  with  their
wings  spread  out.  They  walk  awkwardly,  and  cannot  run  without  the
aid  of  their  wings.  In  order  to  arise  from  the  water,  in  which  they  sink
so  as  nearly  to  be  covered  when  swimming,  they  are  obliged  to  run  and
beat  the  surface  for  many  yards,  before  they  get  fairly  on  wing.  Their
food  consists  of  shrimps,  lents,  capelings,  codlings,  and  other  fishes,  scarce-
ly any  kind  coming  amiss  unless  too  strong  or  of  too  great  a size.  Of
the  codlings  especially  they  devour  vast  numbers,  they  being  in  astonish-
ing shoals  on  the  coast  of  Labrador  at  the  time  when  the  Cormorants
are  breeding,  and  indeed  remaining  until  the  departure  of  the  birds,  when
they  retire  to  deeper  water.  I never  saw  a Cormorant  plunge  from  the
air  after  its  prey,  but  should  be  much  gratified  by  such  a sight,  which,
if  we  trust  compilers,  is  nothing  uncommon  ; nor  have  I ever  seen  a bird
of  this  species  perched  on  any  thing  higher  than  the  top  of  the  low  island
on  which  the  nest  is  placed,  none  having  been  observed  by  me  on  any  of
the  high  rocks  on  which  the  common  species  breeds  in  America.

I have  given  the  figure  of  a beautiful  male  in  its  perfect  spring  plu-
mage. This  is  probably  the  only  representation  of  the  bii-d  yet  presented
to  the  public,  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  Florida  Cormorant.


424


DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.


Pelecanus  (Caebo)  dilophus,  Dodble-crested  Cormorant,  Swains,  and  Rich-
ards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.  part  iL  p.  473.

Double-crested  Cormorant,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  483.

Adult  Male  at  the  commencement  of  the  breeding  season.  Plate
CCLVII.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  somewhat  compress-
ed, straight,  with  the  tip  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line
slightly  concave,  until  near  the  tip,  when  it  is  curved,  the  ridge  convex,
and  separated  from  the  sides  by  a narrow  groove,  the  sides  erect,  convex,
the  edges  sharp  and  straight  as  far  as  the  unguis,  which  is  strong,  convex
above,  incurved,  acute.  No  external  nostrils.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  long  and  very  narrow  towards  the  end,  filled  by  an  extensive  mem-
brane, which  extends  a short  way  down  the  throat,  its  dorsal  line  a little
convex,  the  sides  erect  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip
compressed  and  obliquely  truncate.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  long  and  rather
slender.  Body  full,  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  far  behind ;
tibia  feathered  in  its  whole  length ; tarsus  very  short,  strong,  much  com-
pressed, covered  aU  round  with  scales,  of  which  the  anterior  and  lateral
are  large  and  subhexagonal,  the  posterior  very  small  and  roundish.  Toes
all  placed  in  the  same  plane,  and  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  covered
above  with  very  numerous  oblique  scutella ; first  toe  smallest,  fourth
longest.  Claws  rather  small,  strong,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  of  the  head,  neck,  lower  parts  and  posterior  portion  of  the
back  glossy,  blended  and  silky,  of  the  fore  part  of  the  back  and  wings
compact,  the  feathers  with  loose  glossy  margins.  From  behind  the  eye
to  the  length  of  an  inch  and  a half  on  each  side,  an  elongated  tuft  of  long
slender,  loose  recurved  feathers.  Space  around  the  eye,  and  to  a large
extent  along  the  base  of  the  bill,  together  with  the  small  gular  sac,  bare.
Wings  rather  small ; primaries  very  strong,  curved,  rather  narrow,  taper-
ing and  obtuse,  second  longest,  third  almost  equal,  first  longer  than  fourth ;
secondaries  decurved,  broad,  broadly  rounded,  the  inner  narrower.  Tail
of  moderate  length,  very  narrow,  much  rounded  or  cuneate,  of  twelve  nar-
row, rounded  feathers,  having  extremely  strong  shafts.^

Upper  mandible  dusky,  along  the  edges  greyish-yellow ; lower  yel-
low, irregularly  marked  with  dusky  towards  the  edges.  Iris  bright  green,
margin  of  eyelids,  bare  space  on  the  head,  and  gular  sac,  rich  orange.


DOUBLE-CRESTED  CORMORANT.


425


Feet  and  claws  black.  All  the  silky  part  of  the  plumage  is  greenish-
black,  at  a distance  appearing  black,  but  at  hand  in  a strong  light  green.
The  imbricated  feathers  of  the  back  and  wings  greyish-brown,  their
fringe-like  margins  greenish-black  ; primary  quills  brownish-black ; secon-
dary like  the  other  feathers  of  the  wing.  Tail  black,  the  shafts  of  all  the
feathers  black.

Length  to  end  of  tail  33  inches,  to  end  of  wings  29,  to  end  of  claws
33  ; extent  of  wings  51  ; wing  from  flexure  13  ; tail  6f  ; bill  along  the
back  2i®ij,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  ; outer  toe
3|,  its  claw  ^|.  Weight  5 lb.  7 oz.

The  Female  is  somewhat  smaller,  but  in  other  respects  is  similar  to
the  male.

The  Young,  after  the  first  moult,  have  the  head  and  neck  mottled
with  greenish-black  and  greyish-brown ; the  other  parts  as  in  the  adult,
but  the  tufts  on  the  head  wanting.

The  Double-crested  and  the  Florida  Cormorants  are  very  nearly  allied,
their  forms,  and  the  structure  of  their  plumage,  being  precisely  similar.
There  is,  however,  a very  considerable  difference  in  size,  as  will  be  seen
on  comparing  their  measurements  and  average  weights  as  given  by  me.
The  bills  are  similar  in  form,  but  their  colours  differ,  as  do  those  of  the
eyelids  ; but  in  the  breeding  season  these  birds  may  readily  be  distinguish-
ed by  the  temporary  tufts  or  crests  behind  the  eyes,  which  in  P.Jloridanus
consist  of  a mere  line  of  single  feathers  curved  do^vnwards,  while  in  P.  dilo-
fhus  they  are  of  considerable  breadth,  and  composed  of  about  forty  recurv-
ed feathers.  In  the  absence  of  the  crests,  the  difference  in  size  affords  the
principal  means  of  distinguishing  them.


( 426  )


THE  HUDSONIAN  GODWIT.

Limosa  hudsonica,  Swains.

PLATE  CCLVIII.  Adult  Male  and  Young  Female.

This  species,  which  is  of  rare  occurrence  in  any  part  of  the  United
States,  is  scarcely  ever  found  farther  south  along  the  coast  than  the  State
of  Maryland.  I had  never  seen  it  in  the  flesh,  until  I went  to  Boston
in  1832,  when  I found  specimens  of  it  in  the  market  late  in  Septem-
ber. An  old  gunner  in  my  employ  brought  me  eight  or  ten  in  the  course
of  a month,  but  they  were  all  young  birds.  From  one  of  them  my  son
drew  the  figure  in  the  plate.  While  I was  at  Pictou  Professor  Mac-
CuLLocH  presented  me  with  a pair  of  adult  birds  in  beautiful  plumage.
When  we  were  on  our  way  towards  Labrador,  the  fishermen  and  inhabi-
tants of  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  who  gave  the  name  of  Curlews  to  the
Godwits,  assured  me  that  this  species  breeds  there  in  some  marshes  at  the
extremity  of  the  principal  island,  and  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  kill-
ing them  as  soon  as  they  were  able  to  fly,  when  they  were  considered  ex-
cellent food.  We  saw  none,  however,  on  our  voyage  farther  north,  and
in  Labrador  and  Newfoundland  nobody  seemed  to  know  them.

My  young  friend  Thomas  MacCulloch,  who  gave  me,  in  London,
several  well-mounted  specimens  of  this  species,  in  the  spring  of  1835,  con-
firmed the  assertions  of  the  people  of  the  Magdeleine  Islands,  and  informed
me  that  these  birds  breed  at  times  on  Prince  Edward’s  Island,  from  which
they  spread  along  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  where  they  remain  until  very
severe  weather  comes  on,  when  they  suddenly  disappear.

I have  tried  to  give  a good  figure  of  the  adult,  and  that  made  by  my
son  will,  I hope,  be  considered  faithful  by  those  who  are  acquainted  with
the  bird  in  its  autumnal  plumage.  The  adult  has  been  represented  as  lying
down,  in  order  to  shew  the  difference  between  this  species  and  the  Limosa
melanura  of  Europe,  to  which  it  is  allied,  but  from  which  it  may  readily
be  distinguished  at  all  periods  by  the  black  colour  of  the  inner  wing-coverts.
In  the  European  bird  these  feathers  are  white,  and  the  species  does  not
occur  in  the  United  States,  perhaps  not  in  any  part  of  North  America.
The  females  are  rather  larger  than  the  males,  but  nothing  is  known  re-
specting the  nests  or  eggs.


HUDSONIAN  GODWIT.


427


ScoLOPAX  Hudsonica,  Lath.  Iiid.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  720.

Limosa  Hudsonica,  Hudsonian  Godwit,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  396.

Hudsonian  Godwit,  Nuttall.,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  175.

Adult  Male.  Plate  C CL  VI 1 1.  Fig.  1.

Bill  double  the  length  of  the  head,  subcylindrical,  compressed  at  the
base,  tapering  to  the  obtuse  point,  which  is  a little  enlarged,  slightly  re-
curved. Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  bne  slightly  curved  upwards
in  its  whole  extent,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  with  a narrow  groove  ex-
tending almost  to  the  point,  the  edges  rather  obtuse,  the  tip  slightly  en-
larged. Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  near  the  edges,  small,  linear,  pervious.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  extremely  narrow,  the
dorsal  line  slightly  recurved,  the  sides  with  a narrow  groove  extending
almost  to  the  end,  the  edges  rather  blunt,  the  tip  obtuse.

Head  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long  and  slender.
Body  slender.  Feet  long  and  slender ; tibia  bare  for  about  a third,  an-
teriorly scutellate  ; tarsus  long,  slender,  covered  anteriorly  and  posterior-
ly with  numerous  scutella,  laterally  for  a very  small  space  reticulate ; toes
small,  slender,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,  broadly  marginate,  the  an-
terior connected  at  the  base  by  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is  much  larger ;
first  toe  very  small,  second  slightly  shorter  than  fourth,  third  little  longer.
Claws  small,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  with
the  inner  edge  curved  outwards  and  thin.

Plumage  soft  on  the  head,  neck  and  lower  parts  blended,  on  the  back
imbricated;  all  the  feathers  oblong  and  rounded.  Wings  long,  very
acute,  narrow ; primaries  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  second  little
shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated;  secondaries  incurved,  obliquely  round-
ed, with  a recurved  tip,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  of
twelve  rounded  feathers,  slightly  forked,  but  with  the  two  middle  feathers
a little  longer  than  those  next  them.

Bill  greyish-yellow,  dark  brown  along  the  ridge  of  the  upper  mandi-
ble, and  blackish  toward  the  tips  of  both.  Iris  brown.  Feet  light
greyish-blue.  The  head  and  neck  brownish-grey,  with  darker  fines ; a
band  from  the  bill  over  the  eye,  and  the  throat  greyish-white  ; the  back
deep  grey  ; the  scapulars  brownish-black,  with  small  white  markings  on
the  edges  of  the  feathers  ; the  smaller  wing-coverts,  alula,  primary  quills
and  their  coverts  brownish-black  ; the  secondaries  fighter,  and  with  their


428


HUDSONIAN  GODWIT.


inner  webs  pale  grey  ; tips  of  the  primary  coverts  and  bases  of  the  quills,
white,  as  is  a broad  band  over  the  rump.  Tail  feathers  and  upper  tail-
coverts  brownish-black,  their  bases  white,  and  their  tips  narrowly  edged
with  brownish-white.  The  lower  parts  are  bright  yellowish-red,  the  sides
mottled  with  dark  brown  ; the  abdomen  and  lower  tail-coverts  paler  and
variegated  with  dusky ; the  lower  wing-coverts  blackish-brown,  edged
with  whitish.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  16|,  to  end  of  claws
19f ; wing  from  flexure  8^  ; tail  ; extent  of  wings  28  ; bill  along  the
back  3/^  ; along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  : bare  part  of  tibia
tarsus  2| ; middle  toe  its  claw  ||.  Weight  9 oz.

Young  Female  in  winter.  Plate  CCLVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  bill,  iris  and  feet,  as  in  the  adult  male.  Upper  part  of  the  head
dusky,  with  darker  lines  ; sides  of  the  head,  and  the  neck,  greyish-yel-
low ; a whitish  band  over  the  eye.  The  lower  parts  are  pale  brownish-
grey,  the  upper  brownish-grey ; the  fore  part  of  the  back  and  scapulars
brownish-black,  the  feathers  edged  with  light  brownish-red  ; the  wing-
coverts  brownish-grey ; the  quills  as  in  the  adult,  as  is  the  tail,  anterior
to  which  is  also  a broad  white  band.

In  September  1835,  I shot,  near  Edinburgh,  a young  individual  of
Limosa  ritfa,  which  1 had  previously  observed  for  some  time.  It  thrust
its  bill  into  the  wet  sand  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Woodcocks  ; and  I
was  much  surprised,  on  taking  it  up,  to  see  that  its  bill  was  perfectly
straight  in  its  whole  length.  When  I opened  it,  however,  in  order  to
place  a little  cotton  in  its  throat,  a sudden  spring-like  movement  of  the
mandibles  made  them  curve  upwards.  Never  having  kept  birds  of  this
genus  alive,  I am  unable  to  say  whether  the  bill  be  naturally  straight  or
not.


( 429  )


THE  HORNED  GREBE.

PODICEPS  COMNUTUS,  LiNN.

PLATE  CCLIX.  Male  and  Young.

The  period  at  which  this  little  Grebe  makes  its  first  appearance,  af-
ter the  breeding  season,  on  the  waters  of  the  Western  States,  such  as  the
Ohio,  the  Mississippi,  and  their  numerous  tributaries,  is  the  beginning  of
October,  when  I have  seen  them  arriving  and  passing  onward  on  wing  at
a considerable  height  in  the  air,  following  the  course  of  the  streams.  The
generally  received  idea  that  birds  of  this  genus  perform  their  migrations
on  the  water,  is  extremely  absurd.  I have  already  offered  some  remarks
on  this  subject,  but  as  too  much  cannot  be  said,  when  an  erroneous  no-
tion extensively  adopted  has  to  be  disproved,  I here  repeat  that  I have
seen  flocks  of  Grebes  on  wing  and  migrating  high  in  the  air,  apparently
with  as  much  ease,  as  many  longer-winged  birds,  and  with  considerable
velocity.

Towards  evening,  on  the  14th  of  October  1820,  I was  floating  in  a
small  boat  on  the  Ohio.  The  weather  was  perfectly  calm,  and  I was
startled  by  a whistling  sound  over  head,  resembling  that  of  a Hawk  stoop-
ing on  its  prey,  when,  on  looking  up,  I saw  a flock  of  Grebes,  about  thirty
in  number,  gliding  towards  the  water  as  if  about  to  alight  within  a quarter
of  a mile  from  me.  In  a few  minutes  they  had  come  within  a few  yards
of  the  surface  of  the  water,  when  suddenly  checking  their  speed,  they
pursued  their  course  until  out  of  sight ; but  in  a short  time  I saw  them
returning  towards  me,  and  in  less  than  a minute  they  all  passed  at  a dis-
tance of  forty  or  fifty  yards,  took  a round  and  alighted  pell-mell.  The
next  moment,  they  were  all  engaged  in  washing  and  trimming  themselves,
in  the  manner  of  Ducks,  Cormorants,  and  other  aquatic  birds.  As  I
rowed  towards  them,  they  scarcely  took  notice  of  me,  so  that  they  were
easily  approached ; and  finding  a number  of  them  close  together,  I fired
and  killed  four.  The  rest  paddled  off  for  some  yards,  rose  on  wing,  and
flew  down  the  stream  in  a pretty  close  body,  looking  as  if  not  disposed  to
settle  again  for  some  time.  On  picking  up  the  dead  birds,  I found  them
to  be  of  the  present  species,  three  being  young,  the  other  an  adult  with


430


HORNED  GREBE.


the  winter  plumage  beginning  to  appear.  Here  I may  remark,  that  Grebes
in  general  do  not  moult  so  early  as  most  other  birds  after  they  have  young;
thus  the  Crested  Grebe  often  passes  to  the  south  in  September,  with  its
head  still  adorned  with  a large  portion  of  the  feathers  of  its  spring  and
summer  tippet.  While  residing  at  different  places  on  the  Ohio,  I have
many  times  witnessed  the  passage  of  the  Horned  and  the  Crested.

The  Horned  Grebe  is  abundant  during  autumn  and  winter  on  the
large  rivers  or  inlets  of  the  Southern  States,  but  rare  along  the  coasts  of
the  Middle  and  Eastern  Districts.  On  the  rivers  about  Charleston  in
South  Carolina  it  is  seen  at  those  seasons  in  considerable  numbers,  al-
though not  in  larger  flocks  than  from  four  to  seven  individuals.  The
same  is  observable  from  that  place  to  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi.  It
is  particularly  fond  of  those  streams  of  which  the  borders  are  overgrown
by  rank  sedges  and  other  plants,  and  are  subject  to  the  influx  of  the  tide.
In  such  places  they  enjoy  greater  security  while  searching  for  their  food,
than  in  ponds,  to  which,  however,  they  for  the  most  part  retire  at  the  ap-
proach of  the  pairing  season,  which  commences  early  in  February.  At
that  time  one  might  be  apt  to  think  that  these  birds  could  scarcely  fly,  as
they  are  then  rarely  seen  on  wing ; but  when  they  are  pursued,  and  there
happens  to  be  a breeze,  they  rise  from  the  water  with  considerable  ease,
and  fly  to  a distance  of  several  hundred  yards.  In  December  and  January
I have  never  procured  any  having  the  least  remains  of  their  summer  head-
dress ; but  by  the  10th  of  March,  when  they  were  on  their  journey  to-
wards the  north,  the  long  feathers  of  the  head  were  apparent.  These
tufts  seem  to  attain  their  full  development  in  the  course  of  a fortnight  or
three  weeks,  the  old  birds  becoming  plumed  sooner  than  the  young,  some
of  which  leave  the  country  in  their  winter  dress.

On  the  ground,  this  species  is  not  better  off  than  the  Dobchick,  it  be-
ing obbged  to  stand  nearly  erect,  the  hind  part  of  the  body  resting,  and
the  tarsi  and  toes  extended  laterally.  They  dive  with  great  celerity,  and
when  once  acquainted  with  the  effects  of  the  gun,  are  not  easily  shot.  A
report  is  at  times  sufficient  to  make  the  old  birds  dive  at  once,  although
they  may  be  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  a shot.  The  young  birds  are
more  easily  procured  at  their  first  appearance ; but  the  most  efficient  me-
thod of  obtaining  them  is  to  employ  fishing  nets,  in  the  meshes  of  which
they  become  entangled.

Excepting  a species  of  Hawk  nearly  allied  to  Circus  cyaneus,  I know
of  no  other  bird  that  has  the  eye  of  such  colour,  the  iris  being  externally


HORNED  GREBE.


431


of  a vivid  red,  with  an  inner  circle  of  white,  which  gives  it  a very  singular
appearance.  On  attentively  examining  the  eyes  of  our  Divers  and  Grebes,
I have  not  found  any  with  similar  eyes.  The  Horned  Grebe  does  not
seem  to  see  better  than  any  other  species,  nor  does  it  appear  to  be  more
diurnal  than  the  rest,  nor  are  the  objects  on  which  it  feeds  more  minute,
for  I have  found  as  small  seeds  in  the  stomach  of  the  large  Grebe  as  in
that  of  the  present  species.  The  reason  of  this  strange  colouring  of  the
iris,  therefore,  I am  unable  to  conjecture.

Although  the  greater  number  of  these  birds  go  far  northward  to  breed,
some  remain  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States  during  the  whole  year,
rearing  their  young  on  the  borders  of  ponds,  particularly  in  the  northern
parts  of  the  State  of  Ohio,  in  the  vicinity  of  Lake  Erie.  Two  nests  which
I found  were  placed  at  a distance  of  about  four  yards  from  the  water’s  edge,
on  the  top  of  broken  down  tussocks  of  rank  weeds.  The  materials  of  which
they  were  composed  were  of  the  same  nature,  and  rudely  interwoven  to  a
height  of  upwards  of  seven  inches.  They  were  rather  more  than  a foot
in  diameter  at  the  base,  the  cavity  only  four  inches  across,  shallow,  but
more  neatly  finished  with  finer  plants,  of  which  a quantity  lay  on  the  bor-
ders, and  was  probably  used  by  the  bird  to  cover  the  eggs  when  about  to
leave  them.  There  were  five  eggs  in  one  nest,  seven  in  the  other ; all
contained  chicks  (on  the  29th  of  July)  ; they  measured  one  inch  and  three
quarters  in  length,  by  one  inch  and  two  and  a half  eighths ; their  shell
was  smooth,  and  of  a uniform  yellowish  cream  colour,  without  spots  or
marks  of  any  kind.  The  nests  were  not  more  than  fifty  yards  apart,  on
the  south-western  side  of  the  pond.  I am  thus  particular  because  of  the
near  relation  of  this  bird  to  the  Podiceps  auritus  of  Latham,  with  which
it  may  be  confounded  by  a not  over-careful  observer,  as  may  the  eggs  too,
those  of  the  latter  species  being  precisely  of  the  same  length,  but  fully  an
eighth  of  an  inch  narrower,  which  of  course  gives  them  a more  elongated
appearance.  I have  observed  the  same  differences  in  the  eggs  of  these  twa
species  in  Europe.  I could  not  ascertain  if  both  the  parent  birds  incubate  ;
but  as  I saw  two  pairs  on  the  pond,  I am  inclined  to  think  that  they  do.
The  nests  were  not  fastened  to  the  weeds  around  them,  nor  do  I conceive
it  probable  that  they  could  be  floated,  as  various  writers  assert  they  are
at  times.

I have  not  seen  the  young  of  this  species  when  small ; but  from  the
knowledge  I have  of  those  of  other  Grebes,  T feel  pretty  certain  that  the
notions  entertained  of  their  being  carried  either  on  the  back  or  under  the


432


HORNED  GREBE.


wings  of  their  parents  in  cases  of  danger  must  be  erroneous,  as  Grebes  in
all  such  cases  dive  or  fly  at  once,  when  it  would  be  impossible  for  the
old  and  young  to  keep  thus  attached  to  each  other.

I have  observed  in  the  stoiuachs  of  almost  all  that  I have  examined,
a quantity  of  hair-like  substances  rolled  together  like  the  pellets  of  owls,
but  have  not  ascertained  whether  or  not  these  masses  are  disgorged.  They
certainly  cannot  pass  through  the  intestines.  But  unless  birds  of  this
kind  are  kept  in  an  aviary  and  watched,  this  matter  must  remain  unknown.
The  food  of  this  species,  while  on  salt-water,  is  composed  of  shrimps,
small  fishes,  and  minute  Crustacea.  While  on  fresh-water,  they  procure
insects,  leeches,  small  frogs,  tadpoles,  and  aquatic  lizards ; they  also  pick
up  the  seeds  of  grasses,  and  I have  found  as  many  in  the  stomach  of  an
individual  as  would  fill  the  shell  of  one  of  its  eggs.  Their  flight  is  per-
formed by  regular  short  flappings,  executed  with  great  quickness.

I have  represented  an  adult  male  in  full  spring  plumage,  and  a young
bird  shot  in  December.  The  males  are  rather  larger  than  the  females,
which  are  similar  in  colour,  but  rarely  have  the  head  so  well  feathered
during  the  breeding  season.

PomcEPS  CORNU  Tus,  Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  782 Ch,  Bonaparte.,  Synopsis  of

Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  417 — Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  411.

Horned  Grebe,  or  Dobchick,  Xuttall,  IManual,  vol.  ii.  p.  254.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCLIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  straight,  acute,  rather  slender.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight  for  one-half  of  its  length,  towards
the  end  declinate  and  slightly  convex,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  sloping,
the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  broad,  extend-
ing to  beyond  the  middle  of  the  mandible  ; nostrils  subbasal,  linear-ellip-
tical,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow,
the  dorsal  line  short,  ascending,  straight,  the  sides  erect,  slightly  convex,
the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  the  tip  narrow,  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long  and
slender.  Body  depressed.  Feet  large,  short,  placed  far  behind  ; tibia
feathered  to  the  joint ; tarsus  short,  extremely  compressed,  anteriorly
with  a narrow  scutellate  ridge,  laterally  with  numerous  broad  scuteUa ;
posteriorly  with  a narrow  ridge  having  a double  row  of  small  prominent


HORNED  GREBE.


433


scales.  Hind  toe  very  small,  with  an  inferior  small  membrane  ; fore  toes
long,  the  outer  longest,  scutellate  above,  united  at  the  base  by  short  webs,
externally  margined,  internally  with  broad  rounded  expansions,  which
are  marked  with  parallel  oblique  lines,  and  crenate  on  the  edges.  Claws
flattened,  that  of  the  middle  toe  broadest,  with  an  extremely  thin  broad
terminal  edge.

Plumage  of  the  head  and  neck  very  soft  and  downy,  of  the  breast  and
sides  silky  and  highly  glossed,  of  the  abdomen  downy,  of  the  upper  parts
imbricated,  but  with  loose  edges.  Wings  small ; primaries  much  curved,
the  first  longest,  the  second  almost  equal.  Tail,  a small  tuft  of  loose  fea-
thers. On  the  head,  at  this  season,  is  a tuft  of  soft  feathers  on  each  side
behind  the  eye,  and  a larger  on  each  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  neck.

Bill  bluish-black,  its  tip  yellow.  Short  loral  space  bright  carmine,  as
is  the  iris,  its  inner  margin  white  ; edges  of  eyelids  greyish-blue.  Feet
dusky  externally,  internally  and  on  the  anterior  and  posterior  ridges  of
the  tarsus  dull  yellow;  claws  dusky.  Forehead • greyish-brown  ; upper
parts  of  the  head  bluish-black,  as  are  the  sides,  fore  neck  anteriorly,  and
the  elongated  ruff*  feathers ; a broad  band  over  the  eyes,  and  the  elongated
tufts  behind  them  yellowish- brown.  Fore  neck  brownish-red  ; lower  parts
white,  the  sides  reddish-brown ; abdomen  dull  grey.  The  upper  parts
are  brownish-black,  the  feathers  edged  with  greyish,  the  middle  secondary
quills  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  14|,  to  end  of  claws  19  ; extent  of  wings  25| ;
wing  from  flexure  5f  ; bill  along  the  back  along  the  edge  of  lower
mandible  IJ  ; tarsus  1;^  ; outer  toe  1|§,  its  claw  Weight  14  oz.

Young  Female  in  winter.  Plate  CCLIX.  Fig.  2.

The  feathers  of  the  hind  head  are  a little  elongated,  but  at  this  age
there  are  no  tufts  on  the  head.  In  other  respects  the  plumage  is  as  in
the  adult  male.  The  bill  is  bluish-grey,  as  is  the  bare  loral  space ; the
eye  bright  carmine,  the  iris  with  an  inner  white  edge ; the  feet  bluish-grey.
The  upper  part  of  the  head,  and  the  hind  neck,  are  greyish-black,  as  are
the  upper  parts  in  general.  The  feathers  of  the  back  edged  with  light
grey.  The  throat,  the  sides  of  the  head,  a broad  patch  on  each  side  of
the  neck  nearly  meeting  behind,  the  breast  white ; the  sides  and  downy
feathers  of  the  abdomen  brownish-grey.  Some  of  the  secondaries  are
white,  as  in  the  adult  male.


VOL.  III.


E e


( 434  )


THE  FORKED-TAILED  PETREL.

Thalassidroma  Leachii,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCLX.  Male  and  Female.

Before  describing  the  habits  of  this  bird,  I think  it  necessary  to  speak
of  three  distinct  species  which  are  at  times  found  near  our  coasts,  and  of
which  I have  found  two  breeding  within  the  Union.  The  present  species
is  the  largest;  that  named  after  Wilson  the  next  in  size;  and  the  one
called  the  Stormy  Petrel  the  least.  Until  I had  met  with  the  whole  of
these  species  near  our  coast,  I,  like  others,  thought  that  the  last  mention-
ed kept  nearer  to  Europe  than  it  in  reality  does  at  certain  seasons.

In  August  1831,  I was  on  board  of  the  American  packet-ship  the  Co-
lumbia, commanded  by  my  friend  Joseph  Delano,  Esq.  who  had  promised
that,  in  case  of  a calm  occurring,  he  would  allow  me  to  have  a boat  manned
to  go  in  search  of  birds.  The  day  is  not  given,  because  I never  keep  a jour-
nal while  crossing  the  Atlantic ; but  as  I had  left  England  on  the  first  of
the  month,  and  was  then  on  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  it  must  have
been  towards  the  latter  part  of  it,  when  the  weather  suddenly  became  quite
calm  and  beautiful.  “ Mother  Carey’s  Chickens”  were  by  hundreds  around
the  noble  ship,  and  although  ill  in  consequence  of  the  sickness  which
never  leaves  me  at  sea,  I asked  for  a boat  and  some  hands  to  row  me
about  for  an  hour  or  so.  This  was  granted,  guns  and  ammunition  were
placed  in  the  yawl,  and  my  assistant  Mr  Henrv  Ward  of  London,  an
officer,  and  two  sailors,  accompanied  me.  We  had  three  guns  which  were
alternately  loaded  and  handed  to  me.  In  the  course  of  about  an  hour
twenty-five  or  thirty  Petrels  were  shot,  together  with  some  Fulmars.  Had
you  been  looking  on,  you  might  perhaps  have  laughed  at  me  on  seeing
that  the  moment  after  I fired,  I was  obliged  to  lean  over  the  side  of  the
bark  to  relieve  myself  from  the  distressing  state  of  my  stomach.  On  re-
turning to  the  ship,  my  companions  nimbly  ascended  the  chains ; but  al-
though when  on  land  I am  pretty  firm  and  active,  I was  now  quite  unfit
for  service,  and  therefore  was  hoisted  in  a chair.  Once  on  deck,  I laid
myself  down  on  a mattress,  my  wife  attended  to  me,  and  I gradually  be-
came relieved,  as  the  ship  stood,  to  use  the  words  of  my  kind  captain,
“ as  still  as  if  on  the  stocks.”  There  were  the  dead  birds  nicely  arranged


FORKED-TAILED  PETREL.


435


on  a board  by  my  side ; the  wounded  ones  were  placed  in  a cage,  and  I
began  to  examine  them  all  with  care.  To  my  great  surprise,  I found
among  them  all  the  three  species  mentioned  above.  Sixteen  of  these  birds
were  beautifully  prepared  by  Mr  Ward,  and  the  rest  were  placed  in
spirits,  after  I had  made  correct  outlines  of  each  species,  and  taken  their
exact  dimensions  and  weight.  The  drawings,  however,  I was  unable  to
finish  on  account  of  the  giddiness,  which  seldom  leaves  me  while  at  sea.
The  calm  continued  the  whole  of  the  next  day,  and,  laying  myself  down
on  the  top  of  the  round-house,  I had  ample  opportunities  of  observing  the
habits  of  the  three  species,  while  thus  at  a distance  from  land.

My  esteemed  friend  the  Prince  of  Musignano  has  stated  that  the
Forked-tailed  Petrel  is  less  numerous  near  the  American  coast  than  the
species  named  after  Wilson.  It  is  true  that  it  rarely  goes  so  far  south,
but  in  the  vicinity  of  Massachusetts,  and  from  thence  to  Newfoundland,  it
is  by  far  the  most  abundant  of  the  two ; and  it  breeds  on  all  suitable  places
from  the  Islands  of  Mount  Desert  to  the  last  mentioned  country.

The  species  of  this  genus  with  which  I am  acquainted  all  ramble  over
the  seas,  both  by  night  and  by  day,  until  the  breeding  season  commences,
when  they  remain  in  their  burrows,  under  rocks,  or  in  their  fissures,  un-
til towards  sunset,  when  they  start  off  in  search  of  food,  returning  to  their
mates  or  young  in  the  morning,  and  feeding  them  then.  I feel  pretty
confident  that  these  birds,  like  Owls,  can  hold  out  against  hunger  for
many  hours,  and  are  satisfied  with  one  abundant  meal  in  the  day.  Wil-
son was  of  a different  opinion,  but  I believe  he  never  found  these  birds
breeding.

The  Forked-tailed  Petrel  emits  its  notes  night  and  day,  and  at  not
very  long  intervals,  although  it  is  less  noisy  than  Wilson’s  Petrel.  They
resemble  the  syllables  pewr-xmt,  pewr-wit.  Its  flight  differs  from  that  of
the  other  two  species,  it  being  performed  in  broader  wheelings,  and  with
firmer  flappings,  in  which  respect  it  resembles  that  of  the  Night  Hawk,
Capriviulgus  virginianus,  while  that  bird  is  passing  low  over  the  mea-
dows or  the  waters.  It  is  more  shy  than  the  other  species,  and  when  it
wheels  off  after  having  approached  the  stern  of  a ship,  its  wanderings  are
much  more  extended  before  it  returns.  I have  never  seen  it  fly  close
around  a vessel,  as  the  others  are  in  the  habit  of  doing,  especially  at  the
approach  of  night ; nor  do  I think  that  it  ever  alights  on  the  rigging  of
ships,  but  spends  the  hours  of  darkness  either  on  the  water,  or  on  low
rocks  or  islands.  It  also  less  frequently  alights  on  the  water,  or  pats  it


E e


o


436


FORKED-TAILED  PETREL.


with  its  feet,  probably  on  account  of  the  shortness  of  its  legs,  although  it
frequently  allows  them  to  hang  down.  In  this  it  resembles  the  Thalassi-
droma  pelagica,  and  Wilson’s  Petrel  has  a similar  habit  during  calm
weather.  I have  seen  all  the  three  species  immerse  their  head  into  the  water,
to  seize  their  food,  and  sometimes  keep  it  longer  under  than  I had  expected.

About  the  first  of  June,  the  species  separate,  collect  in  numbers,  and
return  to  their  breeding  places.  I state  so  from  the  report  of  persons  on
whose  testimony  I can  rely,  and  who  have  assured  me  that,  like  the  Guille-
mots, they  revisit  their  haunts  each  spring  for  years  in  succession.  They
now  fly  in  front  of  the  high  rocks,  in  the  manner  of  our  Purple  Martin
when  it  first  arrives  at  its  well  known  box,  passing  and  repassing  a thou-
sand times  in  the  day,  enter  their  dark  and  narrow  mansions,  or  stand  in
the  passage,  and  emit  their  cries,  as  the  bird  just  mentioned  is  wont  to  do
on  similar  occasions.  Now  they  alight  on  some  broad  shelf,  and  walk  as
if  about  to  fall  down,  but  with  considerable  ease,  and  at  times  with  ra-
pidity. Now  and  then  the  mated  birds  approach  each  other,  and,  I be-
lieve, disgorge  some  food  into  each  other’s  mouths,  although  I am  not  ab-
solutely certain  that  they  do  so,  having  only  observed  them  at  such  times
by  means  of  a glass.  They  collect  grasses  and  pebbles,  of  which  they  form
a flat  nest,  on  which  a single  white  egg  is  deposited,  which  measures  an
inch  and  a quarter  in  length,  by  seven-eighths  in  breadth,  is  nearly  equal-
ly rounded  at  both  ends,  and  looks  very  large  for  the  size  of  the  bird.
When  boiled,  it  has  a musky  smell,  but  is  palatable.  When  you  pass
close  to  the  rocks  in  which  they  are,  you  easily  hear  their  shrill  querulous
notes  ; but  the  report  of  a gun  silences  them  at  once,  and  induces  those
on  the  ledges  to  betake  themselves  to  their  holes.

The  Forked-tailed  Petrel,  like  the  other  species,  feeds  chiefly  on  float-
ing mollusca,  small  fishes,  Crustacea,  which  they  pick  up  among  the  float-
ing sea- weeds,  and  greasy  substances,  which  they  occasionally  find  around
fishing-boats  or  ships  out  at  sea.  When  seized  in  the  hand,  it  ejects  an
oily  fluid  through  the  tubular  nostrils,  and  sometimes  disgorges  a quantity
of  food.  I could  not  prevail  on  any  of  those  which  I had  caught  to  take
food.

These  birds  are  caught  from  the  sterns  of  vessels,  with  long  slender
threads,  the  manner  of  using  which  I shall  describe  when  I come  to  speak
of  Wilson’s  Petrel.  I never  could  entice  one  of  them  to  swallow  a hook.
Very  few  are  found  on  the  coasts  of  England  or  Scotland,  where,  how-
ever, the  species  is  said  to  breed.


FORKED-TAILED  PETREL.


437


Thalassiduoma  Leachii,  Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,
p.  367.

PaocELLARiA  Leachii,  Temm.  Man.  d'Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  812.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  slender,  straight,  with  the  tips  curved,  as
broad  as  high  at  the  base,  extremely  compressed  at  the  end  Upper
mandible  with  the  nostrils  forming  a tube  on  its  ridge  at  the  base,  beyond
which  the  dorsal  line  is  for  a short  space  straight,  then  decurved,  the
ridge  narrow  and  separated  from  the  convex  sides  by  a narrow  groove,
the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  the  tip  compressed,  incurved.  Lower  man-
dible with  the  angle  rather  long,  narrow  and  pointed,  the  dorsal  line  be-
yond it  decurved,  the  sides  erect,  the  edges  sharp,  the  tip  decurved.

Head  of  ordinary  size,  roundish,  anteriorly  narrowed.  Neck  short.
Body  rather  slender.  Feet  rather  long,  slender  ; tibia  bare  at  its  lower
part ; tarsus  slender,  reticulate  all  round.  Hind  toe  minute,  with  a coni-
cal claw ; anterior  toes  of  moderate  length,  slender,  scutellate  above,  con-
nected by  striated  webs  with  concave  margins ; the  third  and  fourth  toes
longest,  and  about  equal.  Claws  slender,  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended,  the  feathers  distinct  only  on  the  wings,
which  are  very  long;  primary  quills  tapering  but  rounded,  the  outer  four
a little  incurved  at  their  extremities,  the  second  longest,  the  third  almost
equal,  the  first  and  fourth  about  the  same  length,  the  rest  rapidly  gra-
duated ; outer  secondaries  incurved,  obliquely  rounded  ; inner  longer,
tapering,  straight.  Tail  deeply  forked,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the
plumage  is  dark  greyish- brown,  the  quills  and  tail  brownish-black,  the
smaller  wing-coverts  and  inner  secondaries  light  greyish-brown ; the  rump,
sides  of  the  abdomen,  and  exterior  lower  tail-coverts,  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  8 inches,  to  end  of  wings  8^  ; extent  of  wings
I85 ; wing  from  flexure  65 ; tail  3 ; bill  along  the  back  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  1 ; middle  toe  its  claw
Ifoz.

The  Female  is  exactly  s...


Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLX.  Fig.  2.


( 438  )


A MAPLE-SUGAR  CAMP.

While  advancing  the  best  way  I could  through  the  magnificent  woods
that  cover  the  undulating  grounds  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Green  River  in
Kentucky,  I was  overtaken  by  night.  With  slow  and  cautious  steps  I
proceeded,  feeling  some  doubt  as  to  my  course,  when  the  moon  came
forth,  as  if  purposely  to  afford  me  her  friendly  light.  The  air  I thought
was  uncommonly  keen,  and  the  gentle  breeze  that  now  and  then  shook
the  tops  of  the  tall  trees,  more  than  once  made  me  think  of  halting  for  the
night,  and  forming  a camp.  At  times  I thought  of  the  campaigns  of  my
old  friend  Daniel  Boon,  his  strange  adventures  in  these  very  woods,  and
the  extraordinary  walk  which  he  performed  to  save  his  fellow-creatures  at
Fort  Massacre  from  the  scalping  knives  of  the  irritated  Indians.  Now
and  then  a racoon  or  opossum,  causing  the  fallen  leaves  to  rustle,  made
me  pause  for  a moment ; and  thus  I was  forcing  my  way,  thinking  on
many  things  dismal  as  well  as  pleasing,  when  the  ghmmer  of  a distant
fire  suddenly  roused  me  from  my  reveries,  and  inspired  me  with  fresh
animation.  As  I approached  it,  I observed  forms  of  different  kinds  moving
to  and  fro  before  it,  like  spectres ; and  ere  long,  bursts  of  laughter,  shouts,
and  songs  apprised  me  of  some  merrymaking.  I thought  at  first  that  I
had  probably  stumbled  upon  a camp-meeting ; but  I soon  perceived  that
the  mirth  proceeded  from  a band  of  sugar-makers.  Every  man,  woman,
and  child  stared  as  I passed  them,  but  all  were  friendly,  and,  without
more  ceremony  than  was  needful,  I walked  up  to  the  fire,  at  which  I
found  two  or  three  old  women,  with  their  husbands,  attending  to  the
kettles.  Their  plain  dresses  of  Kentucky  homespun  were  far  more  pleasing
to  my  sight  than  the  ribboned  turbans  of  city  dames,  or  the  powdered
wigs  and  embroidered  waistcoats  of  antique  beaux.  I was  heartily  wel-
comed, and  supplied  with  a goodly  pone  of  bread,  a plate  of  molasses,  and
some  sweet  potatoes.

Fatigued  with  my  long  ramble,  I lay  down  under  the  lee  of  the  smoke,
and  soon  fell  into  a sound  sleep.  When  day  returned,  the  frost  lay  thick
around  ; but  the  party  arose  cheerful  and  invigorated,  and  after  perform-
ing their  orisons,  resumed  their  labour.  The  scenery  around  was  most
pleasing ; the  ground  all  round  looked  as  if  it  had  been  cleared  of  under-
wood ; the  maples,  straight  and  tall,  seemed  as  if  planted  in  rows ; be-


A MAPLE-SUGAR  CAMP.


439


tween  them  meandered  several  rills,  which  gently  murmured  as  they  has-
tened toward  the  larger  stream  ; and  as  the  sun  dissolved  the  frozen  dews,
the  few  feathered  songsters  joined  the  chorus  of  the  woodsmen’s  daugh-
ters. Whenever  a burst  of  laughter  suddenly  echoed  through  the  woods,
an  Owl  or  Wild  Turkey  would  respond  to  it,  with  a signal  welcome  to
the  young  men  of  the  party.  With  large  ladles  the  sugar-makers  stirred
the  thickening  j nice  of  the  maple ; pails  of  sap  were  collected  from  the
trees  and  brought  in  by  the  young  people ; while  here  and  there  some
sturdy  fellow  was  seen  first  hacking  a cut  in  a tree,  and  afterwards  boring
with  an  auger  a hole,  into  which  he  introduced  a piece  of  hollow  cane,  by
which  the  sap  was  to  be  drained  off.  About  half  a dozen  men  had  felled
a noble  yellow  poplar,  and  sawed  its  great  trunk  into  many  pieces, which,
after  being  split,  they  were  scooping  into  troughs  to  be  placed  under  the
cane-cocks,  to  receive  the  maple  juice.

Now,  good  Reader,  should  you  ever  chance  to  travel  through  the
maple  grounds  that  lie  near  the  banks  of  that  lovely  stream  the  Green
River  of  Kentucky,  either  in  January  or  in  March,  or  through  those  on
the  broader  Monongahela  in  April ; nay,  should  you  find  yourself  by  the
limpid  streamlets  that  roll  down  the  declivities  of  the  Pocano  Mountains
to  join  the  Lehigh,  and  there  meet  with  a sugar-camp,  take  my  advice
and  tarry  for  a while.  If  you  be  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  and  are  thirsty,
you  can  nowhere  find  a more  wholesome  or  more  agreeable  beverage  than
the  juice  of  the  maple.  A man  when  in  the  Floridas  may  drink  molasses
diffused  in  water ; in  Labrador  he  may  drink  what  he  can  get ; and  at
New  York  or  Philadelphia  he  may  drink  what  he  chooses;  but  in  the
woods  a draught  from  the  sugar-maple  is  delicious  and  most  refreshing.
How  often,  when  travelling,  have  I quenched  my  thirst  with  the  limpid
juice  of  the  receiving  troughs,  from  which  I parted  with  regret ; nay,
even  my  horse,  I have  thought,  seemed  to  desire  to  linger  as  long  as  he
could.

But  let  me  endeavour  to  describe  to  you  the  manner  in  which  the  su-
gar is  obtained.  The  trees  that  yield  it  (Acer  saccharinum)  are  found  more
or  less  abundantly  in  all  parts  of  the  Union  from  Louisiana  to  Maine,  grow-
ing on  elevated  rich  grounds.  An  incision  is  made  into  the  trunk,  at  a height
of  from  two  to  six  feet ; a pipe  of  cane  or  of  any  other  kind  is  thrust  into
the  aperture;  a Jrough  is  placed  beneath  and  receives  the  juice,  which
trickles  by  drops,  and  is  as  limpid  as  the  purest  spring  water.  When  all  the
trees  of  a certain  space  have  been  tapped,  and  the  troughs  filled,  the  peo-


440


A MAPLE-SUGAR  CAMP.


pie  collect  the  juice,  and  pour  it  into  large  vessels.  A camp  has  already
been  pitched  in  the  midst  of  a grove,  several  iron  boilers  have  been  fixed
on  stone  or  brick  supports,  and  the  business  proceeds  with  vigour.  At  times
several  neighbouring  families  join,  and  enjoy  the  labour  as  if  it  were  a past-
time, remaining  out  day  and  night  for  several  weeks ; for  the  troughs  and
kettles  must  be  attended  to  from  the  moment  when  they  are  first  put  in
requisition  until  the  sugar  is  produced.  The  men  and  boys  perform  the
most  laborious  part  of  the  business,  but  the  women  and  girls  are  not  less
busy.

It  takes  ten  gallons  of  sap  to  produce  a pound  of  fine-framed  sugar ;
but  an  inferior  kind  in  lumps,  called  cake-sugar,  is  obtained  in  greater
quantity.  When  the  season  is  far  advanced,  the  juice  wiU  no  longer
grain  by  boiling,  and  only  produces  a syrup.  I have  seen  maple  sugar
so  good,  that  some  months  after  it  was  manufactured  it  resembled  candy ;
and  well  do  I remember  the  time  when  it  was  an  article  of  commerce
throughout  Kentucky,  where,  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  ago,  it  sold  at
from  6^  to  12^  cents  per  pound,  according  to  its  quality,  and  was  daily
purchased  in  the  markets  or  stores.

Trees  that  have  been  thus  bored  rarely  last  many  years  ; for  the  cuts
and  perforations  made  in  their  trunks  injure  their  health,  so  that  after
some  years  of  weeping  they  become  sickly,  exhibit  monstrosities  about
their  lower  parts,  gradually  decay,  and  at  length  die.  I have  no  doubt,
however,  that,  with  proper  care,  the  same  quantity  of  sap  might  be  ob-
tained with  less  injury  to  the  trees ; and  it  is  now  fuUy  time  that  the  far-
mers and  land-owners  should  begin  to  look  to  the  preservation  of  their
sugar-maples.


( 441  )


THE  WHOOPING  CRANE.

Grus  Americana,  Temm.

PLATE  CCLXI.  Young.

The  specimen  from  which  the  figure  in  this  plate  was  drawn,  was  that
mentioned  at  p.  209,  as  having  been  presented  to  me  by  Captain  Clack.
It  has  already  been  described  at  p.  213.  In  this  state,  the  Whooping
Crane  has  been  considered  as  a distinct  species,  to  which  the  name  of
Brown  or  Canada  Crane,  Griis  canadensis,  has  been  given.

On  referring  to  one  of  my  journals,  written  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  I
find  it  stated  that  one  of  these  birds  came  on  board  one  dark  night,  and,
after  passing  the  man  at  the  helm,  fell  into  the  yawl  hanging  at  the  stern
of  the  ship,  where  in  the  morning  it  was  discovered  and  secured.  Al-
though to  appearance  in  good  health,  it  refused  every  kind  of  food,  and
in  a few  days  died.  Knowing  the  great  power  of  flight  of  this  species,  I
could  only  conjecture  that  some  disease  operating  powerfully  at  the  mo-

nt,  had  caused  the  bird  to  take  refuge  in  the  boat,
me  ’ ®


( 442  )


THE  TROPIC  BIRD.

Phaeton  mthereus,  Linn.

PLATE  CCLXII.  Adult  Male  and  Female.

The  specimens  from  which  the  figures  in  the  plate  were  taken,  were
obtained  on  the  Tortugas,  in  the  summer  of  1832,  by  my  kind  friend
Robert  Day,  Esq.  of  the  United  States’  Revenue  Cutter,  the  Marion.
They  were  shot  out  of  a flock  of  eight  or  ten,  and  were  in  fine  condition.
I have  represented  the  Male  and  Female,  in  what  I suppose  to  be  their
full  summer  or  breeding  plumage  ; but  not  having  had  an  opportunity  of
studying  the  habits  of  this  remarkable  bird,  I am  unable  to  give  any  in-
formation respecting  them.


Phaeton  jEthereus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  219. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  iL  p.  893.

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  409.

Tropic  Bird,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  503.

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCLXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  stout,  very  much  compressed,  slightly  curved,
tapering,  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched,  the
ridge  narrow,  but  rounded,  the  sides  sloping  and  slightly  convex  at  the
base,  nearly  perpendicular  towards  the  end,  the  edges  sharp,  irregularly
broken,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  short,  near  the  ridge ; nostrils  linear,
very  small.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  of  moderate  length,  ex-
tremely narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  erect  and
slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp  but  irregularly  serrated,  the  tip  very
acute.

Head  rather  large,  ovate.  Neck  short  and  thick.  Body  rather  full.
Feet  very  short ; tibia  bare  for  a considerable  space ; tarsus  extremely
short,  roundish,  covered  all  round  with  small  round  scales  ; toes  rather
small,  placed  in  the  same  place,  and  connected  by  reticulated  webs ; the
first  toe  very  small,  the  third  and  fourth  about  equal,  all  scutellate  above.
Claws  small,  arched,  compressed,  rather  sharp,  that  of  middle  toe  largest,
with  an  undulated  thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  on  the  back  and  wings  rather  compact.  Wings


TROPIC  BIRD.


443


long,  acute ; primaries  strong,  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly
graduated;  secondaries  very  short,  incurved,  rounded,  the  inner  longer.
Tail  of  twelve  feathers,  wedge-shaped,  the  two  middle  feathers  extremely
elongated,  narrow,  and  tapering.

Bill  orange-red.  Iris  brown.  Tarsi  and  base  of  toes  yellow,  the  rest
and  the  webs  black,  as  are  the  claws.  The  general  colour  of  the  plum-
age is  pale  pink,  or  white  tinged  with  carmine,  the  two  middle  tail  fea-
thers redder.  A curved  spot  before  the  eye,  and  band  behind  it,  black.
A band  of  the  same  colour  extends  across  the  wing  from  the  flexure,
running  narrow  along  the  middle  coverts,  much  enlarged  on  the  inner
secondaries  and  their  coverts,  and  including  the  extremities  of  the  scapu-
lars. The  outer  webs,  shafts,  and  a portion  of  the  inner  webs  of  the  first
four  primary  quills,  are  also  black,  and  there  is  a spot  of  the  same  on
some  of  the  primary  coverts.  The  shafts  of  the  two  middle  tail  feathers
are  black,  excepting  towards  the  end ; and  some  of  the  long  hypochon-
drical  feathers  are  greyish-black  in  the  centre.

Length  to  end  of  tail  29  ^ inches,  to  end  of  wings  16  ; to  end  of
claw  14;  extent  of  wings  38;  wing  from  flexure  11^;  tail  19^;  bill
along  the  ridge  2,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2|;  tarsus  lj§;
middle  toe  1/^,  its  claw  Weight  15  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  male,  but  is  less  tinged  with  red.  The
bill  is  yellow,  the  iris  and  feet  as  in  the  male.  The  tail-feathers  are  also
less  elongated.

Length  to  end  of  tail  26  inches,  to  end  of  wings  14^,  to  end  of  claws
13  ; wing  from  flexure  11 ; tail  16  ; extent  of  wings  34  ; bill  along  the
ridge  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2^ ; tarsus  ; middle  toe
1^2,  its  claw  Weight  12  oz.


( 444  )


THE  CURLEW  SANDPIPER.

Tringa  subarquata,  Temm.

PLATE  CCLXIIL  Adult  and  Young.

Ix  the  course  of  my  extensive  rambles  along  our  coasts  and  in  the  in-
terior, I have  seen  only  three  birds  of  this  species,  all  of  which  I have
kept  with  care,  considering  the  Cape  Sandpiper  or  Pigmy  Curlew  as  the
rarest  of  its  genus  with  us.  It  appears  to  resort  to  particular  districts  ;
two  of  my  birds  were  shot  at  Great  Egg  Harbour  in  New  Jersey,  in  the
spring  of  1829,  the  other  on  Long  Island  near  Sandy  Hook.  No  other
birds  were  near  them,  and  I approached  them  without  much  difficulty.
They  were  wading  along  the  shores  up  to  the  knees,  picking  up  floating
garbage  and  sand  worms.  In  their  stomachs  1 found  fragments  of  mi-
nute shells,  slender  red  worms,  and  bits  of  marine  plants.  The  one
killed  on  Long  Island  was  a fine  male  in  full  plumage,  and  from  it  I
made  the  figure  that  has  been  engraved  in  the  plate.  The  others  were
females  or  young  birds  of  the  preceding  year.  One,  in  plain  plumage,
was  drawn ; the  other,  mottled  beneath  with  patches  of  white  and  dull
rufous,  I considered  as  a female  which  might  perhaps  have  perfected  its
colouring  that  season.  I have  seen  a few  specimens  in  New  York,  and
two  in  Boston ; and  my  friend  John  Bachman  has  one  or  two  in  his
possession.


Tkinga  suBARauATA,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  609. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis
of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  317.

Numenius  africanus  Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  712.

Cape  Curlew  or  Sandpiper,  Nuttall,  Manual,  p.  104.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXIIL  Fig.  1.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  flexible,  very  shght-
ly  decurved,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  obtuse.  Upper  mandible
with  the  dorsal  line  at  first  shghtly  sloping,  then  nearly  straight,  and  to-
wards the  end  slightly  decurved,  the  ridge  convex  but  narrow,  the  sides
sloping,  the  edges  rather  blunt  and  soft.  Nasal  groove  extending  to  near
the  tip ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  nearly  erect,  with
a long  narrow  groove,  the  tip  tapering  but  rounded.


CURLEW  SANDPIPER.


445


Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Eyes  of  moderate  size.
Neck  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet
rather  long,  slender  ; tibia  bare  about  a third  of  its  length  ; tarsus  com-
pressed, anteriorly  and  posteriorly  covered  with  numerous  scutella ; hind
toe  very  small ; the  rest  of  moderate  length,  slender,  the  fourth  a little
longer  than  the  second,  the  third  longest,  all  free,  scutellate  above,  flat
beneath,  slightly  marginate ; claws  small,  slightly  arched,  compressed,
acute,  that  of  third  toe  largest,  with  the  inner  edge  slightly  dilated.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  beneath,  slightly  distinct  above.  Wings
long  and  pointed  ; primaries  tapering,  obtuse,  the  first  longest,  the  second
scarcely  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; outer  secondaries  short,  in-
curved, obliquely  truncate,  the  inner  web  extending  beyond  the  outer ;
the  inner  secondaries  elongated,  tapering.  Tail  rather  short,  slightly
rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers,  the  two  middle  a little  longer.

Bill  dark  olive-green,  dusky  towards  the  point.  Iris  hazel.  Feet
light  olive,  claws  dusky.  The  head,  neck  and  breast,  are  bright  yellowish-
red,  the  sides  whitish,  the  lower  tail-coverts  white,  with  a brownish-black
spot  towards  the  end.  The  central  parts  of  the  feathers  on  the  upper
part  of  the  head  are  dark  brown,  and  there  are  slight  streaks  of  the  same
on  the  hind  neck  and  sides  of  the  breast.  The  upper  parts  are  mottled
with  brownish-black  and  dull  red,  the  rump  pale  brownish-grey,  as  are
the  smaller  wing-coverts.  Quills  greyish-brown,  the  primaries  dark,  the
outer  secondaries  light  and  tipped  with  white,  the  inner  darker  and  glossed
with  green.  Upper  tail-coverts  white,  spotted  with  brown  and  red  ; tail
pale  brownish  grey,  glossed  with  green.

Length  to  end  of  tail  8f  inches,  to  end  of  wings  9A  ; extent  of  wings
16;  wing  from  flexure  5;  tail  ; bill  along  the  back  1^,  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  ; bare  parts  of  tibia  ^ ; tarsus  lyj,  middle  toe
1,  its  claw  Weight  2^  oz.

Adult  Female,  Plate  CCLXIII.  Young  in  autumn.

The  bill,  iris,  and  feet  as  in  the  adult.  On  the  upper  parts  the  fea-
thers are  brown,  edged  with  darker,  and  margined  with  greyish  yellow ;
the  lore,  cheeks  and  sides  of  the  neck  and  body  are  greyish-yellow,  with
dusky  lines,  a broad  band  from  the  mandible  over  the  eye,  the  fore  part
of  the  neck,  and  the  rest  of  the  lower  parts,  white.  Quills  and  tail  as  in
the  adult,  but  lighter.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7f  inches ; extent  of  wings  llfg.  Weight  If  oz.


( 446  )


THE  FULMAR  PETREL.

Procellaria  glacialis,  Linn.

PLATE  CCLXIV.  Male.

Though  not  a large  bird,  the  Fulmar  is  possessed  of  considerable
strength,  and  has  a powerful  and  sustained  flight.  In  autumn  and  win-
ter it  is  seen  on  our  eastern  coasts,  from  which  it  retires  early  in  summer,
to  betake  itself  to  the  northern  retreats  in  which  it  rears  its  young.  I
have  never  seen  it  farther  south  than  Long  Island,  but  I have  often  found
it  on  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  and  in  the  space  intervening  between
them  and  our  shores.  From  the  beginning  of  September  to  that  of  May
it  may  be  said  to  be  pretty  common,  especially  around  the  banks,  to  which
the  cod-flshers  resort,  and  where  it  feeds  chiefly  on  the  rejected  garbage.

One  calm  day  in  August,  when  on  a voyage  from  England  to  New  York,
of  which  I have  already  spoken  when  describing  the  Forked- tailed  Petrel,
I procured  several  Fulmars.  They  came  up  and  alighted  near  the  boat,
whenever  we  threw  any  thing  overboard,  and  did  not  seem  to  be  in  the
least  alarmed  by  the  report  of  a gun.  In  one  instance  I shot  one  on  the
water,  when  it  was  so  near  that  I could  distinctly  see  the  colour  of  its  eye.
A great  number  of  them  were  swimming  in  small  detached  flocks  of  eight
or  ten,  their  colour  at  a distance  appearing  as  if  pure  white,  and  con-
trasting beautifully  with  the  dark  blue  of  the  sea.  They  floated  very
buoyantly,  some  swimming  about  with  great  ease,  others  to  appearance
sound  asleep.  Most  of  them  had  the  wing  and  tail  feathers  ragged,  and
some  were  much  soiled  with  greasy  matter,  which  gave  them  an  unplea-
sant appearance.  Those  which  were  caught,  on  being  wounded,  emitted
quantities  of  oily  matter  by  their  nostrils,  and  disgorged  much  of  the
same  substance ; but  did  not  attempt  to  bite,  w'hich  seemed  strange  in
birds  having  the  bill  so  powerful  and  hooked.  They  fly  with  less  grace
than  the  Shearwaters,  proceeding  in  a direct  line,  and  at  a small  height,
towards  the  objects  on  which  they  feed.

I was  much  disappointed  at  not  finding  the  Fulmar  along  the  rocky
shores  of  Labrador,  where  I had  expected  to  meet  with  it,  as  it  is  regu-
larly observed  in  spring  moving  northward  in  files  opposite  the  entrance
of  the  Straits  of  Belle  Isle.  Its  passage  towards  the  Arctic  Regions  has


FULMAR  PETREL.


447


been  observed  by  Captain  Sabine  on  the  coast  of  Greenland.  “ Whilst
the  ships,”  he  says,  “ were  detained  by  the  ice  in  Jacob’s  Bay,  in  latitude
71°,  from  the  24th  of  June  to  the  3d  of  July,  Fulmars  were  passing  in  a
continual  stream  to  the  northward,  in  numbers  inferior  only  to  the  flight
of  the  Passenger  Pigeon  in  America.”  While  on  my  way  to  Labrador,

I was  told  that  they  bred  on  the  Seal  Islands  off  the  entrance  of  the  Bay
of  Fundy.  The  egg,  which  is  of  a regular  ovate  form,  with  a smooth
brittle  pure  white  shell,  measures  two  inches  and  seven-eighths  in  length,
by  two  inches  in  breadth.

My  much  esteemed  friend  Mr  Selby,  in  his  Illustrations  of  British
Ornithology,  gives  the  following  account  of  this  species.  “ The  steep  and
rocky  St  Kilda,  one  of  the  western  islands  of  Scotland,  is  the  only  locahty
within  the  British  dominions  annually  resorted  to  by  the  Fulmar,  the  rest
of  the  Scottish  and  our  more  southern  coasts  being  rarely  visited  even  by
stragglers.  Upon  St  Kilda  these  birds  are  found  in  vast  numbers  during
the  spring  and  summer  months,  breeding  in  the  caverns  and  holes  of  the
rocks;  and,  from  the  various  uses  to  which  the  down,  feathers,  and  oil  of
the  young  are  applied,  contribute  essentially  to  the  comfort  of  the  inhabi-
tants. They  lay  but  one  egg  each,  white,  and  of  a large  size,  with  a shell »
of  very  brittle  texture.  The  young  are  hatched  about  the  middle  of  June,
and  are  fed  with  oil  thrown  up  by  the  parents  (the  produce  of  the  food
upon  which  they  subsist),  and,  as  soon  as  fledged,  are  eagerly  sought  for
by  the  natives,  although  often  at  the  risk  of  life,  in  scaling  the  tremendous
and  overhanging  chfl’s  in  which  they  nestle.  Like  most  of  the  group,
these  birds  have  the  power  of  ejecting  oil  with  much  force  through  their
tubular  nostrils,  which  is  used  as  the  principal  mode  of  defence ; it  be-
comes an  essential  point,  therefore,  that  they  should  be  taken  and  killed
by  surprise,  in  order  to  prevent  the  loss  of  a liquid  so  requisite  for  the
comfort  of  the  inhabitants,  by  supplying  them  with  the  necessary  fuel  for
their  lamps.  The  Fulmar  is  of  voracious  appetite,  feeding  upon  all  sorts
of  animal  substance,  particularly  of  an  oily  nature,  such  as  the  blubber  of
whales,  seals,  &c. ; and  for  this  purpose  it  follows  in  great  numbers  the
track  of  the  whale  vessels,  and  is  so  greedy  of  its  favourite  food,  as  to  be
often  seen  alighting  upon  the  wounded  animal,  when  not  quite  dead,  and
immediately  proceeding  to  break  the  skin  with  its  strong  hooked  bill,  and
gorging  itself  with  the  blubber  to  repletion.”

The  Rev.  Mr  Scoresby,  in  his  “ Arctic  Regions,”  vol.  i.  p.  528,  gives
the  following  account  of  its  habits  as  observed  by  him  in  the  polar  seas.


448


FULMAR  PETREL.


“ The  Fulmar  is  the  constant  companion  of  the  whale-fisher.  It  joins
his  ship  immediately  on  passing  the  Shetland  Islands,  and  accompanies  it
through  the  trackless  ocean  to  the  highest  accessible  latitudes.  It  keeps
an  eager  watch  for  any  thing  thrown  overboard ; the  smallest  particle  of
fatty  substance  can  scarcely  escape  it.  As  such,  a hook  baited  with  a
piece  of  fat  meat  or  blubber,  and  towed  by  a long  twine  over  the  ship’s
stern,  is  a means  employed  by  the  sailor  boys  for  taking  them.  In  the
spring  of  the  year,  before  they  have  glutted  themselves  too  frequently
with  the  fat  of  the  whale,  they  may  be  eaten ; and  when  cleared  of  the
skin,  and  of  every  particle  of  yellow  fatty  substance  lying  beneath  it,  and
well  soaked  in  water,  they  are  pretty  good,  particularly  in  ‘ sea  pies.’
They  are  remarkably  easy  and  swift  on  the  wing.  They  can  fly  to  wind-
ward in  the  highest  storms,  and  rest  on  the  water  with  great  composure
in  the  most  tremendous  seas.  But  it  is  observed  that,  in  heavy  gales,
they  fly  extremely  low,  generally  skimming  along  by  the  surface  of  the
water.  The  Fulmar  walks  awkwardly,  and  with  the  legs  so  bent  that  the
feet  almost  touch  the  belly.  When  on  ice  it  rests  with  its  body  on  the
surface,  and  presents  its  breast  to  the  wind.  Like  the  Duck,  it  sometimes
turns  its  head  backward,  and  conceals  its  bill  beneath  its  wing.

“ Fulmars  are  extremely  greedy  of  the  fat  of  the  whale.  Though  few
should  be  seen  when  a whale  is  about  being  captured,  yet,  as  soon  as  the
flensing  process  commences,  they  rush  in  from  all  quarters,  and  frequent-
ly accumulate  to  many  thousands  in  number.  They  then  occupy  the
greasy  track  of  the  ship  ; and  being  audaciously  greedy,  fearlessly  advance
witbin  a few  yards  of  tbe  men  employed  in  cutting  up  the  whale.  If,  in-
deed, the  fragments  of  fat  do  not  float  sufficiently  away,  they  approach  so
near  the  scene  of  operations,  that  they  are  knocked  down  with  boat  hooks
in  great  numbers,  and  sometimes  taken  up  by  the  hand.  The  sea  im-
mediately about  the  ship’s  stern,  is  sometimes  so  completely  covered  with
them,  that  a stone  can  scarcely  be  thrown  overboard,  without  striking  one
of  them.  When  any  thing  is  thus  cast  among  them,  those  nearest  the
spot  where  it  falls  take  the  alarm,  and  these  exciting  some  fear  in  others
more  remote,  sometimes  put  a thousand  of  them  in  motion ; but  as,  in
rising  into  the  air,  they  assist  their  wings,  for  the  first  few  yards,  by
striking  the  water  with  their  feet,  there  is  produced  by  such  a number  of
them,  a loud  and  most  singular  splashing.  It  is  highly  amusing  to  ob-
serve tbe  voracity  with  which  they  seize  the  pieces  of  fat  that  fall  in  their
way  ; the  size  and  quantity  of  the  pieces  they  take  at  a meal ; the  curious


FULMAR  PETREL.


44‘J


chuckling  noise  which  in  their  anxiety  for  dispatch  they  always  make  ;
and  the  jealousy  with  which  they  view,  and  the  boldness  with  which
they  attack,  any  of  this  species  that  are  engaged  in  devouring  the  finest
morsels.  They  frequently  glut  themselves  so  completely,  that  they  are
unable  to  fly  ; in  which  case,  when  they  are  not  relieved  by  a quantity
being  disgorged,  they  endeavour  to  get  on  the  nearest  piece  of  ice,  where
they  rest  until  the  advancement  of  digestion  restores  their  wonted  powers.
Then,  if  opportunity  admit,  they  return  with  the  same  gust  to  the  ban-
quet as  before ; and  though  numbers  of  the  species  may  be  killed,  and
allowed  to  float  about  among  them,  they  appear  unconscious  of  danger  to
themselves.

“ The  Fulmar  never  dives,  but  when  incited  to  it  by  the  appearance
of  a morsel  of  fat  under  water.  When  in  close  view  of  any  men,  it  keeps
a continual  watch  both  on  the  men  and  its  prey  ; having  its  feet  con-
tinually in  motion,  and  yet  perhaps  not  moving  at  all  through  the  water.
Its  boldness  increases  with  the  numbers  of  its  species  that  surround  it.
It  is  a very  hardy  bird.  Its  feathers  being  thick  it  is  not  easily  killed  with
a blow.  Its  bite,  from  the  crookedness,  strength,  and  sharpness  of  its  bill,
is  very  severe.

“ When  carrion  is  scarce,  the  Fulmars  follow  the  living  whale;  and
sometimes,  by  their  peculiar  motions,  when  hovering  at  the  surface  of  the
water,  point  out  to  the  fisher  the  position  of  the  animal  of  which  he  is  in
pursuit.  They  cannot  make  much  impression  on  the  dead  whale,  until
some  more  powerful  animal  tears  away  the  skin  ; the  epidermis  and  rete
mucosum  they  entirely  remove,  but  the  true  skin  is  too  tough  for  them
to  make  way  through  it.”


Procellaria  glacialis,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  213 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.

p.  823.— CA.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  3(!!).

Fulmar  Petrel,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  330.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCLXIV.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  robust,  straight,  slightly  compressed,  the
tip  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  nostrils  on  the  ridge,  separated
only  by  a thin  partition,  covered  by  an  elevated  horny  case,  and  open-
ing directly  forwards,  the  sides  convex,  and  separated  by  a groove  from
the  nasal  plate,  as  well  as  from  the  unguis,  which  is  remarkably  strong,

1-’  f


VOL.  III.


450


FULMAR  PETREL.


curved  and  acute,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  and  slightly  curved.  Lower
mandible  with  the  angle  long,  rather  wide,  acute,  the  sides  erect  but  con-
vex, the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  very  short  dorsal  line  ascending
and  slightly  concave,  the  edges  decurved  at  the  end.

Head  rather  large,  ovate.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  full.  Feet  of
moderate  length,  stout ; tibia  bare  for  a short  space  below ; tarsus  a little
compressed,  rather  sharp  before,  covered  all  round  with  reticular  scales,
of  which  those  on  the  anterior  and  posterior  ridges  are  much  smaller.
Hind  toe  a slight  prominence,  with  a conical  obtuse  c]aw  ; the  fore  toes
long,  slender,  scutellate  above,  connected  by  striated^  entire  webs,  the
fourth  a little  longer  than  the  third,  the  second  not  much  shorter.  Claws
rather  small,  arched,  compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  third  toe  with  an
inner  thin  edge.

Plumage  free,  close,  elastic,  blended  ; on  the  back  and  wings  the  fea-
thers rather  distinct.  Wings  long ; primary  quills  rather  broad,  taper-
ing, acuminate,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  graduated  ; secondary  broad  and
rounded.  Tail  rather  short,  slightly  rounded,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded
feathers.

Bill,  iris,  and  feet  yellow,  the  latter  tinged  with  green.  The  head,
neck  and  lower  parts,  are  pure  white ; the  back  and  wings  light  greyish-
blue,  the  rump  paler,  the  tail  bluish-white  ; the  primary  quills  and  their
coverts  blackish-brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  16^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  17f , to  end  of  claws
1 1 ; extent  of  wings  30  ; wing  from  flexure  13 ; tail  ; bill  along  the
back  lig,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2/5  ; tarsus  2 ; outer  toe  1^®^,
its  claw  Weight  1 lb.  4 oz.


The  Female  is  similar  to  the  Male.


( 451  )


THE  BUFF-BREASTED  SANDPIPER.

Tringa  rufescens,  Vieill.

PLATE  CCLXV.  Male  and  Female.

It  is  a curious  fact  that  although  this  beautiful  bird  is  by  no  means
rare,  at  particular  periods,  along  the  shores  of  our  Eastern  Districts,  it
remained  unknown  to  Wilson,  Bonaparte,  and,  until  found  in  England
by  Mr  Yarrell,  to  myself.  It  was  first  discovered  by  Vieillot  in
Louisiana,  where,  however,  I never  met  with  it.  My  friend  Nuttall,
who  has  also  described  it,  states  that  it  is  often  seen  near  Boston,  in
company  with  the  Pectoral  Sandpiper,  and  is  not  uncommon  in  the
market  there.  To  my  friend  Mr  Yarrell  I am  indebted  for  the  use
of  his  specimen,  from  which  I made  the  figure  in  the  act  of  starting  on
wing.  The  other  figure  was  taken  from  an  American  specimen,  pro-
cured at  Boston,  and  now  in  my  possession.  I regret,  however,  that  I can
say  nothing  respecting  the  habits  or  haunts  of  this  bird,  farther  than
that  having  seen  a wing  of  it  in  the  possession  of  my  friend  Captain
James  Clark  Ross,  I think  it  probable  that  it  breeds  near  the  Arctic
circle,  as  he  received  a wing  from  the  sailors,  who  had  found  it  in  the
course  of  one  of  the  numerous  inland  excursions  in  the  desolate  regions
from  which  these  intrepid  navigators  have  recently  returned.


TiiiNGA  RUFESCENS,  Le  Tringa  roussatre,  Vieill.  Nouv.  Diet.  d’Hist.  Nat. —
Yarrell,  in  Linn.  Trans,  vol.  xvi.  p.  109.  pi.  11.

Buff-breasted  Tringa,  Tringa  rufescens,  Selby,  Illustr.  vol.  ii.  p.  142.  pi.  27.
fig.  4.

Buff-breasted  Sandpiper,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  113.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  very  slightly
decurved,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  rather  depressed  and  obtuse.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  very  slightly  decurved  towards  the
end,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  rather  blunt  and  soft.
Nasal  groove  extending  to  near  the  tip,  nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.
Lower  mandible  witli  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line

E f 2


452


BUFF-BREASTED  SANDPIPER.


straight,  the  sides  sloping  outwards,  with  a long  narrow  groove,  the  tip  a
little  broader,  but  tapering.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Eyes  rather  large.
Neck  of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  rather  long,
slender ; tibia  bare  a third  part  of  its  length  ; tarsus  compressed,  an-
teriorly and  posteriorly  with  numerous  small  scutella  ; hind  toe  very
small ; the  rest  of  moderate  length,  slender,  the  fourth  slightly  longer
than  the  second,  the  third  longest;  all  free,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,
slightly  marginate ; claws  rather  small,  slightly  arched,  compressed,  ra-
ther obtuse,  that  of  the  third  toe  much  larger,  with  the  inner  edge  di-
lated.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  on  the  lower  parts,  the  feathers  rather
distinct  above.  Wings  very  long,  pointed  ; primaries  tapering,  obtuse,
the  first  longest,  the  second  almost  equal,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ;
outer  secondaries  slightly  incurved,  narrow,  very  obliquely  sinuate  on
the  outer  web  towards  the  end,  the  inner  web  rounded,  and  extending
beyond  the  outer  ; inner  secondaries  very  narrow,  tapering,  acute,  reach-
ing, when  the  wing  is  closed,  to  within  half  an  inch  of  its  tip.  Tail
of  moderate  length,  nearly  even,  with  the  two  middle  feathers  exceed-
ing the  rest,  and  having  the  shaft  projecting,  of  twelve  narrow,  rounded
feathers.

Bill  dull  olive-green,  dusky  towards  the  point.  Iris  hasel.  Feet  dull
yellowish-green,  claws  dusky.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is
greyish-yellow,  each  feather  blackish-brown  in  the  centre ; wing-coverts
lighter ; quills  and  their  coverts  light  greyish-brown,  greenish-black  at
the  end,  but  with  a whitish  tip,  the  inner  webs  whitish  in  the  greater
part  of  their  breadth,  and  beautifully  dotted  with  black  in  undulating
lines  ; the  inner  secondaries  like  the  feathers  of  the  back.  The  two  middle
tail-feathers  greyish-brown,  dark-brown  glossed  with  green  at  the  end,  and
slightly  margined  and  tipped  with  white,  the  rest  gradually  paler  to  the
outer,  margined  and  tipped  with  white,  within  which  are  two  lines  of
blackish-brown.  Sides  of  the  head,  fore  neck,  and  sides  light  yellowish-
red,  the  throat  paler,  the  sides  of  the  neck  and  body  spotted  with  brown-
ish-black ; the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  paler  and  unspotted.  The  lower
wing-coverts  are  white,  those  near  the  edge  of  the  wing  black  in  the  centre,
the  primary  coverts  dotted  with  black,  and  having  a spot  of  the  same  near
the  end.


BUFF-BREASTED  SANDPIPER.


453


Length  to  end  of  tail  8 inches,  to  end  of  wings  ; extent  of  wings
18  ; wing  from  flexure  5| ; tail  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  1 ; bare  part  of  tibia  ; tarsus  middle  toe
i§,  its  claw  WeighLS^  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  somewhat  larger  than  the  male,  which  it  resembles  in
colour,  but  has  the  lower  parts  paler,  and  the  feathers  of  the  upper  parts
of  a lighter  brown,  with  an  inner  margin  of  brownish-black  and  an  outer
of  greyish-yellow.


( 454  )


THE  OPOSSUM.

This  singular  animal  is  found  more  or  less  abundant  in  most  parts  of
the  Southern,  Western,  and  Middle  States  of  the  Union.  It  is  iheDidel-
phis  virginiana  of  Pennant,  Haklan,  and  other  authors  who  have  given
some  account  of  its  habits ; but  as  none  of  them,  so  far  as  I know,  have
illustrated  its  propensity  to  dissimulate,  and  as  I have  had  opportunities
of  observing  its  manners,  I trust  that  a few  particulars  of  its  biography
will  prove  amusing.

The  opossum  is  fond  of  secluding  itself  during  the  day,  although  it  by
no  means  confines  its  predatory  rangings  to  the  night.  Like  many  other
quadrupeds  which  feed  principally  on  flesh,  it  is  also  both  frugivorous  and
herbivorous,  and,  when  very  hard  pressed  by  hunger,  it  seizes  various
kinds  of  insects  and  reptiles.  Its  gait,  while  travelling,  and  at  a time
when  it  supposes  itself  unobserved,  is  altogether  ambling:  in  other  words,
it,  like  a young  foal,  moves  the  two  legs  of  one  side  forward  at  once.
The  Newfoundland  dog  manifests  a similar  propensity.  Having  a con-
stitution as  hardy  as  that  of  the  most  northern  animals,  it  stands  the  coldest
weather,  and  does  not  hybernate,  although  its  covering  of  fur  and  hair
may  be  said  to  be  comparatively  scanty  even  during  winter.  The  defect,
however,  seems  to  be  compensated  by  a skin  of  considerable  thickness,  and
a general  subcutaneous  layer  of  fat.  Its  movements  are  usually  rather
slow,  and  as  it  walks  or  ambles  along,  its  curious  prehensile  tail  is  carried
just  above  the  ground,  its  rounded  ears  are  directed  forward,  and  at  al-
most every  step  its  pointed  nose  is  applied  to  the  objects  beneath  it  in
order  to  discover  what  sort  of  creatures  may  have  crossed  its  path.  Me-
thinks  I see  one  at  this  moment  slowly  and  cautiously  trudging  over  the
melting  snows  by  the  side  of  an  unfrequented  pond,  nosing  as  it  goes  for
the  fare  its  ravenous  appetite  prefers.  Now  it  has  come  upon  the  fresh
track  of  a grouse  or  hare,  and  it  raises  its  snout  and  snuffs  the  keen  air.
At  length  it  has  decided  on  its  course,  and  it  speeds  onward  at  the  rate  of
a man’s  ordinary  walk.  It  stops  and  seems  at  a loss  in  what  direction  to
go,  for  the  object  of  its  pursuit  has  either  taken  a considerable  leap,  or
bas  cut  backwards  before  the  opossum  entered  its  track.  It  raises  itself  up,
stands  for  a while  on  its  hind  feet,  looks  around,  snuffs  the  air  again,  and
then  proceeds ; but  now,  at  the  foot  of  a noble  tree,  it  comes  to  a full


THE  OPOSSUM.


455


stand.  It  walks  round  the  base  of  the  huge  trunk,  over  the  snow-covered
roots,  and  among  them  finds  an  aperture,  which  it  at  once  enters.  Seve-
ral minutes  elapse,  when  it  re-appears,  dragging  along  a squirrel  already
deprived  of  life,  with  which  in  its  mouth  it  begins  to  ascend  the  tree.
Slowly  it  climbs.  The  first  fork  does  not  seem  to  suit  it,  for  perhaps  it
thinks  it  might  there  be  too  openly  exposed  to  the  view  of  some  wily  foe,
and  so  it  proceeds,  until  it  gains  a cluster  of  branches  intertwined  with
grape-vines,  and  there  composing  itself,  it  twists  its  tail  round  one  of  the
twigs,  and  with  its  sharp  teeth  demolishes  the  unlucky  squirrel,  which  it
holds  all  the  while  with  its  fore  paws.

The  pleasant  days  of  spring  have  arrived,  and  the  trees  vigorously
shoot  forth  their  buds  ; but  the  opossum  is  almost  bare,  and  seems  nearly
exhausted  by  hunger.  It  visits  the  margins  of  creeks,  and  is  pleased  to
see  the  young  frogs,  which  afford  it  a tolerable  repast.  Gradually  the
poke-berry  and  the  nettle  shoot  up,  and  on  their  tender  and  juicy  stems
it  gladly  feeds.  The  matin  calls  of  the  Wild  Turkey  Cock  delight  the
ear  of  the  cunning  creature,  for  it  well  knows  that  it  wiU  soon  hear  the
female,  and  trace  her  to  her  nest,  when  it  will  suck  the  eggs  with  delight.
Travelling  through  the  woods,  perhaps  on  the  ground,  perhaps  aloft,  from
tree  to  tree,  it  hears  a cock  crow,  and  its  heart  swells  as  it  remembers  the
savoury  food  on  which  it  regaled  itself  last  summer  in  the  neighbouring
farm-yard.  With  great  care,  however,  it  advances,  and  at  last  conceals
itself  in  the  very  hen-house.

Honest  farmer  ! why  did  you  kill  so  many  crows  last  winter.?  aye,
and  ravens  too  ? Well,  you  have  had  your  own  way  of  it ; but  now  hie
to  the  village  and  procure  a store  of  ammunition,  clean  your  rusty  gun,
set  your  traps,  and  teach  your  lazy  curs  to  watch  the  opossum.  There
it  comes ! The  sun  is  scarcely  down,  but  the  appetite  of  the  prowler  is
keen  ; hear  the  screams  of  one  of  your  best  chickens  that  has  been  seized
by  him  ! The  cunning  beast  is  off  with  it,  and  nothing  now  can  be  done,
unless  you  stand  there  to  watch  the  fox  or  the  owl,  now  exulting  in  the
thought  that  you  have  killed  their  enemy  and  your  own  friend,  the  poor
crow.  That  precious  hen  under  which  you  last  week  placed  a dozen  eggs
or  so,  is  now  deprived  of  them.  The  opossum,  notwithstanding  her  angry
outcries  and  rufflings  of  feathers,  has  removed  them  one  by  one ; and  now,
look  at  the  poor  bird  as  she  moves  across  your  yard  ; if  not  mad,  she  is  at
least  stupid,  for  she  scratches  here  and  there,  calling  to  her  chickens  all
the  while.  All  this  comes  from  your  shooting  crows,  Had  you  been


456


THE  OPOSSUM.


more  merciful  or  more  prudent,  the  opossum  might  have  been  kept  with-
in the  woods,  where  it  would  have  been  satisfied  with  a squirrel,  a young-
hare,  the  eggs  of  a Turkey,  or  the  grapes  that  so  profusely  adorn  the
boughs  of  our  forest  trees.  But  I talk  to  you  in  vain.

There  cannot  be  a better  exemplification  of  maternal  tenderness  than
the  female  oppossum.  Just  peep  into  that  curious  sack  in  which  the
young  are  concealed,  each  attached  to  a teat.  The  kind  mother  not  only
nourishes  them  with  care,  but  preserves  them  from  their  enemies ; she
moves  with  them  as  the  shark  does  with  its  progeny,  and  now,  aloft  on
the  tulip  tree,  she  hides  among  the  thick  foliage.  By  the  end  of  two
months  they  begin  to  shift  for  themselves ; each  has  been  taught  its  par-
ticular lesson,  and  must  now  practise  it.

But  suppose  the  farmer  has  surprised  an  Opossum  in  the  act  of  kill-
ing one  of  his  best  fowls.  His  angry  feelings  urge  him  to  kick  the  poor
beast,  which,  conscious  of  its  inability  to  resist,  rolls  off  like  a ball.  The
more  the  farmer  rages,  the  more  reluctant  is  the  animal  to  manifest  re-
sentment ; at  last  there  it  lies,  not  dead,  but  exhausted,  its  jaws  open,  its
tongue  extended,  its  eye  dimmed  ; and  there  it  would  lie  until  the  bottle-
fly  should  come  to  deposit  its  eggs,  did  not  its  tormentor  at  length  walk
off.  “ Surely,”  says  he  to  himself,  “ the  beast  must  be  dead.”  But  no,
reader,  it  is  only  “ ’possuming,”  and  no  sooner  has  its  enemy  withdrawn,
than  it  gradually  gets  on  its  legs,  and  once  more  makes  for  the  woods.

Once,  while  descending  the  Mississippi,  in  a sluggish  flat-bottomed
boat,  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  studying  those  objects  of  nature  more
nearly  connected  with  my  favourite  pursuits,  I chanced  to  meet  with  two
well-grown  Opossums,  and  brought  them  alive  to  the  “ ark.”  The  poor
things  were  placed  on  the  roof  or  deck,  and  were  immediately  assailed  by
the  crew,  when,  following  their  natural  instinct,  they  lay  as  if  quite  dead.
An  experiment  was  suggested,  and  both  were  thrown  overboard.  On
striking  the  water,  and  for  a few  moments  after,  neither  evinced  the  least
disposition  to  move ; but  finding  their  situation  desperate,  they  began  to
swim  towards  our  uncouth  rudder,  which  was  formed  of  a long  slender
tree,  extending  from  the  middle  of  the  boat  thirty  feet  beyond  its  stern.
They  both  got  upon  it,  were  taken  up,  and  afterwards  let  loose  in  their
native  woods.

In  the  year  1829,  I was  in  a portion  of  Lower  Louisiana,  where  the
Opossum  abounds  at  all  seasons,  and  having  been  asked  by  the  President
and  the  Secretary  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  London,  to  forward  live


THE  OPOSSUM.


457


animals  of  this  species  to  them,  I offered  a price  a little  above  the  com-
mon, and  soon  found  myself  plentifully  supplied,  twenty-five  having  been
brought  to  me.  I found  them  excessively  voracious,  and  not  less  coward-
ly. They  were  put  into  a large  box,  with  a great  quantity  of  food,  and
conveyed  to  a steamer  bound  for  New  Orleans.  Two  days  afterwards,  I
went  to  the  city,  to  see  about  sending  them  off  to  Europe ; but,  to  my
surprise,  I found  that  the  old  males  had  destroyed  the  younger  ones,
and  eaten  off  their  heads,  and  that  only  sixteen  remained  alive.  A sepa-
rate box  was  purchased  for  each,  and  some  time  after  they  reached  my
friends  the  Rathbones  of  Liverpool,  who,  with  their  usual  attention,
sent  them  off  to  London,  where,  on  my  return,  I saw  a good  number  of
them  in  the  Zoological  Gardens.

This  animal  is  fond  of  grapes,  of  which  a species  now  bears  its  name.
Persimons  are  greedily  eaten  by  it,  and  in  severe  weather  I have  ob-
served it  eating  lichens.  Fowls  of  every  kind,  and  quadrupeds  less
powerful  than  itself,  are  also  its  habitual  prey.

The  flesh  of  the  Opossum  resembles  that  of  a young  pig,  and  would
perhaps  be  as  highly  prized,  were  it  not  for  the  prejudice  generally  en-
tertained against  it.  Some  “ very  particular”  persons,  to  my  knowledge,
have  pronounced  it  excellent  eating.  After  cleaning  its  body,  suspend
it  for  a whole  week  in  the  frosty  air,  for  it  is  not  eaten  in  summer  ; then
place  it  on  a heap  of  hot  wood  embers ; sprinkle  it  when  cooked  with
gunpowder ; and  now  tell  me,  good  reader,  does  it  not  equal  the  famed
Canvas-back  Duck  ? Should  you  visit  any  of  our  markets,  you  may  see
it  there  in  company  with  the  best  game.


( 458  )


THE  COMMON  CORMORANT.

Phalacrocorax  Carbo,  Dumont.

PLATE  CCLXVI.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Look  at  the  birds  before  you,  and  mark  the  affectionate  glance  of  the
mother,  as  she  stands  beside  her  beloved  younglings  ! I wish  you  could
have  witnessed  the  actions  of  such  groups  as  I did  while  in  Labrador.
Methinks  I still  see  the  high  rolling  billows  of  the  St  Lawrence  breaking
in  foaming  masses  against  the  huge  cliffs,  on  the  shelves  of  which  the
Cormorant  places  its  nest.  I lie  flat  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice  some
hundred  feet  above  the  turbulent  waters,  and  now  crawling  along  with  all
care,  I find  myself  only  a few  yards  above  the  spot  on  which  the  parent
bird  and  her  young  are  fondling  each  other,  quite  unconscious  of  my
being  near.  How  delighted  I am  to  witness  their  affectionate  gratula-
tions,  hear  their  lisping  notes,  mark  the  tremulous  motions  of  their  ex-
panded throats,  and  the  curious  vacillations  of  their  heads  and  necks  !
The  kind  mother  gently  caresses  each  alternately  with  her  bill ; the  little
ones  draw  nearer  to  her,  and,  as  if  anxious  to  evince  their  gratitude,  rub
their  heads  against  hers.  How  pleasing  all  this  is  to  me ! But  at  this
moment  the  mother  accidentally  looks  upward,  her  keen  eye  has  met  mine,
she  utters  a croak,  spreads  her  sable  wings,  and  in  terror  launches  into
the  air,  leaving  her  brood  at  my  mercy.  Far  and  near,  above  and  be-
neath  me,  the  anxious  parent  passes  and  repasses;  her  flight  is  now  un-
natural, and  she  seems  crippled,  for  she  would  fain  perform  those  actions
in  the  air,  which  other  birds  perform  on  the  ground  or  on  the  water,  in  such
distressing  moments  of  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  their  beloved  young.  Her
many  neighbours,  all  as  suspicious  as  herself,  well  understand  the  mean-
ing of  her  mode  of  flight,  and  one  after  another  take  to  wing,  so  that  the
air  is  in  a manner  blackened  with  them.  Some  fly  far  over  the  waters,
others  glide  along  the  face  of  the  bold  rock,  but  none  that  have  observed
me  realight,  and  how  many  of  those  there  are  I am  pretty  certain,  as  the
greater  number  follow  in  the  track  of  the  one  most  concerned.  Mean-
while the  little  ones,  in  their  great  alarm,  have  crawled  into  a recess,  and
there  they  are  huddled  together.  I have  witnessed  their  pleasures  and


COMMON  CORMORANT.


459


their  terrors,  and  now,  crawling  backwards,  I leave  them  to  resume  their
ordinary  state  of  peaceful  security.

It  was  on  the  3d  of  July  1833,  about  three  in  the  morning,  that  I
had  the  pleasure  of  witnessing  the  scene  described  above.  I was  aware
before  that  a colony  of  Cormorants  had  nestled  on  the  ledges  of  the  great
rocky  wall  that  separated  our  harbour  of  Whapatiguan  from  the  waters
of  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence.  A strong  gale  had  ruffled  the  sea,  and  the
waves  dashed  with  extreme  violence  against  the  rocks,  to  which  circum-
stance, I believe,  was  owing  my  having  remained  a while  unseen  and
unheard  so  near  the  birds,  which  were  not  more  than  four  or  five  yards
below  me.  The  mother  fondled  and  nursed  her  young  with  all  possible
tenderness,  disgorged  some  food  into  the  mouth  of  each,  and  coaxed  them
with  her  bill  and  wings.  The  little  ones  seemed  very  happy,  billed  with
their  mother,  and  caressed  her  about  the  breast.  When  the  parent  bird
flew  off  on  observing  me,  tbe  young  seemed  quite  frightened,  squatted  at
once  on  their  broad  nest,  and  then  crawled  with  the  aid  of  their  bills  un-
til they  reached  a recess  where  they  remained  concealed.

On  another  occasion,  my  young  friends  Lincoln  and  Cooledge,
along  with  my  son,  went  to  the  same  rocks,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing
me  a nest  and  some  of  the  young  Cormorants.  They  reported  that,  in
one  instance,  they  surprised  the  parent  birds  close  beneath  them,  appa-
rently asleep,  resting  on  their  rumps  in  an  upright  position,  with  the  head
thrust  under  the  wing,  and  that,  had  they  had  a noose  attached  to  their
poles,  they  might  have  secured  at  least  one  of  them,  but  that  after  a few
minutes  one  drew  out  her  head,  stretched  her  neck,  and  after  looking
around  flew  off  croaking,  so  as  to  alarm  all  her  neighbours.

We  saw  no  nests  of  this  species  placed  in  any  other  situations  than
the  highest  shelves  of  the  precipitous  rocks  fronting  the  water  and  having
a southern  exposure.  No  other  Cormorants  bred  on  the  spots  of  which
this  kind  had  taken  possession  ; but  Ravens  and  Peregrine  Falcons  were
observed  to  have  nests  on  the  same  rocks,  and  in  some  instances  close  to
them.  The  nests  were  formed  of  a quantity  of  small  dry  sticks,  matted
in  a rude  manner  with  a large  quantity  of  weeds  and  moss,  to  a thickness
of  four  or  five  inches  in  new  nests,  and  in  others  to  that  of  a foot  or  more ;
for  we  observed  that  this  species,  as  well  as  the  Double-crested  and  the
Florida  Cormorants,  repair  and  enlarge  their  tenements  each  season,  and
return  to  the  same  rocks  many  years  in  succession,  as  was  shewn  by  their
places  of  resort  remaining  whitewashed  with  excrements  through  the  win-


460


COMMON  CORMORANT.


ter,  in  which  condition  we  saw  them  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  birds
that  season.  The  nests  varied  in  breadth  according  to  the  space  on  which
they  were  placed ; where  there  was  ample  room,  they  measured  at  the
base  from  thirty  to  thirty-six  inches  in  diameter ; others  were  scarcely
large  enough  to  hold  the  young,  which  nevertheless  seemed  as  contented
as  their  neighbours.  On  some  shelves,  eight  or  ten  yards  in  extent,  the
nests  were  crowded  together ; but  more  usually  they  were  placed  apart
on  every  secure  place  without  any  order  ; none,  however,  were  below  a
certain  height  on  the  rocks,  nor  were  there  any  on  the  summit.  The  nests
being  covered  with  lilth,  were  offensive  to  the  eye,  and  still  more  so  to  the
nose.  The  eggs,  three  or  four  in  number,  more  frequently  the  former,
average  two  inches  and  five-eighths  in  length,  by  one  inch  and  three  quar-
ters in  breadth,  the  shell  of  a uniform  pale  bluish-green  colour,  mostly
coated  over  with  calcareous  matter.

The  young  are  at  first  of  a dark  purplish  livid  colour,  and  have  a
very  uncouth  appearance,  their  legs  and  feet  seeming  enormous.  In  less
than  a fortnight  they  become  covered  on  all  the  upper  parts  with  brown-
ish-black down,  but  the  abdomen  remains  bare  much  longer  than  the
rest.  They  increase  rapidly  in  size,  and  are  fledged  in  six  or  seven
weeks.  Some  that  were  weighed  when  about  a month  old,  averaged  three
pounds,  and  others  almost  able  to  fly  six  pounds,  the  young  of  this  spe-
cies, as  of  most  water  birds,  being  much  heavier  than  the  parent  at
the  time  of  leaving  the  nest.  We  procured  several  of  different  sizes,
which  we  kept  on  the  deck.  Whenever  a person  approached  them,
they  raised  their  heads,  stretched  their  necks,  and  opened  their  bills,
so  as  to  expand  the  skin  of  the  throat,  which  they  made  to  vibrate,
while  they  uttered  a sort  of  hissing  mutter  of  a very  strange  character,
but  resembling  that  of  the  young  of  the  Brown  Pelican.  They  crawled
sluggishly  about,  aiding  themselves  in  their  progress  with  their  bills,  and
at  all  times  looked  extremely  clumsy.  They  took  food  very  readily,  ate
a prodigious  quantity,  certainly  more  than  their  own  weight  each  day,
and  appeared  always  ready  to  receive  more.  When  thrown  overboard,
they  swam  off  under  water,  like  the  old  birds,  with  considerable  speed,
moving  their  unfledged  wings  all  the  while.  Some  would  not  rise  for
twenty  or  thirty  yards,  but  few  went  farther  under  water  than  that  dis-
tance, and  they  were  soon  fatigued.  On  one  occasion,  some  half-grown
young  birds  threw  themselves  from  their  nest,  or  were  pushed  off  by  their
parents  while  in  the  agonies  of  death,  they  having  been  shot  at.  As  they


COMMON  CORMORANT.


461


passed  quickly  downwards  through  the  air,  they  moved  their  wings  with
great  rapidity,  and  the  instant  they  reached  the  water  they  disappeared
beneath  the  surface.

This  Cormorant  swims  at  times  with  astonishing  speed,  keeping  it-
self deeply  immersed.  Now  and  then,  should  it  apprehend  danger,  it
sinks  so  far  as  to  shew  only  the  head  and  neck,  in  the  manner  of  the
Anhinga.  When  searching  for  food  in  clear  shallow  water,  they  fre-
quently swim  with  the  rump  rather  elevated,  and  the  head  under,  in
the  manner  of  the  Shoveller  Duck  on  such  occasions,  as  if  they  were
looking  for  prey  on  the  bottom  ; but  I never  observed  them  act  thus
when  the  depth  of  water  exceeded  a few  yards.  They  secure  their  prey
by  diving  and  pursuing  it  under  water,  with  the  wings  partially  ex-
tended and  employed  as  paddles,  while  the  tail  directs  their  course,  and
checks  or  accelerates  their  speed.  I have  observed  this  in  the  Florida
Cormorant,  as  well  as  in  the  present  species.  I never  saw  one  while  fly-
ing plunge  after  its  prey ; but  I have  repeatedly  seen  them  drop  from
a rock  headlong  into  the  sea  when  shot  at  for  the  purpose  of  observing
their  actions.

Cormorants,  Pelicans,  Ducks,  and  other  water  birds  of  various  kinds,
are,  like  land  birds,  at  times  infested  with  insects  which  lodge  near  the  roots
of  their  feathers  ; and  to  clear  themselves  of  this  vermin,  they  beat  up  the
water  about  them  by  flapping  their  wings,  their  feathers  being  all  the  while
ruffled  up,  and  rub  or  scratch  themselves  with  their  feet  and  claws,  much
in  the  same  manner  as  Turkeys  and  most  land  birds  act,  when  scattering
up  the  dry  warm  earth  or  sand  over  them.  The  water  birds  after  thus  clean-
sing themselves  remove,  if  perchers,  and  able  to  fly,  to  the  branches  of  trees,
spread  out  their  wings  and  tail  in  the  sun,  and  after  a while  dress  their
plumage.  Those  which  are  not  perchers,  or  whose  wings  are  too  wet,
swim  to  the  shores,  or  to  such  banks  or  rocks  as  are  above  water,  and
there  perform  the  same  process.  The  Florida  Cormorant  is  especially
addicted  to  this  practice,  and  dives  and  plumes  itself  several  times  in  the
day.  The  Double-crested  and  the  present  species,  which  inhabit  colder
regions,  seem  to  be  satisfied  with  less  frequent  trimming,  and  go  through
the  operation  only  once  a-day,  at  the  warmest  period.  I never  observed
any  of  these  birds  in  their  natural  free  state  perform  these  actions  in  rainy
or  even  cloudy  weather,  but  have  frequently  seen  Cormorants  in  a state
of  captivity  do  so  on  small  artificial  ponds,  such  as  those  of  the  London
Zoological  Gardens.


462


COMMON  CORMORANT.


When  they  have  landed  after  cleansing  themselves  by  washing,  they
usually  extend  their  wings,  and  flap  them  for  a while,  in  the  maimer  of
young  birds  of  any  kind  when  trying  the  strength  of  their  wings  before
leaving  the  nest.  They  are  extremely  regular  in  returning  to  the  same
places  to  roost,  at  the  approach  of  night,  when  hundreds  appear  to  con-
gregate on  their  way  there,  as  they  pass  over  the  different  fishing  grounds.
Those  that  have  no  broods,  spend  the  night  apart  from  the  rest,  standing
nearly  erect  in  files  on  the  most  elevated  shelves,  to  which  they  ascend  in
the  manner  of  some  Hawks,  when  about  to  perch  on  any  elevated  spot.  In
winter,  however,  I observed  some  near  Boston  roosting  singly,  and  im-
mediately over  their  fishing  places,  which  are  usually  the  eddies  under  the
projecting  points  of  rocky  islands.  They  are  shy  and  wary  at  all  periods ;
but  when  congregated  in  the  day,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  approach
them  while  fishing,  for  they  dive  and  return  to  the  surface  one  after  ano-
ther, so  that  one  or  more  are  constantly  on  the  watch,  and  act  as  sentinels.
It  is  in  general  quite  useless  to  pursue  one  that  has  been  wounded.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  strong,  swift,  and  remarkably  sustained.
They  usually  fly  in  long  strings,  now  and  then  forming  angles,  at  a mo-
derate elevation  in  the  air.  When  on  the  rocks,  they  stand  erect  on  their
rump,  with  the  neck  gracefully  curved,  and  resting  between  the  shoulders.
You  may  see  them  in  hundreds,  when  they  look  like  a crowd  of  black
dominoes.  If  alarmed,  they  extend  their  neck  to  its  fidl  length,  and  move
their  head  sideways  to  observe  your  motions  ; and  if  you  approach  them,
they  gradually  raise  and  extend  their  wings,  elevate  the  tail,  incline  the
body  forwards,  and  fly  off  in  silence.

All  our  Cormorants  feed  principally  on  fish  of  various  kinds.  When
they  have  seized  one  that  is  too  large  to  be  swallowed  entire,  they  carry
it  to  the  shore,  or  to  the  branch  of  a tree,  and  there  thrash  and  tear  it  to
pieces.  Some  fishes  which  they  have  swallowed  evidently  incommode
them,  and  on  such  occasions  I have  sometimes  seen  them  shake  their  heads
with  great  violence,  and  disgorge  the  fish,  or  pass  it  downwards  into  the
stomach.  The  young  ones  which  we  kept  several  weeks  at  Labrador,
performed  both  actions,  but  generally  the  first.  All  the  species  are  ex-
pert at  tossing  up  a fish  inconveniently  caught,  a foot  or  so  above  their
head,  and  receiving  it  in  their  extended  gullet,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
Frigate  Pelican,  of  which  an  account  will  be  given  in  the  present  vo-
lume. Some  which  I have  observed  in  a domesticated  state,  were  so  ex-
pert at  receiving  a fish  thrown  to  them  from  tlie  distance  of  several  yards.


COMMON  CORMORANT.


463


by  a sudden  and  precise  movement  of  the  neck  and  head,  as  seldom  to
miss  one  in  a dozen.

The  courtship  of  this  species  is  so  similar  to  that  of  the  Florida  Cormo-
rant, that  I consider  it  unnecessary  to  describe  it,  as  I should  merely  repeat
what  has  been  said  with  respect  to  that  species.  I have  seen  them  act  in
the  same  manner,  both  on  the  shelves  on  which  the  nests  were  placed,  and
on  the  water.  They  begin  to  lay  about  the  first  of  June,  on  the  islands
near  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  about  a fortnight  later  in  Labrador ; and  it  is
my  opinion  that  the  younger  birds  spend  their  breeding  season  in  the
former  places.

The  Common  Cormorant  walks  in  a waddling  and  awkward  manner,
but  at  a good  pace,  and  leaps  from  one  stone  to  another,  assisting  itself
with  its  wings,  and  occasionally  with  the  tail,  which  acts  as  a kind  of
spi’ing.  I am  unable  to  say  at  what  age  this  species  attains  the  full  dress
of  the  love  season,  but  it  cannot  be  in  less  than  three  years,  as  some  which
I have  known  to  have  been  kept  in  a state  of  constant  captivity,  did  not
shew  the  white  patch  on  the  thigh,  nor  the  slender  white  feathers  around
the  head  and  part  of  the  neck,  until  the  middle  of  May,  in  the  fifth  year.
That  the  younger  birds  of  this  and  other  Cormorants,  breed  before  they
have  acquired  the  full  beauty  of  their  plumage,  is  a fact  which  I have
had  many  opportunities  of  ascertaining.  The  Common  Cormorant  is
found  breeding,  both  near  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and  along
the  coast  of  Labrador,  in  flocks  of  fifty  or  more  pairs,  of  which  not  an
individual  shews  any  white  unless  on  the  sides  of  the  head,  and  along  the
throat,  but  much  duller  on  these  parts  than  even  in  the  female  repre-
sented in  the  plate,  which  was  yet  what  may  be  termed  an  immature  bird.
No  differences  appear  in  the  garb  of  the  sexes,  in  their  different  states  of
plumage,  and  perfect  specimens  of  both  are  equally  beautiful  in  the  breed-
ing season,  being  then  similar  to  the  male  of  which  I have  endeavoured
to  present  a good  portrait.  I have  observed  a greater  difference  in  size
between  individuals  of  this  species,  than  those  of  any  other.

The  white  markings  observed  on  the  old  birds  of  this  species,  during
the  period  of  courtship,  incubation,  and  rearing  of  the  young  until  they
are  able  to  fly,  and  which  extends  to  two  months  and  a half,  begin  to
disappear  from  the  moment  incubation  has  fairly  begun,  and  at  the  time
when  the  young  leave  the  nest  scarcely  any  remain,  unless  on  the  sides
of  the  head.  In  autumn  and  winter  the  feathers  of  the  head  are  similar
to  those  of  the  neck,  and  the  plumage  in  general  has  lost  much  of  its  ver-


464


COMMON  CORMORANT.


nal  and  sestival  beauty.  The  entire  crest  also  falls  off  in  autumn.  The
white  markings  and  the  crest  are  renewed  in  the  wild  state  about  the  end
of  February  ; but  in  birds  kept  in  domestication  rarely  before  May.
The  young  do  not  exhibit  the  crest  until  the  second  spring,  at  which
period,  being  yet  destitute  of  white  markings  on  the  head  and  thighs,
they  might  readily  be  mistaken  for  a different  species,  by  a person  unac-
quainted with  their  habits.

The  singular  fact  that  the  young  of  the  three  species  of  Cormorant
described  in  this  volume,  have  open  nostrils  until  they  are  nearly  half-
grown,  may  surprise  you  as  much  as  it  surprised  me.  Having  observed
it  in  many  individuals,  I preserved  one  in  spirits,  and  of  it  you  will  find
a description  beneath.

The  Common  Cormorant  is  rarely  seen  farther  south  than  the  extreme
limits  of  Maryland  ; but  from  Cheasapeake  Ray  eastward,  it  becomes
more  plentiful ; and  in  severe  winters,  I have  seen  it  exposed  for  sale  in
the  New  York  market.  They  are  abundant  in  winter  around  the  islands
of  the  Bay  of  Boston,  and  on  the  coasts  of  Massachusetts  and  Maine,
where  most  of  them  remain  during  autumn,  winter,  and  the  early  part  of
spring,  as  well  as  on  the  Bay  of  Fundy  and  along  the  shores  of  Nova
Scotia.  I am  unable  to  say  how  far  north  they  go  beyond  Labrador,  to
breed,  or  what  may  be  the  limits  of  their  range  on  the  St  Lawrence  in
autumn.  I have  never  seen  one  on  a tree,  or  on  fresh  water.  The  flesh
of  this  species  is  dark,  tough,  and  fishy,  its  eggs  also  do  not  furnish
agreeable  food,  and  it  is  seldom  that  either  are  eaten,  even  by  epicures.


Pelecanus  Carbo,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  i.  p.  21G — Lath.  Iiul.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  S8C.

Phai,acrocorax  Carbo,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  402.

CoRsioRANT,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  479.

Adult  Male  in  March.  Plate  CCLXVT.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  somewhat  compress-
ed, straight,  with  the  tip  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line
sloping  and  slightly  concave,  at  the  tip  decurved,  its  ridge  broad  and
rounded,  and  separated  from  the  sides  by  a narrow  groove,  the  sides  erect,
irregularly  scaly,  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  straight  as  far  as  the  unguis,
at  the  base  a distinct  horny  plate,  the  unguis  strong,  convex  above,  in-
curved, acute.  No  external  nostrils  when  full-grown.  Lower  mandible
witli  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow  towards  the  end,  filled  by  an  exten-


COMMON  CORMORANT.


465


sible  membrane,  which  extends  a short  way  down  the  throat,  its  short  dorsal
line  a little  convex,  then  concave,  the  sides  scaly,  erect,  and  slightly  convex,
the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  compressed  and  obliquely  truncate.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  long  and  stout.
Body  rather  full,  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  far  behind  ; tibia
feathered  in  its  whole  length  ; tarsus  very  short,  strong,  much  compress-
ed, covered  all  round  with  scales,  of  which  the  outer  are  subhexagonal.
the  inner  transversely  elongated,  the  posterior  very  small  and  roundish.
Toes  all  placed  in  the  same  plane,  and  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  co-
vered above  with  very  numerous  oblique  scutella  ; first  toe  smallest,  fourth
longest.  Claws  strong,  curved,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  third  toe
pectinated  on  its  inner  edge.

Plumage  of  the  head,  neck,  lower  parts,  and  posterior  portion  of  the
back,  glossy,  blended,  and  silky ; of  the  fore  part  of  the  back  and 'wings
compact,  the  feathers  with  loose  glossy  margins.  The  middle  feathers  of
the  occiput  and  hind  neck  are  elongated,  and  those  of  the  head  and  up-
per neck  are  intermixed  with  numerous  linear  feathers  of  a different  colour,
and  erectile  at  will.  Space  around  the  eye,  and  to  a large  extent  along
the  base  of  the  bill,  together  with  the  small  gular  sac,  bare.  Wings  ra-
ther small;  primaries  very  strong,  curved,  rather  narrow,  tapering  and
obtuse,  third  longest,  second  almost  as  long,  first  little  shorter ; secon-
daries decurved,  broad,  broadly  rounded,  the  inner  broad  and  shorter.
Tail  small,  much  rounded,  of  fourteen  narrow,  rounded  feathers,  having
extremely  long  shafts.

Upper  mandible  greyish-black,  along  the  edges  yellowish- white ; lower
yellowish-white  at  the  base,  dusky  towards  the  end.  Iris  light  bluish-
green,  margins  of  eyelids  dusky.  Bare  space  about  the  eye  dull  olive,
below  it  bright  red,  the  gular  sac  yellow.  Feet  and  claws  greyish-black.
All  the  silky  part  of  the  plumage  is  black,  glossed  with  deep  greenish-
blue  ; at  the  base  of  the  gular  sac  is  a broad  gorgelet  of  white,  and  the
linear  interspersed  feathers  over  the  head  and  upper  neck  are  white,  there
is  also  a large  parcel  of  elongated  white  feathers  on  the  side  over  the
thigh.  The  feathers  of  the  wings  and  part  of  the  back  are  dull  bluish-grey
glossed  with  bronze,  their  fringe-like  margins  greenish-black.  Primary
quills  greyish-black,  secondary  like  the  other  feathers  of  the  wing.  Tail
greyish-black.  The  shafts  of  all  the  feathers  are  black  at  the  end,  leaden-
grey  towards  the  base.

Length  to  end  of  tail  37  inches,  to  end  of  claws  36  ; to  end  of  wings

VOL.  III.  G O'

O


466


COMMON  CORMORANT.


32 ; extent  of  wings  62  ; wing  from  flexure  14  ; tail  6^  ; bill  along  the
ridge  3j%,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  4^2  ; tarsus  2^  ; outer  toe
its  claw  Weight  7^  !b.

Female  in  July,  Plate  CCLXVI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  when  old  is  similar  to  the  male.  In  the  state  here  re-
presented, the  plumage  in  general  is  similar,  but  the  white  feathers  of
the  head  and  thighs  are  wanting.  The  bill,  eyes  and  feet  are  coloured  as
in  the  male,  as  are  the  bare  parts  about  the  base  of  the  bill,  only  the
part  under  the  eye  which  is  bright  red  in  the  male,  is  bright  yellow  in
the  female.

Young  Birds  unfledged.  Plate  CCLXVI.  Fig.  3,  4.

The  inside  of  the  mouth  and  the  gular  sac  flesh-coloured  ; the  bill
dusky,  at  the  base  flesh-coloured ; the  eyes  bluish  grey.  The  general  co-
lour of  their  skin  is  dull  livid  ; the  feet  purplish-dusky,  the  webs  yellow-
ish-brown.

The  following  is  a description  of  the  smaller  individual  represented  in
the  plate,  and  which  was  about  two  weeks  old.  The  length  is  twelve
inches  and  a half ; the  colour  dull  Uvid,  the  abdomen  and  breast  lighter,
the  forehead,  gular  sac,  and  bases  of  the  mandibles,  flesh-colour  tinged
with  yellow,  as  is  the  mouth.  The  head  and  upper  part  of  the  neck  are
bare,  as  well  as  the  lower  surface  of  the  wings.  Over  the  rest  of  the  body
are  small  down  tufts  rising  in  regular  series,  excepting  along  an  impressed
line  extending  from  the  anterior  part  of  the  thorax  to  the  anus.  The
apertures  of  the  ears  are  round,  extremely  small,  being  only  half  a twelfth
in  diameter;  the  eyes  very  small,  the  iris  grey.  The  aperture  of  the
posterior  nares  is  linear-lanceolate,  smooth  on  the  edges,  half  an  inch  long.
A probe  introduced  into  it  passes  readily  out  by  the  nostril,  which  is  basal,
linear,  small,  two-twelfths  long,  placed  at  the  commencement  of  the  long
groove  which  separates  the  sides  from  the  ridge  of  the  mandible,  and  co-
vered above  by  the  skin,  so  as  to  be  not  readily  observed,  although  it  is
easily  dilatable.  Each  internal  nostril  is  oblique,  much  wider  below,  and
has  on  its  inner  side  a transverse  soft  ridge,  which  divides  it  into  two  ca-
vities, the  posterior  deep  and  funnel-shaped,  passing  backwards  and  up-
wards, the  anterior  becoming  narrower  towards  the  external  aperture.
The  tongue  is  extremely  small,  four-twelftlis  long,  elliptical,  with  a cen-


COMMON  CORMORANT.


467


tral  ridge.  The  oesophagus  is  extremely  dilatable,  and  as  far  as  the  mid-
dle of  the  neck  is  of  larger  diameter  than  below,  but  it  again  dilates  as  it
enters  the  stomach.  Its  length  is  five  inches  and  a half.  The  inner  coat
is  smooth  in  its  dilated  part,  but  in  the  rest  is  raised  into  numerous  lon-
gitudinal ridges  or  folds,  which  at  the  lower  part  are  undulated.  The
stomach  is  oblong,  four  and  a half  inches  long,  quite  membranous,  and
without  apparent  central  tendons.  The  gastric  glands  are  disposed  so  as
to  occupy  two  spaces,  the  one  three  and  a half  inches  by  two,  the  other  a
little  smaller.  The  inner  coat  is  soft  and  without  wrinkles.  The  in-
testine is  five  feet  two  inches  long,  at  its  upper  part  three-twelfths  in
diameter,  gradually  diminishing  to  one-twelfth.  At  the  distance  of  two
inches  from  the  anus  are  two  coeca,  three-twelfths  long,  one-twelfth  in
diameter,  and  rounded.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  were  fragments  of
fish,  with  numerous  bones,  and  a pebble  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter.
The  heart  triangular,  much  flattened.  The  liver  of  two  very  unequal
lobes,  the  right  one  two  inches  and  a half  long,  the  other  one  and  a half.
The  specimen,  which  I had  preserved  in  spirits,  was  examined  in  my  pre-
sence by  ray  friend  Mr  Macgillivray.  Whether  the  fact  of  the  anterior
aperture  of  the  organ  of  smeU  being  open  in  the  young  Cormorant  has  been
observed  by  any  other  person  than  myself,  I know  not ; but  it  would  seem
that  the  general  opinion  is,  that  Cormorants  have  no  external  nares  in  any
stage,  and  although  some  state  that  in  the  adult  they  exist,  and  are  ex-
tremely small,  others  allege  that  there  are  none  at  all.

A young  female,  shot  in  the  end  of  October,  on  being  carefully  ex-
amined, was  found  to  present  the  following  characters.

The  length  to  the  end  of  the  tail  was  36  inches,  to  the  end  of  the
wings  29|,  to  the  end  of  the  outer  toe  34^  ; the  extent  of  the  wings  55  ;
the  weight  5 lb.  10^  oz.

Bill  along  the  ridge  and  unguis  black,  the  sides  brownish-grey  ; the
lower  mandible  brownish-grey,  dusky  on  the  sides  at  the  middle,  the  bare
skin  at  the  base  yellow,  as  is  the  gular  sac.  Upper  part  of  the  head  and
hind  neck  brownish-black  ; the  back  greenish-black,  its  fore  part,  the  sca-
pulars and  the  wing-coverts  brownish-grey,  the  feathers  edged  with  green-
ish-black, and  an  outer  margin  of  brownish-white,  most  conspicuous  on
the  secondary  coverts ; the  quills  brownish-black,  the  secondaries  tinged
with  grey  on  the  outer  edge ; the  tail  greyish-black,  the  shafts  greyish-
blue.  Upper  part  of  the  throat  brownish-white ; the  rest  of  the  neck
greyish-white,  mixed  witli  brown  ; the  breast  and  abdomen  white,  the

G g 2


468


COMxMON  CORMORANT.


sides  greenish-black  ; the  lower  surface  of  the  wings  dusky ; the  lower
tail-coverts  greyish-brown,  the  feathers  before  them  brownish-black.  The
feet  greyish-black  ; the  inner  edge  of  the  middle  claws  very  slightly  pec-
tinated. The  foot,  when  stretched  to  its  full  extent,  measures,  from  the
tip  of  the  first  to  that  of  the  fourth  claw,  5|§  inches.

The  tongue  is  oblong,  carinate  above,  long,  broad.  The  pala-
tal slit  or  aperture  of  the  posterior  nares  is  linear,  lj%  long,  with  a soft
flap  on  each  side.  The  mouth  is  wide  ; the  bill  3|  along  the  back,
4 along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible.  The  aperture  of  the  ear  is  circular,
only  half  a line  in  diameter.

On  blowing  into  the  posterior  nares  no  air  passes.  The  internal  ca-
vities are  separated  by  a longitudinal  membranous  dissepiment ; each  ca-
vity is  transversely  divided  by  a membranous  partition,  but  neither  of  the
chambers  thus  formed  has  any  external  communication  by  the  mandible.
The  lachrymal  duct,  which  is  wide,  passes  obliquely  forward  and  down-
ward into  the  anterior  cavity.  On  gradually  slicing  the  horny  covering
of  the  mandible  over  the  place  where  the  nostril  ought  to  be,  its  position
is  found  clearly  defined,  there  being  a slight  discontinuity  of  the  bone  at
that  part ; but  on  cutting  farther  all  traces  disappear,  the  original  aper-
ture being  closed  by  ossification.

The  aperture  of  the  glottis  has  thick  prominent  rounded  edges,  which
unite  behind  and  terminate  in  three  knobs,  and  there  is  a small  transverse
flap  on  each  side  behind.

The  heart  is  triangular,  depressed,  obtuse,  2^  inches  long,  its  greatest
breadth  1 y^.  The  liver  has  two  very  unequal  lobes,  the  right  5 inches,
the  left  3 inches  long;  the  former  broad,  the  latter  If.  The  gall-bladder
is  2^  long,  yj  in  diameter,  rounded,  but  not  much  enlarged  at  the  ex-
tremity.

The  oesophagus  is  22|  inches  long;  at  its  upper  part  when  dilated
upwards  of  two  inches  wide,  extremely  thin,  its  circular  fibres  distinct.
It  is  contracted  in  the  whole  length  of  the  thorax,  where  its  smallest  dia-
meter is  y®5,  the  largest  y§  ; but  this  part,  which  in  the  ordinary  state  has
its  inner  coat  folded  into  numerous  longitudinal  wrinkles,  is  capable  of
being  dilated  so  as  to  present  a diameter  of  more  than  3 inches,  when  the
internal  rugae  disappears.  The  proventriculus  seems  at  first  to  form  part
of  the  stomach  ; its  walls  are  extremely  thick  and  studded  with  glandules,
disposed  in  two  circular  patches,  which  are  separated  by  a space  of  about
y^5  of  an  inch.  The  stomach  properly  so  called  is  very  small ; its  nnis-


COMMON  CORMORANT.


469


cular  coat  thin,  but  with  two  distinct  tendons.  It  is  of  an  oblong  form,
compressed,  and  at  its  upper  parts  has  a rounded  lobe,  from  which  the  in-
testine comes  off.  The  inner  coat  is  thick,  soft,  and  rugous.  The  pylorus
has  a circular  marginal  rim.  The  intestine,  which  is  8 feet  long,  is  at  its  up-
per part  f I in  diameter,  towards  the  cceca  ||.  The  rectum  is  7 inches  long,
its  diameter  for  4^  inches  is  ; the  cloaca  globulai’,  2/^  in  diameter  ; the
cceca  long.  The  cystic  duct  enters  one  inch  below  the  hepatic ; between
them  enters  one  of  the  pancreatic  ducts,  the  other  2 inches  farther  up.
The  distance  from  the  pylorus  to  the  hepatic  duct  is  16^  inches.

The  lungs  extend  to  the  kidneys.  The  ovules  exceedingly  small  and
numerous.  In  the'^proventriculus  and  lower  part  of  the  oesophagus  were
many  small  ascarides.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  were  a few  bones
of  fishes.

Although  I have  not  actually  observed  that  Cormorants  have  the
power  of  disgorging  such  substances  as  they  are  unable  to  digest,  I should
not  be  surprised  to  find  this  to  be  the  case,  when  their  habits  are  investi-
gated in  a state  of  domestication.


( 470  )


THE  ARCTIC  JAGER.

Lestris  parasiticus,  Boie.

PLATE  CCLXVII.  Male  and  Female.

During  winter  this  indefatigable  teaser  of  the  smaller  Gulls  often
ranges  along  our  southern  coasts  as  far  as  the  Mexican  Gulf,  where  I
have  seen  it,  as  well  as  opposite  the  shores  of  the  Floridas ; but  I never
met  with  a single  individual  in  summer,  even  in  the  most  northern  parts,
although  I had  expected  to  find  it  breeding  on  the  coasts  of  Labrador
and  Newfoundland.  Few  birds  surpass  it  in  power  or  length  of  flight.
It  generally  passes  through  the  air  at  a height  of  fifty  or  sixty  yards,
flying  in  an  easy  manner,  ranging  over  the  broad  bays,  on  which  Gulls
of  various  kinds  are  engaged  in  procuring  their  food.  No  sooner  has  it
observed  that  one  of  them  has  secured  a fish,  than  it  immediately  flies  to-
ward it  and  gives  chase.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  the  Gull  to  escape,
for  the  warrior  with  repeated  jerkings  of  his  firm  pinions  sweeps  towards
it,  with  the  rapidity  of  a Peregrine  Falcon  pouncing  on  a Duck.  Each
cut  and  turn  of  the  Gull  only  irritates  him  the  moi'e  and  whets  his  keen
appetite,  until  by  two  or  three  sudden  dashes,  he  forces  it  to  disgorge  the
food  it  had  so  lately  swallowed.  This  done,  the  poor  Gull  may  go  in
search  of  more ; the  Lestris  is  now  for  a while  contented,  and  alights  on
the  water  to  feed  at  leisure.  But  soon,  perceiving  a distant  flock  of
Gulls,  he  rises  on  wing  and  speeds  towards  them.  Renewing  his  at-
tacks, he  now  obtains  an  abundant  supply,  and  at  length,  when  quite
gorged,  searches  for  a place  on  which  to  alight,  unseen  by  any  other  of  his
tribe  more  powerful  than  himself.  When  on  wing,  its  beautiful  long
tail-feathers  seem  at  times  to  afford  this  bird  great  assistance  in  execut-
ing short  sudden  turns,  which  have  often  brought  to  my  mind  the  mo-
tions of  a greyhound  while  pursuing  a hare.  By  sudden  lashings  of  its
tail,  it  can  instantly  turn,  or  arrest  its  flight.  When  it  is  on  the  water,
it  keeps  that  part  upright,  but  when  on  a rock  or  a floating  piece  of  tim-
ber, it  allows  it  to  fall  in  a graceful  manner.

Although  usually  seen  single,  or  at  most  in  pairs,  during  the  winter,
I observed  this  species  in  April,  on  my  voyage  to  the  Florida  Keys,  in
flocks  of  from  ten  to  fifteen,  congregated  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  return-


ARCTIC  JAGER,


471


ing  to  the  northern  regions,  where  it  is  said  to  breed  in  groups.  Mr
Selby,  in  treating  of  this  bird,  says  “ It  breeds  upon  several  of  the
Orkney  and  Shetland  Isles,  and  is  gregarious  during  that  period;  and
the  situations  selected  for  nidification  are  the  unfrequented  heaths  at  some
distance  from  the  shores.  The  nest  is  composed  of  dry  grass  and  mosses,
and  its  two  eggs  are  of  a dark  oil-green,  with  irregular  blotches  of  liver-
brown.  At  this  season  the  bird  is  very  courageous,  and,  like  the  Com-
mon Skua,  attacks  every  intruder  upon  the  limits  of  its  territory,  by
pouncing  and  striking  at  the  head  with  its  bill  and  wings.  It  also  occa-
sionally endeavours  to  divert  attention  by  feigning  accidental  lameness.”
Having  received  eggs  of  this  bird  from  individuals  who  had  collected
them,  I may  add  that  they  are  broadly  rounded  at  the  larger  end,  rather
pointed  at  the  smaller,  have  a smooth  shell,  and  average  two  inches  four-
twelfths  in  length,  by  one  inch  and  four  and  a half  eighths  in  breadth.

M.  Temminck,  in  his  Manuel  d’Ornithologie,  describes  the  young
when  about  to  leave  the  nest  as  follows : “ Top  of  the  head  of  a deep
grey ; sides  and  upper  part  of  the  neck  of  a light  grey,  sprinkled  with
longitudinal  brown  spots ; a black  spot  before  the  eyes ; lower  part  of
the  neck,  back,  scapulars,  small  and  large  wing-coverts,  umber-brown,
each  feather  bordered  with  yellowish-brown,  and  often  with  reddish  ;
lower  parts  irregularly  variegated  with  deep  brown  and  yellowish-brown
on  a whitish  ground ; tail-coverts  and  abdonien  transversely  barred  ;
quills  of  the  wings  and  tail  blackish,  white  at  their  base  and  on  the  inner
barbs,  all  terminated  with  white ; the  two  outer  shafts  white ; tail  only
rounded ; base  of  the  bill  yellowish-green,  black  towards  the  point ; tarsi
bluish-grey  ; base  of  the  toes  and  membranes  white,  the  rest  black,  hind
claw  often  white.”

In  middle  age,  he  says,  “ all  the  upper  parts  are  greyish-brown  with-
out spots ; lower  parts  of  a somewhat  lighter  tint,  and  also  unspotted  ;
inner  base  of  the  quills  and  only  the  upper  parts  of  the  tail-featliers  pure
white,  the  rest  blackish-brown  ; the  two  elongated  tail-feathers  gi-adually
diminish  in  breadth  towards  the  extremity,  which  ends  in  a very  attenu-
ated point ; bill  and  feet  as  in  the  old  individuals.”

Captain  James  Clark  Ross  has  informed  me  by  letter,  that  this  spe-
cies was  seen  in  great  numbers  during  his  late  voyage  towards  the  Arctic
circle;  that  the  Pomarine  Lestris  was  less  abundant,  and  Riciiakdson’.s


very  rare.


472


ARCTIC  JAGER.


Lestris  Buffokii,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  364.

Lestris  parasitica,  Arctic  Jager,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.
p.  430.

Arctic  Jager,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  317.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  straight,  the  tip
curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  toward  the  end
curved,  the  ridge  broad  and  convex,  the  sides  separated  from  the  ridge
by  a narrow  groove,  extremely  narrow  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and
inflected,  the  tip  compressed,  rather  obtuse.  Nostrils  in  the  fore  part  of
the  nasal  groove,  nearer  the  tip  than  the  base,  submarginal,  pervious,
linear,  oblong,  wider  anteriorly.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long
and  narrow,  a slight  prominence  at  its  extremity,  beyond  which  the  dor-
sal line  is  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  sloping  outwards  and  convex,
the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  obliquely  truncate  and  rather  ob-
tuse.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  much  narrowed  before.  Neck  of  moderate
length.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  rather  short  and  of  moderate  strength  ;
tibia  bare  at  its  lower  part ; tarsus  anteriorly  covered  with  broad  decurved
scutella,  on  the  sides  with  oblong  scales,  behind  with  smaller  oblong  pro-
minent scales ; hind  toe  extremely  small  and  elevated,  the  fore  toes  of
moderate  size,  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  which  have  their  margins
convex  ; the  third  toe  longest,  the  fourth  not  much  shorter,  all  covered
above  with  numerous  scutella,  the  lateral  ones  margined  externally  with
small  prominent  scales  directed  forwards.  Claws  of  moderate  size,  curved,
acute,  compressed,  that  of  third  toe  with  a sharp  inner  edge.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  soft,  and  blended  ; the  fea-
thers on  the  back  and  wings  rather  compact  and  distinct.  Wings  very
long,  rather  broad,  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering  and  rounded,  the
first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondary  rather  short,  round-
ed. Tail  feathers  of  moderate  length  excepting  the  two  middle,  which  are
extremely  elongated  and  gradually  attenuated,  the  rest  broad  and  round-
ed, there  being  twelve  in  all.

Bill  greyish-black,  the  upper  part  bluish.  Iris  brown.  Feet  black,
but  with  the  greater  part  of  the  tarsus  yellow.  The  neck  and  lower  parts
are  white,  the  former  tinged  with  yellow  ; upper  and  fore  part  of  head


ARCTIC  JAGER.


473


with  the  space  before  the  cheeks  blackish-brown  ; the  lower  part  of  the
hind  neck  and  all  the  upper  parts  blackish-grey,  the  primary  quills  and
tail-feathers  brownish-black,  the  shafts  of  the  former  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  28  inches,  to  end  of  wings  15  ; extent  of  wings
45  ; wing  from  flexure  12;  tail  12;  bill  along  the  back  1;^,  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  If ; tarsus  l/^  ; middle  toe  its  claw

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXVII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  male,  but  the  middle  tail-feathers  are  about
three  inches  shorter.


( 474  )


THE  AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.

SCOLOPAX  MINOR,  GmEL.

PLATE  CCLXVIII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Theke  is  a kind  of  innocent  simplicity  in  our  Woodcock,  which  has
often  excited  in  me  a deep  feeling  of  anxiety,  when  I witnessed  the  rude
and  unmerciful  attempts  of  mischievous  boys,  on  meeting  a mother  bird
in  vain  attempting  to  preserve  her  dear  brood  from  their  savage  grasp.
She  scarcely  limps,  nor  does  she  often  flutter  along  the  ground,  on  such
occasions  ; but  with  half  extended  wings,  inclining  her  head  to  one  side,
and  uttering  a soft  murmur,  she  moves  to  and  fro,  urging  her  young  to
hasten  towards  some  secure  spot  beyond  the  reach  of  their  enemies.  Re-
gardless of  her  own  danger,  she  would  to  all  appearance  gladly  suffer
herself  to  be  seized,  could  she  be  assured  that  by  such  a sacrifice  she
might  ensure  the  safety  of  her  brood.  On  an  occasion  of  this  kind,  I saw
a female  Woodcock  lay  herself  down  on  the  middle  of  a road,  as  if  she
were  dead,  while  her  little  ones,  five  in  number,  were  endeavouring  on
feeble  legs  to  escape  from  a pack  of  naughty  boys,  who  had  already
caught  one  of  them,  and  were  kicking  it  over  the  dust  in  barbarous  sport.
.The  mother  might  have  shared  the  same  fate,  had  I not  happened  to  is-
sue from  the  thicket,  and  interpose  in  her  behalf.

The  American  Woodcock,  although  allied  to  our  Common  Snipe,
Scolopax  Wilsonii,  differs  essentially  from  it  in  its  habits,  even  more  than
in  form.  The  former  is  a much  gentler  bird  than  the  latter,  and  although
both  see  at  night,  the  Woodcock  is  more  nocturnal  than  the  Snipe.  The
latter  often,  without  provocation  or  apparent  object,  migrates  or  takes
long  and  elevated  flights  during  the  day  ; but  the  Woodcock  rarely  takes
flight  at  this  time,  unless  forced  to  do  so  to  elude  its  enemies,  and  even
then  removes  only  to  a short  distance.  When  rambling  unconcernedly,
it  rarely  passes  high  above  the  tree  tops,  or  is  seen  before  the  dusk  or
after  the  morning  twilight,  when  it  flies  rather  low,  generally  through
the  woods ; and  its  travels  are  altogether  performed  under  night.  The
largeness  of  its  eyes,  as  compared  with  those  of  the  Snipe,  might  of  itself
enable  one  to  form  such  a conclusion ; but  there  is  moreover  a difference
in  the  habits  of  the  Woodcock  and  Snipe,  which  I have  been  surprised  at


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


475


not  finding  mentioned  by  Wilson,  who  certainly  was  an  acute  observer.
It  is  that  the  Woodcock,  although  a prober  of  the  mire,  frequently  alights
in  the  interior  of  extensive  forests,  where  little  moisture  can  be  seen,  for
the  purpose  of  turning  up  the  dead  leaves  with  its  bill,  in  search  of
food  beneath  them,  in  the  manner  of  the  Passenger  Pigeon,  various
Grakles,  and  other  birds.  This  the  Snipe,  I believe,  has  never  been  ob-
served to  do.  Indeed,  although  the  latter  at  times  alights  on  the  borders
of  pools  or  streams  overhung  by  trees,  it  never  flies  through  the  woods.

The  American  Woodcock,  which  in  New  Brunswick  is  named  the
Bog-sucker,  is  found  dispersed  in  abundance  during  winter,  over  the
southern  parts  of  the  Union,  and  now  and  then,  in  warm  and  sequestered
places,  even  in  the  Middle  Districts.  Its  stay  in  any  portion  of  the  coun-
try at  this  period,  seems  to  depend  altogether  on  the  state  of  the  weather.
In  the  Carolinas,  or  even  in  Lower  Louisiana,  after  a night  of  severe  frost,
I have  found  their  number  greatly  diminished  in  places  where  they  had
been  observed  to  be  plentiful  the  day  before.  The  limits  of  its  northern
migrations  at  the  commencement  of  the  breeding  season,  are  yet  unascer-
tained. When  in  Newfoundland  I was  assured  that  it  breeds  there ; but
I met  with  none  either  in  that  country  or  in  Labrador,  although  it  is  not
rare  in  the  British  Provinces  of  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia  durina;
summer.  From  the  beginning  of  March  until  late  in  October,  this  bird
may  be  found  in  every  district  of  the  Union  that  affords  places  suited  to
its  habits ; and  its  numbers,  I am  persuaded,  are  much  greater  than  is
usually  supposed.  As  it  feeds  by  night,  it  is  rarely  met  with  by  day,  un-
less by  a sportsman  or  gunner,  who  may  be  engaged  in  pursuing  it  for
pleasure  or  profit.  It  is,  however,  killed  in  almost  incredible  numbers,
from  the  beginning  of  July  until  late  in  winter,  in  different  parts  of  the
Union,  and  our  markets  are  amply  supplied  with  it  during  its  season.
You  may  at  times  see  gunners  returning  from  their  sports  with  a load  of
Woodcocks,  composed  of  several  dozens ; nay,  adepts  in  the  sport  have
been  known  to  kill  upwards  of  a hundred  in  the  course  of  a day,  being
assisted  by  relays  of  dogs,  and  perhaps  a change  of  guns.  In  Lower
Louisiana,  they  are  slaughtered  under  night  by  men  carrying  lighted
torches,  which  so  surprise  the  poor  things  that  they  stand  gazing  on  the
light  until  knocked  dead  with  a pole  or  cane.  This,  however,  takes  place
only  on  the  sugar  and  cotton  plantations.

At  the  time  when  the  Woodcocks  are  travelling  from  the  south  to-
wards all  parts  of  the  United  States,  on  their  way  to  their  breeding  places.


476


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


these  birds,  although  they  migrate  singly,  follow  each  other  with  such
rapidity,  that  they  might  be  said  to  arrive  in  flocks,  the  one  coming  di-
rectly in  the  wake  of  the  other.  This  is  particularly  observable  by  a
person  standing  on  the  eastern  banks  of  the  Mississippi  or  the  Ohio,  in
the  evening  dusk,  from  the  middle  of  March  to  that  of  April,  when  al-
most every  instant  there  whizzes  past  him  a Woodcock,  with  a velocity
equalling  that  of  our  swiftest  birds.  See  them  flying  across  and  low  over
the  broad  stream  ; the  sound  produced  by  the  action  of  their  wings
reaches  your  ear  as  they  approach,  and  gradually  dies  away  after  they
have  passed  and  again  entered  the  woods.  While  travelling  with  my
family,  in  the  month  of  October,  through  New  Brunswick  and  the
northern  part  of  the  State  of  Maine,  I saw  the  Woodcocks  returning
southward  in  equal  numbers  late  in  the  evenings,  and  in  the  same  con-
tinuous manner,  within  a few  yards  or  even  feet  of  the  ground,  on  the
roads  or  through  the  woods.

This  species  finds  itself  accommodated  in  the  warmer  parts  of  the
United  States,  as  well  as  in  high  northern  latitudes,  during  the  breeding
season : it  is  well  known  to  reproduce  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Savannah
in  Georgia,  and  near  Charleston  in  South  Carolina.  My  friend  John
Bachman  has  known  thirty  young  ones,  not  yet  fully  fledged,  to  have
been  killed  in  the  vicinity  of  the  latter  place  in  one  day.  I have  never
found  its  nest  in  Louisiana,  but  I have  frequently  fallen  in  with  it  in  the
States  from  Mississippi  to  Kentucky,  in  which  latter  country  it  breeds
abundantly.  In  the  Middle  Districts,  the  Woodcock  begins  to  pair  in
the  end  of  March  ; in  the  southern  a montli  earlier.  At  this  season,
its  curious  spiral  gyrations,  while  ascending  or  descending  along  a space
of  fifty  or  more  yards  of  height,  in  the  manner  described  in  the  article
of  the  Snipe,  when  it  utters  a note  different  from  the  cry  of  that  bird,
and  somewhat  Resembling  the  word  hwaiih,  are  performed  every  eve-
ning and  morning  for  nearly  a fortnight.  While  on  the  ground,  at
this  season  as  well  as  in  autumn,  the  male  not  unfrequently  repeats  this
sound,  as  if  he  were  calling  to  others  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  on  hear-
ing it  answered,  immediately  flies  to  meet  the  other  bird,  which  in  the
same  manner  advances  toward  him.  On  observing  the  Woodcock  while
in  the  act  of  emitting  these  notes,  you  would  imagine  he  exerted  himself
to  the  utmost  to  produce  them,  its  head  and  bill  being  inclined  towards
the  ground,  and  a strong  forward  movement  of  the  body  taking  place  at
the  moment  the  kwauk  roaches  your  ear.  Tliis  over,  the  bird  jerks  its


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


477


half-spread  tail,  then  erects  itself,  and  stands  as  if  listening  for  a few  mo-
ments, when,  if  the  cry  is  not  answered,  it  repeats  it.  I feel  pretty  con-
fident that,  in  spring,  the  female,  attracted  by  these  sounds,  flies  to  the
male  ; for  on  several  occasions  I observed  the  bird  that  had  uttered  the
call  immediately  caress  the  one  that  had  just  arrived,  and  which  I knew
from  its  greater  size  to  be  a female.  I am  not,  however,  quite  certain
that  this  is  always  the  case,  for  on  other  occasions  I have  seen  a male  fly
off  and  abght  near  another,  when  they  would  immediately  begin  to  fight,
tugging  at  and  pushing  each  other  with  their  bills,  in  the  most  curious
manner  imaginable.

The  nest,  which  is  formed  of  dried  leaves  and  grass,  without  much
apparent  care,  is  usually  placed  in  some  secluded  part  of  the  woods,  at
the  foot  of  some  bush,  or  by  the  side  of  a fallen  trunk.  In  one  instance,
near  Camden,  in  New  Jersey,  I found  one  in  a small  swamp,  on  the  upper
part  of  a log,  the  lower  portion  of  which  was  covered  with  water  to  the
height  of  several  inches.  The  eggs,  which  are  laid  from  February  to  the
first  of  June,  according  to  the  latitude  of  the  place  selected,  are  usually
four,  although  I have  not  very  unfrequently  found  five  in  a nest.  They
average  one  inch  and  five  and  a half-eighths  in  length,  by  one  inch  and
an  eighth  in  breadth,  are  smooth,  of  a dull  yellowish  clay  colour,  varying
in  depth,  and  irregularly  but  pretty  thickly  marked  with  patches  of  dark
brown,  and  others  of  a purple  tint.

The  young  run  about  as  soon  as  they  emerge  from  the  shell.  To  my
astonishment,  I once  met  with  three  of  them  on  the  border  of  a sand-bar
on  the  Ohio,  without  their  parent,  and  to  all  appearance  not  more  than
half  a day  old.  I concealed  myself  near  them  for  about  half  an  hour,
during  which  time  the  little  things  continued  to  totter  about  the  edge  of  the
water,  as  if  their  mother  had  gone  that  way.  During  the  time  I remain-
ed I did  not  see  the  old  bird,  and  what  became  of  them  I know  not.  The
young  birds  are  at  first  covered  with  down  of  a dull  yellowish-brown  co-
lour, then  become  streaked  with  deeper  umber  tints,  and  gradually  acquire
the  colours  of  the  old.  At  the  age  of  from  three  to  four  weeks,  although
not  fully  fledged,  they  are  able  to  fly  and  escape  from  their  enemies,  and
when  they  are  six  weeks  old,  it  requires  nearly  as  much  skill  to  shoot
them  on  wing  as  if  they  were  much  older.  At  this  age  they  are  called
stupid  by  most  people ; and,  in  fact,  being  themselves  innocent,  and  not
yet  having  had  much  experience,  they  are  not  sufficiently  aware  of  the
danger  that  may  threaten  them,  when  a two-legged  monster,  armed  witli


478


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


a gun,  makes  his  appearance.  But,  Reader,  observe  an  old  cock  on  such
occasions  : there  he  lies,  snugly  squatted  beneath  the  broad  leaves  of  that
“ sconk  cabbage”  or  dock.  I see  its  large  dark  eye  meeting  my  glance  ;
the  bird  shrinks  as  it  were  within  its  usual  size,  and,  in  a crouching  atti*
tude,  it  shifts  with  short  steps  to  the  other  side.  The  nose  of  the  faithful
pointer  marks  the  spot,  but  unless  you  are  well  acquainted  with  the  ways
of  Woodcocks,  it  has  every  chance  of  escaping  from  you  both,  for  at  this
moment  it  runs  off  through  the  grass,  reaches  a clump  of  bushes,  crosses  it,
and,  taking  to  wing  from  a place  toward  which  neither  you  nor  your  dog
have  been  looking,  you  become  flustered,  take  a bad  aim,  and  lose  your  shot.

Thousands  of  persons  besides  you  and  myself  are  fond  of  Woodcock
shooting.  It  is  a healthful  but  at  times  laborious  sport.  You  well  know
the  places  where  the  birds  are  to  be  found  under  any  circumstances ; you
ai’e  aware  that,  if  the  weather  has  been  for  some  time  dry,  you  must  resort
to  the  damp  meadows  that  border  the  Schuylkil,  or  some  similar  places ;
that  should  it  be  sultry,  the  covered  swamps  are  the  spots  which  you  ought
to  visit ; but  if  it  be  still  lowering  after  continued  rain,  the  southern  sides
of  gentle  hills  will  be  found  preferable ; that  if  the  ground  is  covered
with  snow,  the  oozy  places  visited  by  the  Snipe  are  as  much  resorted  to
by  the  Woodcock  ; that  after  long  frost,  the  covered  thickets  along  some
meandering  stream  are  the  places  of  their  retreat ; and  you  are  aware
that,  at  all  times,  it  is  better  for  you  to  have  a dog  of  any  kind  than
to  go  without  a dog  at  all.  Well,  you  have  started  a bird,  which  with
easy  flaps  flies  before  you  in  such  a way  that  if  you  miss  it,  your  com-
panion certainly  will  not.  Should  he,  however,  prove  as  unsuccessful
as  yourself,  you  may  put  up  the  bird  once,  twice,  or  thrice  in  succession,
for  it  will  either  alight  in  some  clump  of  low  trees  close  by,  or  plunge
into  a boggy  part  of  the  marsh.  As  you  advance  towards  him,  you
may  chance  to  put  up  half  a score  more,  and  stupid  though  you  should
be,  you  must  be  a bad  shot  indeed  if  you  do  not  bring  some  one  of
them  to  the  ground.  Aye,  you  have  done  it,  and  are  improving  at  the
sport,  and  you  may  be  assured  that  the  killing  of  Woodcocks  requires
more  practice  than  almost  any  other  kind  of  shooting.  The  young  sports-
man shoots  too  quick,  or  does  not  shoot  at  all,  in  both  which  cases  the
game  is  much  better  pleased  than  you  are  yourself.  But  when  once  you
have  acquired  the  necessary  coolness  and  dexterity,  you  may  fire,  charge
and  fire  again  from  morning  till  night,  and  go  on  thus  during  the  whole
of  the  Woodcock  season.


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


479


Now  and  then,  the  American  Woodcock,  after  being  pursued  for  a
considerable  time,  throws  itself  into  the  centre  of  large  miry  places,  where
it  is  very  difficult  for  either  man  or  dog  to  approach  it ; and  indeed  if
you  succeed,  it  will  not  rise  unless  you  almost  tread  upon  it.  In  such
cases  I have  seen  dogs  point  at  them,  when  they  were  only  a few  inches
distant,  and  after  several  minutes  seize  upon  them.  When  in  clear  woods,
such  as  pine  barrens,  the  Woodcock  on  being  put  up  flies  at  times  to  a
considerable  distance,  and  then  performs  a circuit  and  alights  not  far
from  you.  It  is  extremely  attached  to  particular  spots,  to  which  it  re-
turns after  being  disturbed.

Its  flight  is  performed  by  constant  rather  rapid  beats  of  the  wings,
and  while  migrating  it  passes  along  with  great  speed.  I am  inclined  to
think  its  flight  is  greatly  protracted,  on  account  of  the  early  periods  at
which  it  reaches  Maine  and  New  Brunswick : — I may  be  wrong,  but  I
am  of  opinion  that  at  such  times  it  flies  faster  than  our  little  Partridge.
In  proceeding,  it  inclines  irregularly  to  the  right  and  left  at  the  end  of
every  few  yards ; but  when  it  has  been  put  up  after  having  settled  for  a
while,  it  rises  as  if  not  caring  about  you,  and  at  a slow  pace  goes  a few
yards  and  alights  again,  runs  a few  steps  and  squats  to  await  your  depart-
ure. It  is  less  addicted  to  wading  through  the  water  than  the  Snipe,
and  never  searches  for  food  in  salt  marshes  or  brackish  places.  Rivulets
that  run  through  thickets,  and  of  which  the  margins  are  muddy  or  com-
posed of  oozy  ground,  are  mostly  preferred  by  it ; but,  as  I have  already
said,  its  place  of  abode  depends  upon  the  state  of  the  weather  and  the  de-
gree of  temperature.

The  food  of  the  Woodcock  consists  principally  of  large  earth-worms,
of  which  it  swallows  as  many  in  the  course  of  a night  as  would  equal  its
own  weight ; but  its  power  of  digestion  is  as  great  as  that  of  the  Herons,
and  it  is  not  very  often  that  on  opening  one  you  find  entire  worms  in  its
stomach.  It  obtains  its  food  by  perforating  the  damp  earth  or  mire,  and
also  by  turning  the  dead  leaves  in  the  woods,  and  picking  up  the  worms
that  lie  beneath  them.  In  captivity,  Woodcocks  very  soon  accustom
themselves  to  feed  on  moistened  corn  meal,  bits  of  cheese,  and  vermicelli
soaked  in  water.  I have  seen  some  that  became  so  gentle  as  to  allow  their
owner  to  caress  them  with  the  hand.  On  watching  several  individuals
probing  mud  in  which  a number  of  earthworms  had  been  introduced,  in
a tub  placed  in  a room  partially  darkened,  I observed  the  birds  plunge
their  bills  up  to  the  nostrils,  but  never  deeper  ; and  from  the  motion  of


480


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


the  parts  at  the  base  of  the  mandibles,  I concluded  that  the  bird  has  the
power  of  working  their  extremities  so  as  to  produce  a kind  of  vacuum,
which  enables  it  to  seize  the  worm  at  one  end,  and  suck  it  into  its  throat
before  it  withdraws  its  bill,  as  do  Curlews  and  Godwits.  The  quickness
of  their  sight  on  such  occasions  was  put  to  the  test  by  uncovering  a cat
placed  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  at  the  same  height  above  the  floor  as
the  surface  of  the  mud  which  filled  the  tub,  when  instantly  the  Woodcock
would  draw  out  its  bill,  jerk  up  its  tail,  spread  it  out,  leap  upon  the  floor,
and  run  off  to  the  opposite  corner.  At  other  times,  when  the  cat  was
placed  beneath  the  level  of  the  bird,  by  the  whole  height  of  the  tub,  which
was  rather  more  than  a foot,  the  same  result  took  place  ; and  I concluded
that  the  elevated  position  of  this  bird’s  eye  was  probably  intended  to
enable  it  to  see  its  enemies  at  a considerable  distance,  and  watch  their
approach,  while  it  is  in  the  act  of  probing,  and  not  to  protect  that  organ
from  the  mire,  as  the  Woodcock  is  always  extremely  clean,  and  never
shews  any  earth  adhering  to  the  feathers  about  its  mouth.

How  comfortable  it  is  when  fatigued  and  covered  with  mud,  your
clothes  drenched  with  wet,  and  your  stomach  aching  for  food,  you  arrive
at  home  with  a bag  of  Woodcocks,  and  meet  the  kind  smiles  of  those  you
love  best,  and  which  are  a thousand  times  more  delightful  to  your  eye,
than  the  savoury  flesh  of  the  most  delicate  of  birds  can  be  to  your  palate.
When  you  have  shifted  your  clothes,  and  know  that  on  the  little  round
table  already  spread,  you  will  ere  long  see  a dish  of  game,  which  will
both  remove  your  hunger  and  augment  the  pleasure  of  your  family  ; when
vou  are  seated  in  the  midst  of  the  little  group,  and  now  see  some  one
neatly  arrayed  introduce  the  mess,  so  white,  so  tender,  and  so  beautifully
surrounded  by  savoury  juice;  when  a jug  of  sparkling  Newark  cider
stands  nigh  ; and  you,  without  knife  or  fork,  quarter  a Woodcock,  ah

Reader  ! But  alas  ! I am  not  in  the  Jerseys  just  now,  in  the  company  of

my  generous  friend  Edward  Harris  ; nor  am  I under  the  hospitable
roof  of  my  equally  esteemed  friend  John  Bachman,  i No,  Reader,  I am
in  Edinburgh,  wielding  my  iron  pen,  without  any  expectation  of  Wood-
cocks for  my  dinner,  either  to-day  or  to-morrow,  or  indeed  for  some
months  to  come.


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


481


ScoLOPAX  siiuoR,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  G61 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  714.

— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  331.

Woodcock,  Scolopax  minor,  Wits.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  40.  pi.  48.  fig.  2.

Lesser  Woodcock,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  194.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  double  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  slender,  tapering,  sub
trigonal  and  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  slightly  depressed  towards  the
end.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  ridge  narrow,
towards  the  end  flattened,  the  sides  nearly  erect,  sloping  outward  towards
the  soft  obtuse  edges,  the  tip  blunt,  knob-like,  and  longer  than  that  of
the  lower  mandible.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  linear,  very  small.  Lower
mandible  broader  than  the  upper,  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,  the
dorsal  line  straight,  the  back  broadly  rounded,  the  sides  marked  with  a
broad  groove,  sloping  inwards  at  the  base,  outwards  towards  the  end,
the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  the  tip  rounded.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  narrowed  anteriorly ; eyes  large,  and  placed
high.  Neck  short  and  thick.  Body  rather  full.  Feet  rather  short  ;
tibia  feathered  to  the  joint ; tarsus  rather  short,  compressed,  anteriorly
covered  with  numerous  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  subhexagonal
scales,  and  having  a row  of  small  scutelliform  scales  along  the  outer  side
behind.  Toes  free,  slender,  the  first  very  small,  the  second  slightly
shorter  than  the  fourth,  the  third  much  longer  and  exceeding  the  tarsus
in  length  ; all  scutellate  above,  marginate,  flattish  beneath.  Claws  very
small,  arched,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  extremely  small,  of  middle  toe  with
a thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  very  soft,  elastic,  blended  ; of  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very
short,  of  the  neck  full.  Wings  short,  rounded ; the  fourth  and  fifth
quills  about  equal  and  longest,  the  first  three  extraordinarily  attenuated,
being  in  fact  sublinear,  narrower  beyond  the  middle,  the  inner  web  slight-
ly enlarged  towards  the  end,  the  first  as  long  as  the  seventh ; secondaries
broad,  the  outer  a little  incurved  and  rounded,  the  inner  tapering  and
elongated.  Tail  very  short,  wedge-shaped,  of  twelve  narrow  feathers,
which  taper  towards  the  rounded  point.

Bill  light  yellowish-brown,  dusky  towards  the  end.  Iris  brown.
Feet  flesh  coloured  ; claws  brownish-black.  The  forehead  is  yellowish-
grey,  with  a few  dark  mottlings  in  the  centre ; on  the  upper  part  of  the
head  are  two  broad  blackish  brown  transverse  bands,  and  on  the  occiput

H h


VOL.  III.


482


AMERICAN  WOODCOCK.


two  narrower,  separated  by  bands  of  light  red ; a brownish-black  loral
band,  and  a narrow  irregular  line  of  the  same  across  the  cheek  and  con-
tinued to  the  occiput.  The  upper  parts  are  variegated  with  brownish-
black,  light  yellowish-red,  and  ash-grey ; there  are  three  broad  longitudi-
nal bands  of  the  first  colour,  barred  with  the  second,  down  the  back,  se-
parated by  two  of  the  last.  The  inner  wing-coverts  and  secondary  quills
are  similarly  barred  ; the  outer  pale  greyish-red,  faintly  barred  with  dusky.
The  quiUs  are  greyish-brown,  tipped  with  dull  grey,  the  secondaries  spot-
ted on  the  outer  web  with  dull  red.  Upper  tail-coverts  barred  ; tail-fea-
thers brownish-black,  their  tips  grey,  their  outer  edges  mottled  with  red-
dish. The  sides  of  the  neck  are  grey  tinged  with  red  ; the  lower  parts  in
general  light  red,  tinged  with  grey  on  the  breast,  on  the  sides  and  lower
wing-coverts  deeper ; the  lower  tail-coverts  with  a central  dusky  line,  and
the  tip  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  1 1 inches,  to  end  of  wings  9^  ; wing  from  flexure
51  ;■  tail  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible

; tarsus  ; middle  toe  1 its  claw  Weight  6^  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXVIII.  Fig.  %

The  Female,  which  is  considerably  larger,  has  the  same  colours  as
the  male.

Length  to  end  of  tail  to  end  of  wings  j to  end  of  claws  13^*^  ;

wing  from  flexure  5/g  ; tail  ; bill  along  the  ridge  21  § ; along  the  edge

of  lower  mandible  2||  ; tarsus  1/^  ; middle  toe  2/^,  its  claw  Weight
8^  oz.


Young  fledged.  Plate  CCLXVIII.  Fig.  3.

The  Young  when  fully  fledged  is  similar  to  the  old  female.


( 483  )


THE  GREENSHANK.

Totanus  Glottis,  Bechst.

PLATE  CCLXIX.  Male.

While  on  Sand  Key,  which  is  about  six  miles  distant  from  Cape
Sable  of  the  Floridas,  in  lat.  24°  57'  north,  and  81°  45'  long,  west  of
Greenwich,  I shot  three  birds  of  this  species  on  the  28th  of  May  1832.
I had  at  first  supposed  them  to  be  Tell-tale  Godwits,  as  they  walked
on  the  bars  and  into  the  shallows  much  in  the  same  manner,  and,  on
obtaining  them,  imagined  they  were  new ; but  on  shewing  them  to  my
assistant  Mr  Ward,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  Greenshank  of  Europe,
he  pronounced  them  to  be  of  that  species,  and  I have  since  ascertained  the
fact  by  a comparison  of  specimens.  They  were  all  male  birds,  and  I
observed  no  material  difference  in  their  plumage.  We  did  not  find  any
afterwards  ; but  it  is  probable  that  we  had  seen  some  previously,  although
we  did  not  endeavour  to  procure  them,  having  supposed  them  to  be  Tell-
tales. Almost  all  the  birds  seen  in  the  Floridas  at  this  date  had  young
or  eggs  ; and  this  circumstance  increased  my  surprise  at  finding  all  the
three  individuals  to  be  males.  They  had  been  shot  merely  because  they
offered  a tempting  opportunity,  being  all  close  together,  and  it  is  not  often
that  one  can  kill  three  Tell-tales  at  once.  As  I am  not  acquainted  with
the  habits  of  this  species,  I have  applied  to  my  friend  Mr  Macgillivray,
who  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  the  following  notice  of  them  as  observed
in  the  Hebrides.

“ The  Greenshank  is  seen  in  the  Outer  Hebrides  early  in  spring,  and
generally  departs  in  October,  although  I have  observed  individuals  there  in
November.  Previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  breeding-season,  and
after  the  young  are  fledged,i  it  resorts  to  the  shores  of  the  sea,  frequenting
pools  of  brackish-water  at  the  head  of  the  sand-fords,  and  the  shallow
margins  of  bays  and  creeks.  Its  habits  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the
Redshank,  with  which  it  associates  in  autumn.  It  is  extremely  shy  and
vigilant,  insomuch  that  one  can  very  seldom  shoot  it,  unless  after  it  has
deposited  its  eggs.  Many  individuals  remain  during  the  summer,  when
they  are  to  be  found  by  the  lakes  in  the  interior,  of  which  the  number  in

H h 2


484


GREENSHANK.


Uist,  Harris,  and  Lewis  is  astonishing.  At  that  season  it  is  very  easily
discovered,  for  when  you  are  perhaps  more  than  a quarter  of  a mile  dis-
tant, it  rises  into  the  air  with  clamorous  cries,  alarming  all  the  birds  in
its  neighbourhood,  flies  round  the  place  of  its  nest,  now  wheeling  off'  to  a
distance,  again  advancing  towards  you,  and  at  intervals  alighting  by  the
edge  of  the  lake,  when  it  continues  its  cries,  vibrating  its  body  all  the
while.  I once  found  a nest  of  this  bird  in  the  island  of  Harris.  It  was
at  a considerable  distance  from  the  water,  and  consisted  of  a few  fragments
of  heath  and  some  blades  of  grass,  placed  in  a shallow  cavity  scraped  in
the  turf,  in  an  exposed  place.  The  nest,  in  fact,  resembled  that  of  the
Golden  Plover,  the  Curlew,  or  the  Lapwing.  The  eggs,  placed  with
their  narrow  ends  together,  were  four  in  number,  pyriform,  larger  than
those  of  the  Lapwing,  and  smaller  than  those  of  the  Golden  Plover,
equally  pointed  with  the  latter,  but  proportionally  broader  and  more
rounded  at  the  larger  end  than  either.  The  dimensions  of  one  of  them,
still  remaining  with  me,  are  two  inches  exactly,  by  one  inch  and  three-
eighths  ; the  ground  colour  is  a very  pale  yellowish-green,  sprinkled  all
over  with  irregular  spots  of  dark  brown,  intermixed  with  blotches  of  light
purplish-grey,  the  spots,  and  especially  the  blotches,  more  numerous  on
the  larger  end.  Although  in  summer  these  birds  may  be  seen  in  many
parts  of  the  islands,  they  are  yet  very  rare,  a pair  being  to  be  met  with
only  at  an  interval  of  several  miles.  In  other  parts  of  Scotland  they  are
seen  chiefly  in  autumn,  but  are  of  rare  occurrence.”

It  is  curious  how  nearly  by  this  account  the  habits  of  the  Greenshank
correspond  with  those  of  the  Tell-tale  God  wit,  Totanus  melanoleucos.


ScoLOPAX  Glottis,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  245 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  270-

Totanus  Glottis,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  659. — Selby,  lllust.  vol.  ii.  p.  86.

Greenshank,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  618.  ,

Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCLXIX.

Bill  long,  slender,  compressed,  tapering,  slightly  recurved.  Upper
mandible  tvith  the  dorsal  line  very  slightly  curved  upwards,  the  ridge
convex,  the  sides  grooved  nearly  to  the  middle,  afterwards  convex,  the
edges  inflected  and  directly  meeting  those  of  the  lower  mandible,  the  tip
narrowed  and  slightly  deflected.  Nostrils  basal,  lineai’,  pervious,  nearer
the  edge  than  the  dorsal  line.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  nar-
row and  medial,  beyond  it  the  outline  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides


GRBENSHANK.


485


grooved  as  far  as  the  angle  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,
the  point  very  narrow.

Head  small,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  rather  long,  slender.
Body  slender.  Feet  long  and  slender ; tibia  bare  for  half  its  length,  scu-
tellate  before  and  behind ; tarsus  long,  slender,  covered  before  and  behind
with  numerous  scutella,  the  narrow  lateral  spaces  with  extremely  small
oblong  scales.  Toes  small,  very  slender,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,
marginate,  the  middle  toe  connected  with  the  outer  by  a basal  membrane,
with  the  inner  by  an  extremely  small  one ; first  toe  extremely  small,  se-
cond slightly  shorter  than  fourth,  third  considerably  longer.  Claws  small,
compressed,  arched,  rather  obtuse,  that  of  third  toe  with  a dilated  inner
edge.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short,  on
the  neck  short  and  almost  downy.  Wings  rather  long,  very  acute,  nar-
row ; primaries  tapering  and  rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  second  little
shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  obliquely  rounded,  the
inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  of  twelve  narrow,  rounded  fea-
thers, the  two  middle  ones  considerably  longer  than  the  rest.

Bill  dusky-green,  black  at  the  end.  Iris  brown.  Feet  dull  green-
ish-grey. A broad  band  from  the  bill  to  the  eye,  all  the  lower  parts,  as
well  as  the  back,  excepting  a small  portion  anteriorly,  pure  white ; that
colour,  however,  does  not  appear  on  the  back,  when  the  wings  are  closed,
it  being  covered  over  by  the  scapulars.  Loral  space  white,  marked  with
small  oblong  spots  of  greyish  brown  ; sides  of  the  lower  part  of  fore  neck
and  a portion  of  the  breast  faintly  barred  with  grey.  The  upper  part  of
the  head,  and  the  hind  part  and  sides  of  the  neck  are  greyish-white,  with
longitudinal  central  greyish-brown  markings.  The  scapulars  and  inner
secondaries  are  greyish-brown,  the  feathers  edged  with  greyish-white,  and
lined  or  mottled  with  dark  brown  towards  the  margins ; the  smaller  wing-
coverts  plain,  the  larger  darker  near  the  edge  and  margined  with  whitish,
as  are  the  outer  secondaries ; the  primary  quills  and  their  coverts  dark
brown,  the  shaft  of  the  outer  white.  The  tail  is  greyish-white,  undulated
with  light  brown,  the  four  outer  feathers  on  each  side  with  only  a series
of  spots  on  the  outer  edge,  which  on  the  outermost  feathers  is  almost
obliterated.

Length  to  end  of  tail  11  inches,  to  end  of  wings  12  ; wing  from  flexure
7 ; tail  3 ; bill  along  the  back  2i®g,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandihle  2/^  ;
bare  part  of  tibia  l^^^  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  1^%,  its  claw


( 486  )


WILSON’S  PETREL.

Thalassidroma  Wilsonii.

PLATE  CCLXX.  Male  and  Female.

A LONG  voyage  would  always  be  to  me  a continued  source  of  suffer-
ing, were  I restrained  from  gazing  on  the  vast  expanse  of  the  waters,  and
on  the  ever-pleasing  inhabitants  of  the  air  that  now  and  then  appear  in  the
ship’s  wake.  The  slightest  motion  of  the  vessel  effectually  prevents  me
from  enjoying  the  mirth  of  my  fellow  passengers,  or  sympathizing  with  them
in  their  sickness.  When  the  first  glimpse  of  day  appears,  I make  my
way  on  deck,  where  I stand  not  unlike  a newly  hatched  bird,  tottering
on  feeble  legs.  Let  the  wind  blow  high  or  not,  I care  little  which,  pro-
vided it  waft  me  toward  the  shores  of  America.  If  the  sky  be  clear,  the
first  sight  of  the  sun  excites  emotions  of  gratitude  towards  the  Being
by  whose  power  it  was  formed,  and  sent  forth  to  shed  its  benign  influence
on  surrounding  worlds.  Silent  adoration  occupies  my  soul,  and  I con-
clude with  ardent  wishes  for  the  happiness  of  friends  left  far  behind,  and
those  toward  whom  I am  proceeding.  But  now,  ever  flapping  its  wing-
lets,  I have  marked  the  little  bird,  dusky  all  over  save  a single  spot,  the
whiteness  of  which  contrasts  with  the  dark  hue  of  the  waters  and  the
deep  tone  of  the  clear  sky.  Full  of  life  and  joy  it  moves  to  and  fro,  ad-
vances toward  the  ship,  then  shoots  far  away,  gambols  over  the  swelling
waves,  dives  into  their  hollows,  and  twitters  with  delight  as  it  perceives
an  object  that  will  alleviate  its  hunger.  Never  fatigued,  the  tiny  Pe-
trels seldom  alight,  although  at  times  their  frail  legs  and  feet  seem  to
touch  the  crest  of  the  foaming  wave.  I love  to  give  every  creature  all
the  pleasure  I can  confer  upon  it,  and  towards  the  little  things  I cast
over  the  stern  such  objects  as  I know  they  will  most  prize.  Social  crea-
tures ! would  that  all  were  as  innocent  as  you  ! There  are  no  bickerings,
no  jealousies  among  you ; the  first  that  comes  is  first  served  ; it  is  all  the
result  of  chance;  and  thus  you  pass  your  lives.  But  the  clouds  gather,
the  gale  approaches,  and  our  gallant  bark  is  trimmed.  Darkness  spreads
over  the  heavens,  and  the  deep  waters  send  back  a blacker  gloom,  broken
at  intervals  by  the  glimmer  of  the  spray.  You  meet  the  blast,  and  your
little  wings  bear  you  up  against  it  for  a while ; but  you  cannot  encounter


WILSON’S  PETREL.


487


the  full  force  of  the  tempest ; and  now  you  have  all  come  close  beneath
me,  where  you  glide  over  the  curling  eddies  caused  by  the  motion  of  the
rudder.  You  shall  have  all  possible  attention  paid  you,  and  I will  crawl
to  the  camboose,  in  search  of  food  to  support  your  tiny  frames  in  this
hour  of  need.  But  at  length,  night  closes  around,  and  I bid  you  fare-
well.

The  gale  is  over ; the  clear  blue  of  tbe  sky  looks  clearer  than  ever,
the  sun’s  rays  are  brighter,  on  the  quiet  waters  the  ship  seems  to  settle  in
repose,  and  her  wings,  though  widely  spread,  no  longer  swell  with  the
breeze.  At  a distance  around  us  tbe  dusky  wanderers  are  enjoying  the
bright  morning ; the  rudder-fish,  yesterday  so  lively,  has  ended  its  career,
so  violently  was  it  beaten  by  the  waves  against  the  vessel ; and  now  the
Petrels  gather  around  it,  as  it  floats  on  the  surface.  Various  other  mat-
ters they  find ; here  a small  crab,  there  the  fragments  of  a sea-plant.  Low
over  the  deep  they  range,  and  now  with  little  steps  run  on  the  waters.
Few  are  their  notes,  but  great  their  pleasure,  at  this  moment.  It  is  need-
less for  me  to  feed  them  now,  and  therefore  I will  return  to  my  task.

It  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  any  individual  to  determine  the
extent  of  the  movements  of  the  three  species  of  Petrel  seen  on  the  waters
of  the  Atlantic.  My  opinion  is  that  until  their  breeding  places  are  re-
peatedly visited  by  naturalists,  little  can  be  known  respecting  the  range
of  their  flight.  I have  crossed  the  ocean  many  times,  and  have  always
paid  more  or  less  attention  to  these  birds  ; yet  I am  as  ignorant  of  their
migrations  as  my  predecessors.  I have  rarely  seen  Wilson’s  Petrel  farther
to  the  eastward  than  the  Azores,  and  beyond  these  islands  it  generally
abandoned  the  vessel.  Along  the  American  coast,  I have  not  met  with  it
to  the  northward  beyond  the  51st  degree  of  latitude;  while  to  the  south-
ward I have  rarely  observed  many  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico ; nor  do  I be-
lieve that  any  breed  on  the  shores  of  the  Floridas,  or  on  the  Bahama  Is-
lands, as  alleged  by  Wilson,  who,  it  would  appear,  stated  so  from  report.
Petrels  are  rarely  destroyed  by  men,  quadrupeds,  or  rapacious  birds,  when
breeding ; to  the  former  they  are  of  no  value  as  an  article  of  food,  and
by  the  latter  they  are  seldom  sought  after ; consequently  they  are  more
likely  to  return  to  their  breeding  places  than  most  other  birds,  many  of
which  are  frequently  induced  to  abandon  them  on  account  of  the  perse-
cutions to  which  they  are  subjected.  I have  found  the  Forked-tailed
Petrel  breeding  on  our  coast,  in  the  fissures  of  rocks  above  the  reach  of  the
spray,  and  Wilson’s  digging  for  itself  burrows  in  the  sand  or  loose  earth.


488


WILSON’S  PETREL.


on  low  islands.  The  Thalassidroma  pelagka  I have  never  found  breed-
ing on  any  part  of  our  coast ; but  it  is  well  known  that  it  resorts  to  holes
on  certain  of  the  Shetland  Islands,  among  the  blocks  and  stones  of  which
the  beaches  are  formed  ; though  it  appears  that  in  some  spots,  where  the
fisherman  are  in  the  habit  of  destroying  them,  many  resort  to  the  elevated
fissures  of  the  rocks,  where  also  a few  of  the  Forked-tailed  species  occa-
sionally breed.  The  latter  then,  though  more  abundant  in  America,  be-
longs to  Europe  also.  Wilson  was  not  aware  that  the  species  now
named  after  him  was  any  thing  else  than  “ the  Stormy  Petrel,  Procellaria
pelagica  of  Linn.eus  and  he  remarks  that  it  “ is  found  over  the  whole
Atlantic  ocean,  from  Europe  to  North  America,  at  all  distances  from
land,  and  in  all  weathers.”

To  my  learned  friend  the  Prince  of  Musignano,  the  scientific  world
is  indebted  for  a Memoir  on  Petrels,  in  which  he  has  clearly  shewn  the
specific  differences  of  the  three  species  mentioned  above,  of  which  he  has
also  given  figures,  as  well  as  those  of  the  bills  and  feet  nearly  of  the  natural
size.  But  the  artist  who  drew  these  birds  for  him,  or  the  engraver,
committed  an  error  in  representing  the  present  bird  as  the  largest  of  the
three.

Wilson’s  Petrel  breeds  on  some  small  islands  situated  off  the  southern
extremity  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  called  “ Mud  Islands,”  but  which  are
formed  of  sand  and  light  earth,  scantily  covered  with  grass.  Thither  the
birds  resort  in  great  numbers,  about  the  beginning  of  June,  and  form  bur-
I’ows  of  the  depth  of  two  or  two  and  a half  feet,  in  the  bottom  of  which
is  laid  a single  white  egg,  a few  bits  of  dry  grass,  scarcely  deserving  the
name  of  a nest,  having  been  placed  for  its  reception.  The  egg  measures
an  inch  and  a half  in  length,  by  seven-eighths  of  an  inch  in  breadth,  is
almost  equally  rounded  at  both  ends,  and  has  a pure  white  colour.  These
Petrels  copulate  on  the  water,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Hyperborean
Phalarope.  By  the  beginning  of  August  the  young  follow  their  parents
to  sea,  and  are  then  scarcely  distinguishable  from  them.  During  in-
cubation, they  remain  in  the  burrows,  or  at  their  entrance,  rarely  going
to  seek  for  food  before  the  dusk.  *

On  wing  this  species  is  more  lively  than  the  Forked-tailed,  but  less  so
than  the  Common  Stormy  Petrel.  It  keeps  its  wings  nearly  at  right  an-
gles with  its  body,  and  makes  considerable  use  of  its  feet,  particularly
during  calm  weather,  when  it  at  times  hops  or  leaps  for  several  feet,  or
pats  the  water,  whilst  its  wings  are  extended  upwards  with  a fluttering


WILSON’S  PETREL.


489


motion,  and  it  inclines  its  head  downwards  to  pick  up  its  food  from  the
water,  and  I have  observed  it  immerse  the  whole  head  beneath  the  surface,
to  seize  on  small  fishes,  in  which  it  generally  succeeded.  It  can  walk  pretty
well  on  the  deck  of  a vessel,  or  any  other  flat  surface,  and  rise  from  it
without  much  difficulty.  Its  notes  are  different  from  that  of  the  Forked-
tailed  Petrel,  and  resembles  the  syllables  Icee-re-hee  Tcee.  They  are  more
frequently  emitted  at  night  than  by  day.  I never  could  ascertain  whe-
ther or  not  these  birds  alight  on  the  rigging  at  night,  but  my  opinion  is
that  they  do  not,  for  the  sailors,  to  whom  I had  offered  premiums  for
catching  some  of  them,  told  me  that  although  they  flew  about  them  while
aloft,  they  could  not  see  one  standing  anywhere.

In  my  journal  written  on  board  the  packet  ship  Columbia,  command-
ed by  my  worthy  friend  Joseph  Delano,  Esq.,  I find  the  following  me-
morandums : Wilson’s  Petrel  was  first  seen,  this  voyage,  about  two
hundred  miles  from  England,  and  alone  until  we  reached  the  middle  of
the  Atlantic,  when  the  Forked-tailed  came  in  sight,  after  which  the  lat-
ter was  most  plentiful,  and  the  pelagica  by  far  the  least  numerous.”  Du-
ring my  several  visits  to  the  coasts  of  the  Floridas,  I saw  scarcely  any  of
these  birds  in  the  course  of  several  months  spent  there,  but  I found  them
pretty  abundant  on  returning  towards  Charleston.  This  species,  like
the  others,  feeds  on  mollusca,  small  fishes,  Crustacea,  marine  plants,  ex-
crements of  cetaceous  animals ; and  the  greasy  substances  thrown  from
vessels.  When  caught,  they  squirt  an  oily  substance  through  the  nos-
trils, and  often  disgorge  the  same.  The  sexes  are  similar  in  their  ex-
ternal appearance.

Thalassidroma  Wilsonii,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,
p.  367.

Stormv  Petrel,  Procellaria  pelagica,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  90.  pi.  CO.

Procellarla  Wilsonii,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Journ.  Acad.  Phil.  vol.  vi.  p.  231.  pL  9.

Wilson’s  Stormy  Petrel,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  322.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  slender,  straight,  with  the  tips  curved,  as
broad  as  high  at  the  base,  compressed  towards  the  end.  Upper  mandi-
ble with  the  nostrils  forming  a tube  at  the  base,  beyond  which,  for  a short
space,  the  dorsal  line  is  straight,  then  decurved,  the  ridge  narrow  and  se-
parated from  the  sides  by  a narrow  groove,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  the
tip  compressed  obliquely  deflected.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  ra-


490


WILSON’S  PETREL.


ther  long,  narrow  and  pointed,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  it  very  slightly
concave  and  decurved,  the  sides  erect,  the  edges  sharp,  the  dip  slightly
decurved.

Head  of  moderate  size,  roundish,  anteriorly  narrowed.  Neck  short.
Body  rather  slender.  Feet  long,  very  slender ; tibia  bare  at  its  lower
part ; tarsus  very  slender,  reticulate,  anteriorly  with  a long  plate  which  is
very  slightly  marked.  Hind  toe  conical,  so  minute  as  scarcely  to  be  per-
ceptible ; anterior  toes  rather  long  and  extremely  slender,  obscurely  scutel-
late  above,  connected  by  striated  webs  with  concave  margins ; the  third
and  fourth  toes  longest,  and  about  equal.  Claws  slender,  arched,  de-
pressed, acute.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended,  the  feathers  distinct  only  on  the  wings,
which  are  very  long;  primary  quills  tapering,  but  rounded,  the  third
longest,  the  second  slightly  longer  than  the  fourth,  the  first  much  shorter
and  a little  longer  than  the  sixth  ; secondaries  short,  the  outer  incurved,
obliquely  rounded.  Tail  rather  long,  even,  of  twelve  broad  rounded
feathers.

Bill  and  feet  black,  but  the  webs  yellow  excepting  at  the  margin.
Iris  dark  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  dark  greyish-
brown,  the  quills  and  tail  brownish-black,  the  outer  secondary  wing-co-
verts and  some  of  the  secondary  quills  bght  greyish- brown,  and  tipped
with  whitish.  The  rump,  sides  of  the  abdomen,  and  exterior  lower  tail-
coverts,  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7;^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  8,  to  end  of  claws  8 ;
extent  of  wings  15f  ; wing  from  flexure  6 ; tail  3| ; bill  along  the  back
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  If,  middle  toe  1,  its
claw  Weight  If  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXX.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  resembles  the  male.


( 491  )


A LONG  CALM  AT  SEA.

On  the  17th  of  May  1826, 1 left  New  Orleans  on  board  the  ship  Delos,
commanded  by  Joseph  Hatch,  Esq.  of  Kennebunk,  bound  for  Liver-
pool. The  steamer  Hercules,  which  towed  the  ship,  left  us  several  miles
outside  the  Balize,  about  ten  hours  after  our  departure ; but  there  was
not  a breath  of  wind,  the  waters  were  smoother  than  the  prairies  of  the
Oppelousas,  and  notwithstanding  our  great  display  of  canvass,  we  lay,  like
a dead  whale,  floating  at  the  mercy  of  the  currents.  The  weather  was
uncommonly  fair,  and  the  heat  excessive ; and  in  this  helpless  state  we
continued  for  many  days.  About  the  end  of  a week  we  had  lost  sight  of
the  Balize,  although  I was  assured  by  the  commander,  that  all  this  while
the  ship  had  rarely  answered  the  helm.  The  sailors  whistled  for  wind,
and  raised  their  hands  in  all  directions,  anxious  as  they  were  to  feel  some
motion  in  the  air ; but  all  to  no  purpose ; it  was  a dead  calm,  and  we  con-
cluded that  dEolus  had  agreed  with  Neptune  to  detain  us,  until  our
patience  should  be  fairly  tried,  or  our  sport  exhausted  ; for  sport  we  cer-
tainly had,  both  on  board  and  around  the  ship.  I doubt  if  I can  better
contribute  to  your  amusement  at  present,  than  by  giving  you  a short  ac-
count of  the  occurrences  that  took  place,  during  this  sleepy  fit  of  the
being  on  whom  we  depended  for  our  progress  toward  merry  England.

Vast  numbers  of  beautiful  dolphins  glided  by  the  side  of  the  vessel,
glancing  like  burnished  gold  through  the  day,  and  gleaming  like  meteors
by  night.  The  captain  and  his  mates  were  expert  at  alluring  them  with
baited  hooks,  and  not  less  so  at  piercing  them  with  a five-pronged  instru-
ment, which  they  called  grains  ; and  I was  delighted  with  the  sport,  be-
cause it  afforded  me  an  opportunity  of  observing  and  noting  some  of  the
habits  of  this  beautiful  fish,  as  well  as  several  other  kinds.

On  being  hooked,  the  Dolphin  flounces  vigorously,  shoots  off  with  great
impetuosity  to  the  very  end  of  the  line,  when,  being  suddenly  checked,  it
often  rises  perpendicularly  several  feet  out  of  the  water,  shakes  itself
violently  in  the  air,  gets  disentangled,  and  thus  escapes.  But  when  well
secured,  it  is  held  in  play  for  a while  by  the  experienced  fisher,  soon  be-
comes exhausted,  and  is  hauled  on  board.  Some  persons  prefer  pulUng
them  in  at  once,  but  they  seldom  succeed,  as  the  force  with  which  the  fish
shakes  itself  on  being  raised  out  of  the  water,  is  generally  sufficient  to


492


A LONG  CALM  AT  SEA.


enable  it  to  extricate  itself.  Dolphins  move  in  shoals,  varying  from  four
or  five  to  twenty  or  more,  hunting  in  packs  in  the  waters,  as  wolves  pur-
sue their  prey  on  land.  The  object  of  their  pursuit  is  generally  the  Fly-
ing-fish, now  and  then  the  Bonita;  and  when  nothing  better  can  be  had,
they  will  follow  the  little  Rudder-fish,  and  seize  it  immediately  under  the
stern  of  the  ship.  The  Flying-fishes,  after  having  escaped  for  a while  by
dint  of  their  great  velocity,  but  on  being  again  approached  by  the  Dol-
phin, emerge  from  the  waters,  and  spreading  their  broad  wing-like  fins,
sail  through  the  air  and  disperse  in  all  directions,  like  a covey  of  timid
partridges  before  the  rapacious  falcon.  Some  pursue  a direct  course,
others  diverge  on  either  side;  but  in  a short  time  they  all  drop  into  their
natural  element.  While  they  are  travelling  in  the  air,  their  keen  and
hungry  pursuer,  like  a greyhound,  follows  in  their  wake,  and  performing
a succession  of  leaps,  many  feet  in  extent,  rapidly  gains  upon  the  quarry,
which  is  often  seized  just  as  it  falls  into  the  sea.

Dolphins  manifest  a very  remarkable  sympathy  with  each  other.  The
moment  one  of  them  is  hooked  or  grained,  those  in  company  make  up  to
it,  and  remain  around  until  the  unfortunate  fish  is  pulled  on  board,  when
they  generally  move  off  together,  seldom  biting  at  any  thing  thrown  out
to  them.  This,  however,  is  the  case  only  with  the  larger  individuals,
which  keep  apart  from  the  young,  in  the  same  manner  as  is  observed  in
several  species  of  birds ; for  when  the  smaller  Dolphins  are  in  large  shoals,
they  all  remain  under  the  bows  of  a ship,  and  bite  in  succession  at  any
sort  of  line,  as  if  determined  to  see  what  has  become  of  their  lost  com-
panions, in  consequence  of  which  they  are  often  all  caught.

You  must  not  suppose  that  the  Dolphin  is  without  its  enemies.  Who,
in  this  world,  man  or  fish,  has  not  enough  of  them  ? Often  it  conceives
itself  on  the  very  eve  of  swallowing  a fish,  which,  after  all,  is  nothing  but
a piece  of  lead,  with  a few  feathers  fastened  to  it,  to  make  it  look  like  a
flying-fish,  when  it  is  seized  and  severed  in  two  by  the  insidious  Bala-
couda,  which  I have  once  seen  to  carry  off  by  means  of  its  sharp  teeth,  the
better  part  of  a Dolphin  that  was  hooked,  and  already  hoisted  to  the  sur-
face of  the  water.

The  Dolphins  caught  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  during  this  calm  were
suspected  to  be  poisonous ; and  to  ascertain  whether  this  was  really  the
case,  our  cook,  who  was  an  Afi’ican  Negro,  never  boiled  or  fried  one  with-
out placing  beside  it  a dollar.  If  the  silver  was  not  tarnished  by  the  time
the  Dolphin  was  ready  for  the  table,  the  fish  was  presented  to  the  passen-


A LONG  CALM  AT  SEA.


493


gers,  with  an  assurance  that  it  was  perfectly  good.  But  as  not  a single
individual  of  the  hundred  that  we  caught  had  the  property  of  converting
silver  into  copper,  I suspect  that  our  African  sage  was  no  magician.

One  morning,  that  of  the  22d  of  June,  the  weather  sultry,  I was  sur-
prised, on  getting  out  of  my  hammock,  which  was  slung  on  deck,  to  find
the  water  all  around  swarming  with  Dolphins,  which  were  sporting  in
great  glee.  The  sailors  assured  me  that  this  was  a certain  “ token  of
wind,”  and,  as  they  watched  the  movement  of  the  fishes,  added,  “ aye,
and  of  a fair  breeze  too.”  I caught  several  Dolphins  in  the  course  of  an
hour,  after  which  scarcely  any  remained  about  the  ship.  Not  a breath  of
air  came  to  our  relief  all  that  day,  no,  nor  even  the  next.  The  sailors
were  in  despair,  and  I would  probably  have  become  despondent  also,  had
not  my  spirits  been  excited  by  finding  a very  large  Dolphin  on  my  hook.
When  I had  hauled  it  on  board,  I found  it  to  be  the  largest  I had  ever
caught.  It  was  a magnificent  creature.  See  how  it  quivers  in  the  ago-
nies of  death  ! its  tail  flaps  the  hard  deck,  producing  a sound  like  the
rapid  roll  of  a drum.  How  beautiful  the  changes  of  its  colours ! Now
it  is  blue,  now  green,  silvery,  golden,  and  burnished  copper ; now  it  pre-
sents a blaze  of  all  the  hues  of  the  rainbow  intermingled  ; but,  alack  ! it
is  dead,  and  the  play  of  its  colours  is  no  longer  seen.  It  has  settled  into
the  deep  calm  that  has  paralyzed  the  energies  of  the  blustering  winds,
and  smoothed  down  th,e  proud  waves  of  the  ocean.

The  best  bait  for  the  Dolphin  is  a long  stripe  of  shark’s  flesh.  I think
it  generally  prefers  this  to  the  semblance  of  a flying-fish,  which  indeed  it
does  not  often  seize  unless  when  the  ship  is  under  weigh,  and  it  is  made
to  rise  to  the  surface.  There  are  times,  however,  when  hunger  and  the
absence  of  their  usual  food,  will  induce  the  Dolphins  to  dash  at  any  sort
of  bait ; and  I have  seen  some  caught  by  means  of  a piece  of  white  linen
fastened  to  a hook.  Their  appetite  is  as  keen  as  that  of  the  Vulture,  and
whenever  a good  opportunity  occurs,  they  gorge  themselves  to  such  a de-
gree that  they  become  an  easy  prey  to  their  enemies  the  Balacouda  and
the  Bottle-nosed  Porpoise.  One  that  had  been  grained  while  lazily  swim-
ming immediately  under  the  stern  of  our  ship,  was  found  to  have  its  sto-
mach completely  crammed  with  flying-fish,  all  regularly  disposed  side  by
side,  with  their  tails  downwards, — by  which  I mean  to  say  that  the  Dol-
phin always  swallows  its  'prey  tail  foremost.  They  looked  in  fact  like  so
many  salted  herrings  packed  in  a box,  and  were  to  the  number  of  twenty-
two,  each  six  or  seven  inches  in  length.


494


A LONG  CALM  AT  SEA.


The  usual  length  of  the  Dolphins  caught  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  is
about  three  feet,  and  I saw  none  that  exceeded  four  feet  two  inches.  The
weight  of  one  of  the  latter  size  was  only  eighteen  pounds;  for  this  fish  is
extremely  narrow  in  proportion  to  its  length,  although  rather  deep  in  its
form.  When  just  caught,  the  upper  fin,  which  reaches  from  the  forehead
to  within  a short  distance  of  the  tail,  is  of  a fine  dark  blue.  The  upper  part
of  the  body  in  its  whole  length  is  azure,  and  the  lower  parts  are  of  a gol-
den hue,  mottled  irregularly  with  deep  blue  spots.  It  seems  that  they  at
times  enter  very  shallow  water,  as  in  the  course  of  my  last  voyage  along
the  Florida  coast,  some  were  caught  in  a seine,  along  with  their  kinsman
the  “ Cavalier,”  of  which  I shall  speak  elsewhere.

The  flesh  of  the  Dolphin  is  rather  firm,  very  white,  and  lies  in  flakes
when  cooked.  The  first  caught  are  generally  eaten  with  great  pleasure,
but  when  served  many  days  in  succession,  they  become  insipid.  It  is  not,
as  an  article  of  food,  equal  to  the  Balacouda,  which  is  perhaps  as  good  as
any  fish  caught  in  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.


( 495  )


THE  FRIGATE  PELICAN.

Tachypetes  Aquilus,  Vieill.

PLATE  CCLXXI.  Adult.

Previous  to  my  visit  to  the  Florida  Keys,  I had  seen  but  few  Fri-
gate Birds,  and  those  only  at  some  distance,  while  I was  on  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  so  that  I could  merely  recognise  them  by  their  mode  of  flight.
On  approaching  Indian  Key,  however,  I observed  several  of  them,  and
as  I proceeded  farther  south,  their  numbers  rapidly  increased ; but  on
the  Tortugas  very  few  were  observed.  This  bird  rarely  travels  farther
eastward  than  the  Bay  of  Charleston  in  South  Carolina,  although  it  is
abundant  at  all  seasons  from  Cape  Florida  to  Cape  Sable,  the  two  ex-
treme points  of  the  peninsula.  How  far  south  it  may  be  found  I cannot
tell.

The  Frigate  Pelicans  may  be  said  to  be  as  gregarious  as  our  Vultures :
Y ou  see  them  in  small  or  large  flocks,  according  to  circumstances.  Like
our  Vultures,  they  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  day  on  wing,  searching
for  food ; and  like  them  also,  when  gorged  or  roosting,  they  collect  in
large  flocks,  either  to  fan  themselves  or  to  sleep  close  together.  They  are
equally  lazy,  tyrannical,  and  rapacious,  domineering  over  birds  weaker
than  themselves,  and  devouring  the  young  of  every  species,  whenever  an
opportunity  offers,  in  the  absence  of  the  parents ; in  a word,  they  are
most  truly  Marine  Vultures.

About  the  middle  of  May,  a period  which  to  me  appeared  very  late
for  birds  found  in  so  warm  a climate  as  that  of  the  Florida  Keys,  the
Frigate  Pelicans  assemble  in  flocks  of  from  fifty  to  five  hundred  pairs  or
more.  They  are  seen  flying  at  a great  height  over  the  islands  on  which
they  have  bred  many  previous  seasons,  courting  for  hours  together ; after
which  they  return  towards  the  mangroves,  alight  on  them,  and  at  once
begin  to  repair  the  old  nests  or  construct  new  ones.  They  pillage  each
other’s  nests  of  their  materials,  and  make  excursions  for  more  to  the  near-
est keys.  They  break  the  dry  twigs  of  trees  with  ease,  passing  swiftly
on  wing,  and  snapping  them  off  by  a single  grasp  of  their  powerful  bill.
It  is  indeed  a beautiful  sight  to  see  them  when  thus  occupied,  especially
when  several  are  so  engaged,  passing  and  repassing  with  the  swiftness  of


496


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


thought  over  the  trees  whose  tops  are  blasted  ; their  purpose  appears  as
if  accomplished  by  magic.  I know  only  two  other  birds  that  perform  the
same  action ; one  of  them  is  the  Forked-tailed  Hawk,  the  other  our  swift
or  Chimney  Swallow;  but  neither  of  them  is  so  expert  as  the  Frigate
Pelican.  It  sometimes  happens  that  this  bird  accidentally  drops  a stick
while  travelling  towards  its  nest,  when,  if  this  should  happen  over  the
water,  it  plunges  after  it  and  seizes  it  with  its  bill  before  it  has  reached
the  waves.

The  nests  are  usually  placed  on  the  south  side  of  the  keys,  and  on
such  trees  as  hang  over  the  water,  some  low,  others  high,  several  in  a
single  tree,  or  only  one,  according  to  the  size  of  the  mangrove,  but  in
some  cases  lining  the  whole  side  of  the  island.  They  are  composed  of
sticks  crossing  each  other  to  the  height  of  about  two  inches,  and  are
flattish  but  not  very  large.  When  the  birds  are  incubating,  their  long
wings  and  tail  are  seen  extending  beyond  the  nest  for  more  than  a foot.
The  eggs  are  two  or  three,  more  frequently  the  latter  number,  measure
two  inches  and  seven-eighths  in  length,  two  in  breadth,  being  thus  of  a
rather  elongated  form,  and  have  a thick  smooth  shell,  of  a greenish-white
colour,  frequently  soiled  by  tbe  filth  of  the  nests.  The  young  are  covered
with  yellowish-white  down,  and  look  at  first  as  if  they  had  no  feet.  They
are  fed  by  regurgitation,  but  grow  tardily,  and  do  not  leave  the  nest  until
they  are  able  to  follow  their  parents  on  wing.

At  that  period  the  plumage  of  the  young  females  is  marbled  with  grey
and  brown,  with  the  exception  of  the  head  and  the  lower  parts,  which  are
white.  The  tail  is  about  half  the  length  it  attains  at  the  first  moult,  and
is  brownish-black,  as  are  the  primaries.  After  the  first  change  of  plu-
mage, the  wings  become  longer,  and  their  flight  is  almost  as  elegant  and
firm  as  that  of  older  birds.

The  second  spring  plumage  of  this  sex  is  brownish-black  on  the  up-
per parts,  that  colour  extending  over  the  head  and  around  the  neck  in
irregular  patches  of  brown,  continued  in  a sharp  angle  towards  the  breast,
but  separated  on  its  sides  by  the  white  that  ascends  on  either  side  of  the
neck  towards  the  head.  The  lower  tail-coverts  are  brownish-black,  as
are  the  lower  parts  of  the  belly  and  flanks ; the  shoulders  alone  remain-
ing as  at  first.  The  tail  and  wings  are  perfect.

The  third  spring,  the  upper  parts  of  the  head  and  neck  are  of  a purer
brownish-black,  which  extends  down  to  the  extremity  of  the  angle,  as  are
the  feathers  of  the  belly  and  the  lower  tail-coverts,  the  dark  colour  reach-


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


497


ing  now  to  within  five  inches  of  the  angle  on  the  breast.  The  white  of
the  intermediate  space  has  become  much  purer ; here  and  there  light  tints
of  bronze  appear;  the  feet,  which  at  first  were  dull  yellow,  have  become  of
a rich  reddish-orange,  and  the  bill  is  pale  blue.  The  bird  is  now  capable
of  breeding,  although  its  full  plumage  is  not  obtained  until  the  next
moult,  when  the  colours  become  glossy  above,  and  the  white  of  the  breast
pure.

The  changes  which  the  males  undergo  are  less  remarkable.  They
are  at  first,  when  fully  fledged,  entirely  of  the  colour  seen  on  the  upper
parts  of  the  young  females ; and  the  tint  is  merely  improved  afterwards,
becoming  of  a deeper  brownish-black,  and  acquiring  purer  reflections  of
green,  purple  and  bronze,  which  in  certain  lights  are  seen  on  every  part
of  the  head,  neck  and  body,  and  in  very  old  males  on  the  wings  and
tail.  They  also  commence  breeding  the  third  spring.  But  I now  return
to  the  habits  of  this  interesting  bird.

The  Frigate  Pelican  is  possessed  of  a power  of  flight  which  I conceive
superior  to  that  of  perhaps  any  other  bird.  However  swiftly  the  Cayenne
Tern,  the  smaller  Gulls  or  the  Jager  move  on  wing,  it  seems  a matter  of
mere  sport  to  it  to  overtake  any  of  them.  The  Goshawk,  the  Peregrine,  and
the  Gyr  Falcon,  which  I conceive  to  be  the  swiftest  of  our  hawks,  are  ob-
liged to  pursue  their  victim,  should  it  be  a Green- winged  Teal  or  Passenger
Pigeon,  at  times  for  half  a mile,  at  the  highest  pitch  of  their  speed,  before
they  can  secure  them.  The  bird  of  which  I speak  comes  from  on  high  with
the  velocity  of  a meteor,  and  on  nearing  the  object  of  its  pursuit,  which
its  keen  eye  has  spied  while  fishing  at  a distance,  darts  on  either  side
to  cut  off  all  retreat,  and  with  open  bill  forces  it  to  drop  or  disgorge
the  fish  which  it  has  just  caught.  See  him  now  ! Yonder,  over  the
waves  leaps  the  brilliant  dolphin,  as  he  pursues  the  flying-fishes,  which
he  expects  to  seize  the  moment  they  drop  into  the  water.  The  Frigate
Bird,  who  has  marked  them,  closes  his  wings,  dives  toward  them,  and  now
ascending,  holds  one  of  the  tiny  things  across  his  bill.  Already  fifty
yards  above  the  sea,  he  spies  a porpoise  in  full  chase,  launches  towards
the  spot,  and  in  passing  seizes  the  mullet  that  had  escaped  from  its  dread-
ed foe ; but  now,  having  obtained  a fish  too  large  for  his  gullet,  he  rises,
munching  it  all  the  while,  as  if  bound  for  the  skies.  Three  or  four  of
his  own  tribe  have  watched  him  and  observed  his  success.  They  shoot
towards  him  on  broadly  extended  pinions,  rise  in  wide  circles,  smoothly,

I i


VOL.  III.


498


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


yet  as  swiftly  as  himself.  They  are  now  all  at  the  same  height,  and  each
as  it  overtakes  him,  lashes  him  with  its  wings,  and  tugs  at  his  prey.  See  !
one  has  fairly  robbed  him,  but  before  he  can  secure  the  contested  fish
it  drops.  One  of  the  other  birds  has  caught  it,  but  he  is  pursued  by
all.  From  bill  to  bill,  and  through  the  air,  rapidly  falls  the  fish,  un-
til it  drops  quite  dead  on  the  waters,  and  sinks  into  the  deep.  Whatever
disappointment  the  hungry  birds  feel,  they  seem  to  deserve  it  all.

Sights  bke  these  you  may  every  day  see,  if  you  take  ship  and  sail  for
the  Florida  Keys.  I have  more  to  tell  you,  however,  and  of  things  that
to  me  were  equally  pleasing.  While  standing  in  the  cool  veranda  of
Major  Glassel  of  the  United  States  army,  at  Key  West,  I observed  a
Frigate  Pelican  that  had  forced  a Cayenne  Tern,  yet  in  sight,  to  drop  a
fish,  which  the  broad- winged  warrior  had  seized  as  it  fell.  This  fish  was
rather  large  for  the  Tern,  and  might  probably  be  about  eight  inches  in
length.  The  Frigate  Pelican  mounted  with  it  across  his  bill  about  a
hundred  yards,  and  then  tossing  it  up  caught  it  as  it  fell,  but  not  in  the
proper  manner*  He  therefore  dropped  it,  but  before  it  had  fallen  many
yards,  caught  it  again.  Still  it  was  not  in  a good  position,  the  weight  of
the  head,  it  seemed,  having  prevented  the  bird  from  seizing  it  by  that
part.  A second  time  the  fish  was  thrown  upwards,  and  now  at  last  was
received  in  a convenient  manner,  that  is,  with  its  head  downwards,  and
immediately  swallowed.

When  the  morning  light  gladdens  the  face  of  nature,  and  while
the  warblers  are  yet  waiting  in  silence  the  first  rays  of  the  sun,  whose  ap-
pearance they  will  hail  with  songs  of  joy,  the  Frigate  Bird,  on  extended
pinions,  sails  from  his  roosting  place.  Slowly  and  gently,  with  retracted
neck  he  glides,  as  if  desirous  of  quietly  trying  the  renovated  strength  of
his  wings.  Toward  the  vast  deep  he  moves,  rising  apace,  and  before  any
other  bird  views  the  bright  orb  emerging  from  the  waters.  Pure  is  the
azure  of  the  heavens,  and  rich  the  deep  green  of  the  smooth  sea  below ;
there  is  every  prospect  of  the  finest  weather ; and  now  the  glad  bird
shakes  his  pinions  ; and  far  up  into  the  air,  far  beyond  the  reach  of  man’s
unaided  eye,  he  soars  in  his  quiet  but  rapid  flight.  There  he  floats  in
the  pure  air,  but  thither  can  fancy  alone  follow  him.  Would  that  I could
accompany  him  ! But  now  I see  him  again,  with  half-closed  wings,  gently
falling  towards  the  sea.  He  pauses  a while,  and  again  dives  through  the
air.  Thrice,  four  times,  has  he  gradually  approached  the  surface  of  the
ocean  ; now  he  shakes  his  pinions  as  violently  as  the  swordsman  whirls  his


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


499


claymore ; all  is  right ; and  he  sweeps  away,  shooting  to  this  side  and
that,  in  search  of  prey.

Mid-day  has  arrived,  and  threatening  clouds  obscure  the  horizon ; the
breeze,  ei’e  felt,  ruffles  the  waters  around  ; a thick  mist  advances  over  the
deep ; the  sky  darkens,  and  as  the  angry  blasts  curl  the  waves,  the  thun-
der mutters  afar ; all  nature  is  involved  in  gloom,  and  all  is  in  confusion,
save  only  the  Man-of-war  Bird,  who  gallantly  meets  the  gale.  If  he  can-
not force  his  way  against  the  storm,  he  keeps  his  ground,  balancing  him-
self like  a hawk  watching  his  prey  beneath  ; but  now  the  tempest  rages,
and  rising  obliquely,  he  shoots  away,  and  ere  long  surmounts  the  tumid -
tuous  clouds,  entering  a region  calm  and  serene,  where  he  floats  secure
until  the  world  below  has  resumed  its  tranquillity.

I have  frequently  observed  the  Frigate  Bird  scratch  its  head  with  its
feet  while  on  wing;  and  this  happening  one  day,  when  the  bird  fell  through
the  air,  as  it  is  accustomed  to  do  at  such  times,  until  it  came  within  shot,  I
killed  it  when  almost  over  my  head,  and  immediately  picked  it  up.  I
had  been  for  years  anxious  to  know  what  might  be  the  use  of  the  pecti-
nated claws  of  birds  ; and  on  examining  both  its  feet  with  a glass,  1 found
the  racks  crammed  with  insects,  such  as  occur  on  the  bird’s  head,  and  es-
pecially around  the  ears.  I also  observed  that  the  pectinated  claws  of
birds  of  this  species  were  much  longer,  flatter,  and  more  comb-bke  than
those  of  any  other  species  with  which  I am  acquainted.  I now  therefore
feel  convinced,  that,  however  useful  this  instrument  may  be  on  other  oc-
casions, it  is  certainly  employed  in  cleansing  parts  of  the  skin  of  birds
which  cannot  be  reached  by  the  bill.

At  times  these  birds  may  be  seen  chasing  and  jostling  each  other  as  if
engaged  in  a frolic,  after  which  they  bear  away  on  extended  wings,  and
fly  in  a direct  course  until  out  of  sight.  But  although  their  flight  is  easy
and  powerful,  in  a degree  not  surpassed  by  any  other  bird,  they  move
with  great  difficulty  on  the  ground.  They  can  rise,  however,  from  a sand-
bar, no  matter  how  low  and  level  it  may  be.  At  such  times,  as  well  as
when  sitting  on  the  water,  which  it  occasionally  does,  the  bird  raises  its
wings  almost  perpendicularly,  spreads  its  tail  half  erect,  and  at  the  first
flap  of  the  former,  and  simultaneous  stroke  of  the  latter,  on  the  ground
or  the  water,  bounces  away.  Its  feet,  however,  are  of  little  service  be-
yond what  I have  mentioned,  and  the  supporting  of  its  body  when  it  has
alighted  on  a branch,  on  which  it  rarely  stands  very  erect,  although  it
moves  sideways  on  it,  as  Parrots  sometimes  do.  It  never  dives,  its  bill

I i 2


500


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


in  form  resembling  that  of  the  Cormorants,  which  also  never  plunge  from
on  wing  in  pursuit  of  fish,  and  only  dip  into  the  water  when  dropping
from  a perch  or  a rock  to  escape  danger,  as  the  Anhingas  and  some  other
birds  are  also  accustomed  to  do.

When  the  Frigate  Pelican  is  in  want  of  a dead  fish,  a crab,  or  any
floating  garbage  suited  to  its  appetite,  it  approaches  the  water  in  the  man-
ner of  Gulls,  holding  its  wings  high,  and  beating  them  until  the  bill  has
performed  its  duty,  which  being  accomplished,  the  bird  immediately  rises
in  the  air  and  devours  its  prey.

These  birds  see  well  at  night,  although  they  never  go  to  sea  except-
ing by  day.  At  various  times  I have  accidentally  sailed  by  mangrove
keys  on  which  hundreds  were  roosted,  and  apparently  sound  asleep,  when,
on  my  firing  a gun  for  the  purpose  of  starting  whatever  birds  might  be
there,  they  would  all  take  to  wing  and  sail  as  beautifully  as  during  day,
returning  to  the  trees  as  the  boats  proceeded.  They  are  by  no  means
shy  ; indeed  they  seem  unaw^are  of  danger  from  a gun,  and  rarely  all  go
off  when  a party  is  shooting  at  them,  until  a considerable  number  has
been  obtained.  The  only  difficulty  I experienced  in  procuring  them  was
on  account  of  the  height  to  which  they  so  soon  rose  on  leaving  the  trees ;
but  we  had  excellent  guns,  and  our  worthy  pilot’s  “ Long  Tom”  dis-
tinguished itself  above  the  rest.  At  one  place,  where  we  found  many
hundreds  of  them,  they  sailed  for  nearly  half  an  hour  over  our  heads,  and
about  thirty  were  shot,  some  of  them  at  a remarkable  height,  when  w'e
could  hear  the  shot  strike  them,  and  when,  as  they  fell  to  the  water,  the
sound  of  their  great  wings  whirhng  through  the  air  resembled  that  pro-
duced by  a sail  flapping  during  a calm.  When  shot  at  and  touched  ever
so  slightly,  they  disgorge  their  food  in  the  manner  of  Vultures,  Gulls  and
some  Terns ; and  if  they  have  fallen  and  are  approached,  they  continue  to
vomit  the  contents  of  their  stomach,  which  at  times  are  extremely  putrid  and
nauseous.  When  seized,  they  evince  little  disposition  to  defend  themselves,
although  ever  so  slightly  wounded,  but  struggle  and  beat  themselves  until
killed.  Should  you,  however,  place  your  fingers  wdthin  their  open  bill,  you
might  not  withdraw  them  scatheless.

They  are  extremely  silent,  and  the  only  note  which  I heard  them
utter  was  a rough  croaking  one.  They  devour  the  young  of  the  Brow  n
Pelican  when  quite  small,  as  well  as  those  of  other  birds  whose  nests  are
flat  and  exposed  during  the  absence  of  the  parent  birds  ; but  their  own
young  suffer  in  the  same  manner  from  the  still  more  voracious  Turkey


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


.501


Buzzard.  The  notion  that  the  Frigate  Bird  forces  the  Pelicans  and
Boobies  to  disgorge  their  prey  is  erroneous.  The  Pelican,  if  attacked  or
pursued  by  this  bird,  could  alight  on  the  water  or  elsewhere,  and  by  one
stroke  of  its  sharp  and  powerful  bill  destroy  the  rash  aggressor.  The
Booby  would  in  all  probability  thrust  its  strong  and  pointed  bill  against
the  assailant  with  equal  success.  The  Cayenne  Tern,  and  other  species
of  that  genus,  as  well  as  several  small  Gulls,  all  abundant  on  the  Florida
coasts,  are  its  purveyors,  and  them  it  forces  to  disgorge  or  drop  their  prey.
Those  of  the  deep  are  the  dolphins,  porpoises,  and  occasionally  the  sharks.
Their  sight  is  wonderfully  keen,  and  they  now  and  then  come  down  from
a great  height  to  pick  up  a dead  fish  only  a few  inches  long  fioating  on
the  water.  Their  flesh  is  tough,  dark,  and,  as  food,  unfit  for  any  other
person  than  one  in  a state  of  starvation.

I have  given  a figure  of  a very  beautiful  old  male  in  spring  plumage,
which  was  selected  from  a great  number  of  all  ages.  I have  also  repre-
sented the  feet  of  an  individual  between  two  and  three  years  old,  on  ac-
count of  the  richness  of  their  colour  at  that  age,  whereas  in  the  adult
males  they  are  quite  black.

Pelecanus  Aquilus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  216.

Pelecanus  Aquilus,  i.eucocephalvs,  and  Palmerstoni,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.
vol.  ii.  pp.  885,  886.

Tachypetes  Aauii.us,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  406.

Frigate  Pelican,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  491.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXI.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  strong,  broader  than  deep,  excepting
towards  the  curved  extremity,  the  edges  irregularly  jagged.  Upper  man-
dible with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  concave,  at  the  tip  decurved,  its  ridge
broad  and  nearly  flat  at  the  base,  narrowed  and  more  convex  towards  the
end,  the  sides  separated  from  the  ridge  by  a narrow  groove,  convex,  the
edges  sharp  and  inflected,  with  a prominence  at  the  commencement  of  the
curve  of  the  elongated  compressed  hooked  point.  Nostrils  basal,  linear,
inconspicuous.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  extremely  long,  narrow,
the  membrane  bare  and  dilatable  into  a small  pouch,  the  very  short  dor-
sal line  decurved,  the  sides  erect  at  the  base,  convex  in  the  rest  of  their
extent,  the  edges  sharp  and  much  inflected,  at  the  narrow  tip  decurved.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong.  Neck  of  moderate  length,  stout.
Body  rather  slender.  Feet  very  short,  stout ; tibia  very  short ; tarsus


502


FRIGATE  PELICAN.


extremely  short,  feathered ; toes  all  placed  in  the  same  plane,  and  con-
nected by  short  reticulated  webs  with  concave  margins,  but  running  nar-
row along  the  sides ; they  are  scutellate  above,  broad  and  papillate  be-
neath; first  toe  small,  second  shorter  than  fourth,  third  much  longer  than
the  latter.  Claws  strong,  compressed,  curved,  acute,  that  of  middle  toe
long,  obliquely  flattened,  and  pectinate  on  the  inner  edge.

Eyelids  and  gular  sac,  with  the  anterior  part  of  the  neck,  bare.  Plu-
mage compact,  on  the  head,  neck,  breast,  and  back,  shining.  The  fea-
thers of  the  head,  neck,  and  back  are  lanceolate  and  acuminate ; of  the
breast  and  sides  broader ; of  the  wings  small  and  rounded.  Wings  ex-
tremely long,  pointed,  the  first  quill  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  diminishing ;
the  secondaries  very  short,  obliquely  rounded  and  acuminate,  the  inner
long  and  tapering.  Tail  very  long,  deeply  forked,  of  twelve  rounded
feathers,  the  outer  narrow  and  abruptly  rounded.

Bill  light  purplish-blue,  white  in  the  middle,  the  curved  tips  dusky.
Inside  of  mouth  carmine  ; gular  sac  orange.  Bare  space  about  the  eye
purplish-blue ; iris  deep  brown.  Feet  light  carm  ne  above,  orange  be-
neath. The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  brownish -black,  the  head,
neck,  back,  breast,  and  sides,  splendent  with  green  and  purple  reflections,
the  former  predominating  on  the  head,  the  latter  on  the  back.  The  wings
are  tinged  with  grey,  the  inner  secondaries  and  tail  with  brown ; the  shafts
of  the  former  black,  of  the  latter  brown.

I have  observed  in  specimens  which  I considered  to  be  very  old,  that
the  gular  sac  was  covered  with  pustules,  similar  to  those  found  at  times
around  the  base  of  the  mandibles  of  the  Catliartes  Aura,  and  which  ap-
pear to  be  the  effects  of  disease,  occasioned  by  their  coming  frequently
in  contact  with  putrid  substances.

Length  to  end  of  tail  41  inches,  to  end  of  wings  37 ; to  end  of  claws
24f ; wing  from  flexure  25,  tail  18;  extent  of  wings  86;  bill  along  the
back  5^,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  5-^^  ; tarsus  | ; middle  toe  2^,  its
claw  Weight  3 lb.  6 oz.

The  Adult  Female  differs  from  the  male  in  several  respects.  The
former  has  the  whole  plumage  dark-coloured,  whereas  the  latter  has  a
broad  white  space  on  the  breast,  that  colour  extending  forwards  along
the  sides  of  the  neck,  and  encircling  it  about  the  middle.  The  feathers
of  the  back  are  less  elongated  and  pointed,  and  their  lustre  is  much  in-
ferior to  that  of  the  male.  The  dark  parts  also  are  more  tinged  with
brown,  and  most  of  the  smaller  wing-coverts  are  of  the  latter  colour.


( 503  )


RICHARDSON’S  JAGER.

Lestris  Richardsonii,  Swains.

PLATE  CCLXXII.  Male  and  Young.

This  bird,  though  rare  on  the  coast  of  the  United  States,  visits  the
shores  of  Massachusetts  and  Maine,  where,  during  winter,  it  is  seen  over
the  bays  and  inlets,  to  which  various  species  of  Gulls  also  resort  at  the
same  season.  It  is  more  shy  and  difficult  to  be  approached  than  the  Po-
marine  Jager.  Its  flight  is  rapid  and  greatly  protracted ; and,  like  the
other  species  of  this  genus,  it  harasses  the  smaller  Gulls  and  Terns,  for-
cing them  to  disgorge  their  food.  Dr  Richardson  informs  us  that  it
breeds  in  considerable  numbers  in  the  barren  grounds,  at  a distance  from
the  coast,  and  that  it  feeds  on  testaceous  mollusca,  which  are  plentiful  in
the  small  lakes  of  the  fur  countries.  I am  unable  to  afford  any  informa-
tion respecting  its  habits ; nor  can  I state  decidedly  the  number  of  eggs
which  it  lays,  although  I have  procured  several  of  them.  They  measure
two  inches  and  three-eighths  in  length,  by  one  inch  and  five-eighths  in
breadth,  are  of  an  oval  rather  pointed  form,  and  have  a dull  greyish-yel-
low ground,  patched  with  umber  and  faint  purple,  the  markings  closer
towards  the  larger  end.  I am  extremely  doubtful  as  to  the  right  which
this  bird  has  to  rank  as  a species  distinct  from  L.  parasiticus.


Lestris  Richardsonii,  Richardson’s  Jager,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.

Amer.  part  ii.  p.  433. — ^uttall,  INIanual,  vol.  ii.  p.  319.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCLXXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  straight,  the  tip
curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  toward  the  end
curved,  the  ridge  broad  and  convex,  the  sides  separated  from  the  ridge
by  a narrow  groove,  extremely  narrow  and  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and
inflected,  the  tip  compressed,  rather  obtuse.  Nostrils  in  the  fore  part  of
the  nasal  groove,  nearer  the  tip  than  the  base,  submarginal,  pervious,
linear-oblong,  wider  anteriorly.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and
narrow,  a slight  prominence  at  its  extremity,  beyond  which  the  dorsal
line  is  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  sloping  outwards  and  convex,  the
edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  obliquely  truncate  and  rather  obtuse.


504


RICHARDSON’S  JAGER.


Head  rather  small,  oblong,  much  narrowed  before.  Neck  of  moderate
length.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  rather  short,  and  of  moderate  strength ;
tibia  bare  at  its  lower  part ; tarsus  anteriorly  covered  with  broad  decurv-
ed  scutella,  on  the  sides  with  oblong  scales,  behind  with  smaller  oblong
prominent  scales ; hind  toe  extremely  small  and  elevated,  the  fore  toes  of
moderate  size,  connected  by  reticulated  webs,  which  have  their  margins
convex  ; the  third  toe  longest,  the  fourth  a little  shorter,  the  second  con-
siderably shorter  ; all  covered  above  with  numerous  scutella,  the  lateral
ones  margined  externally  with  small  prominent  scales  directed  forwards.
Claws  of  moderate  size,  curved,  acute,  compressed,  that  of  third  toe  with
a sharp  inner  edge.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  soft,  and  blended  ; the  fea-
thers on  the  back  and  wings  rather  compact  and  distinct.  Wings  very
long,  rather  broad,  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering  and  rounded,  the
first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondary  rather  short,  obliquely
rounded.  Tail  feathers  of  moderate  length,  excepting  the  two  middle,
which  extend  beyond  the  rest  and  taper  to  a point,  the  other  feathers
broad  and  rounded,  there  being  twelve  in  all.

Bill  greyish-black,  the  upper  part  bluish.  Iris  brown.  Legs  and  feet
black.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  of  a sooty  brown,  the  upper
part  of  the  head,  the  primary  quills,  and  the  tail  darker,  the  breast  and
abdomen  lighter ; the  shafts  of  the  primary  quills  white,  of  the  tail  feathers
brownish.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  17  ; extent  of  wings
40;  wing  from  flexure  12|;  tail  8^,  the  middle  feathers  longer  than
the  rest;  bill  along  the  back  l^V)  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1| ;
tarsus  ; middle  toe  its  claw

Young  Bird  in  September.  Plate  CCLXXII.  Fig.  2.

Bill  light  blue,  dusky  at  the  end.  Iris  brown.  Tarsi  and  basal  poi-
tion  of  the  toes  and  webs  light  blue,  the  rest  black.  The  general  colour
of  the  plumage  is  sooty  brown,  lighter  on  the  neck  and  lower  parts  ; the
feathers  of  the  back  are  all  tipped  with  whitish,  and  the  breast,  sides,  lower
wing-coverts,  abdomen,  and  lower  tail-coverts,  are  undulatingly  barred
with  pale  greyish-yellow.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  13|,  to  end  of  claws
13^  ; wing  from  flexure  11 1 ; tail  61,  the  middle  feathers  only  | longer
than  the  rest ; bill  along  the  back  IJ  ; tarsus  1^  ; middle  toe  and  claw
li.  Weight  7 oz.


( 505  )


THE  CAYENNE  TERN.

Sterna  cayana,  Lath.

PLATE  CCLXXIII.  Male.

On  reaching  the  entrance  of  the  little  port  of  St  Augustine  in  East
Florida,  I observed  more  Cayenne  Terns  together  than  I had  ever  before
seen.  I had  afterwards  good  opportunities  of  watching  them  both  during
that  season  and  the  following,  about  the  Keys.  Their  shyness  surprised
me  not  a little,  especially  as  they  are  very  seldom  molested,  and  it  was
such  that  I could  study  their  habits  only  with  the  aid  of  a good  glass.  I
found  them  at  first  in  great  flocks,  composed  of  several  hundred  individuals,
along  with  Razor-billed  Shearwaters,  which  also  congregated  there  in
great  numbers.  During  low  water,  both  species  resorted  to  a large  flat
sand-bar  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  where  they  reposed  until  the  re-
turn of  the  tide,  sitting  close  together,  in  an  easy  posture,  with  their  heads
facing  the  breeze.  They  kept  separate,  however,  placing  themselves  in
parallel  lines  twenty  or  thirty  paces  asunder,  and  either  lay  flat  on  the
sand,  or  stood  up  and  plumed  themselves.  My  attempts  to  procure  some
of  them  were  always  futile,  for  they  flew  off  when  I was  yet  several  hun-
dred yards  distant,  and  moved  directly  towards  the  sea.  It  was  pleasing  to
see  the  whole  of  these  birds  take  to  wing  at  the  same  moment,  the  jetty
hue  of  the  Shearwaters  contrasting  with  the  pale  blue  of  the  Terns,  and
the  brilliantly-coloured  bills  of  both  species,  their  different  modes  of
flight,  and  their  various  evolutions  presenting  a most  agreeable  sight.  The
Terns  on  these  occasions  constantly  emitted  their  harsh  loud  cries,  while
the  Shearwaters  moved  in  perfect  silence.  After  spending  several  days
in  unsuccessful  endeavours  to  approach  them,  I employed  several  boats,
which  advanced  towards  the  sands  at  several  points,  and  we  shot  as  many
as  we  wished,  for  as  the  flocks  passed  over  any  of  the  boats,  several  indi-
viduals were  brought  down  at  once,  on  which  the  rest  would  assail  the
gunners,  as  if  determined  to  rescue  their  brethren,  and  thus  afford  sub-
jects for  them  on  which  to  exercise  their  skill.  We  found  it  necessary  to
use  large  shot,  the  Cayenne  Tern  being  a strong  and  tough  bird,  the  lar-
gest of  the  genus  met  with  on  our  Atlantic  coasts.  When  wounded,  how-
ever slightly,  they  disgorged  in  the  manner  of  Vultures;  and  when  brought


50C


CAYENNE  TERN.


to  the  water  disabled,  they  at  once  endeavoured  to  make  off  from  the
shores,  swimming  with  buoyancy  and  grace,  though  without  making  much
progress.  When  seized  they  at  once  erected  their  beautiful  crest,  threw
up  the  contents  of  their  stomach,  uttered  loud  cries,  and  bit  severely.
One  that  was  merely  touched  in  the  wing,  and  brought  ashore,  through
a high  surf,  by  my  Newfoundland  dog,  stuck  fast  to  his  nose  until  forced
to  relinquish  its  hold  by  having  its  throat  squeezed,  after  which  it  dis-
gorged seven  partially  digested  fishes.

Although  the  Cayenne  Tern  often  searches  for  food  over  the  sea,  and
at  times  several  miles  from  the  shore,  it  gives  a decided  preference  to  the
large  inlets  running  parallel  to  the  coast  of  the  Floridas,  within  the  high
sandy  embankments,  as  well  as  the  rivers  in  the  interior  of  the  peninsula.
They  alight  on  the  banks  of  racoon  oysters,  so  abundant  in  the  inlets,
and  are  seen  in  company  with  the  Semipalmated  Snipe  and  the  American
Oystercatcher,  searching  for  food  like  these  birds,  and  devouring  crabs
and  such  fishes  as  are  confined  in  small  shallow  pools.  These  they  catch
with  considerable  agility,  in  a manner  not  employed  by  any  of  our  other
Terns.  While  on  the  St  John’s  River,  I saw  them  alight  on  stakes,  in
the  manner  of  the  Marsh  Tern  and  the  Noddy  ; and  as  I ascended  that
stream,  I often  saw  them,  at  the  distance  of  seventy  miles  from  the  sea,
perched  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  on  the  same  sticks  as  the  Florida
Cormorants,  and  found  them  more  easily  approached  in  the  dusk  than
during  broad  daylight.  Until  then  I had  supposed  this  species  to  be  en-
tirely oceanic,  and  averse  from  mingling  with  any  other.

The  flight  of  the  Cayenne  Tern  is  strong  and  well  sustained,  although
less  lively  or  graceful  than  that  of  the  smaller  species,  excepting  on  par-
ticular occasions.  They  usually  incline  their  bill  downwards,  as  they
search  for  their  prey,  like  the  other  Terns,  but  keep  at  a much  greater
height,  and  plunge  towards  the  waters  with  the  speed  of  an  arrow,  to  seize
on  small  fishes,  of  which  they  appear  to  capture  a great  number,  espe-
cially of  the  “ mullets,”  which  we  saw  moving  about  in  shoals,  composed
of  individuals  of  different  sizes.  When  travelling,  these  birds  generally
proceed  in  lines ; and  it  requires  the  power  of  a strong  gale  to  force  them
back,  or  even  to  impede  their  progress,  for  they  beat  to  windward  with
remarkable  vigour,  rising,  falling,  and  tacking  to  right  and  left,  so  as  to
seize  every  possible  opportunity  of  making  their  way.  In  calm  and  plea-
sant weather,  they  pass  at  a great  height,  Avith  strong  unremitted  flap-
pings, uttering  at  intervals  their  cries,  Avhich  so  nearly  resemble  the  shriek-


CAYENNE  TERN.


307


ing  notes  of  our  little  Parrakeet,  that  I have  often  for  a moment  thought
I heard  the  latter,  when  in  fact  it  was  only  the  Tern.  At  times  their
cries  resemble  the  syllables  lewee-reek,  repeated  several  times  in  succes-
sion, and  so  loudly  as  to  be  heard  at  the  distance  of  half  a mile  or  more,
especially  when  they  have  been  disturbed  at  their  breeding  places,  on
which  occasion  they  manifest  all  the  characteristic  violence  of  their  tribe,
although  they  are  much  more  guarded  than  any  other  species  with  which
I am  acquainted,  and  generally  keep  at  a considerable  distance  from  their
unwelcome  visitors.

On  the  11th  May  1832,  I found  the  Cayenne  Terns  breeding  on  one
of  the  Tortugas.  There  they  had  dropped  their  eggs  on  the  bare  sand,
a few  yards  above  high-water  mark,  and  none  of  the,  birds  paid  much  at-
tention to  them  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  You  may  judge  of  my  sur-
prise when,  on  meeting  with  this  Tern  breeding  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,
on  the  18th  of  June  1833, 1 found  it  sitting  on  two  eggs  deposited  in  a nest
neatly  formed  of  moss  and  placed  on  the  rocks,  and  this  on  a small  island,  in
a bay  more  than  twelve  miles  from  our  harbour,  which  itself  was  at  some
distance  from  the  open  Gulf.  On  another  equally  sequestered  islet,
some  were  found  amidst  a number  of  nests  of  our  Common  Gull ; and,
during  my  stay  in  that  country,  I observed  that  this  Tern  rarely  went
to  the  vicinity  of  the  outer  coast,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  food,  pro
bably  because  there  was  an  extreme  abundance  of  small  fishes  of  several
kinds  in  every  creek  or  bay.  Until  that  period  I was  not  aware  that  any
Tern  could  master  the  Lestris  Pomarinus,  to  which,  however,  I there  saw
the  Cayenne  Tern  give  chase,  didving  it  away  from  the  islands  on  which
it  had  its  eggs.  On  such  occasions,  I observed  that  the  Tern’s  power  of
flight  greatly  exceeded  that  of  the  Jager;  but  the  appearance  of  the
Great  Black-backed  Gull  never  failed  to  fill  it  with  dismay,  for  although
of  quicker  flight,  none  of  the  Terns  dared  to  encounter  that  bird,  any
more  than  they  would  venture  to  attack  the  Frigate  Pelican  in  the
Florid  as.

The  Cayenne  Tern  usually  lays  two  eggs ; in  a few  instances  I found
only  one,  and  I concluded  that  no  more  had  been  laid,  as  it  contained  a
chick,  which  would  not  have  been  there  had  the  Great  Gull  ever  visited
the  nest.  The  eggs  measure  two  inches  and  six-eighths  in  length,  by
one  inch  and  six  and  a half  eighths  in  breadth,  and  are  rather  sharp  at
the  smaller  end.  They  have  a pale  yellowish  ground  colour,  irregularly
spotted  with  dai'k  umber  and  faint  purplish  marks,  dispersed  all  over


508


CAYENNE  TERN.


but  not  close.  The  eggs,  like  those  of  the  other  species,  afford  good
eating.

I never  saw  the  young  of  this  bird  M'hile  small,  and  cannot  speak  of
the  changes  which  they  undergo  from  their  first  state  until  autumn.
Then,  however,  they  greatly  resemble  the  young  of  the  Sandwich  Tern,
their  colour  being  on  the  upper  parts  of  a dark  greyish-brown,  trans-
versely marked  with  umber,  and  on  the  lower  dull  white.  While  in  this
plumage,  they  keep  by  themselves,  in  flocks  of  fifty  or  more  individuals,
and  remain  separated  from  the  old  birds  until  spring,  when  they  have
acquired  the  full  beauty  of  their  plumage,  although  they  appear  rather
inferior  in  size.

My  surprise  at  finding  this  species  breeding  in  Labrador  was  increased
by  the  circumstance  of  its  being  of  rare  occurrence  at  any  season  along
the  coasts  of  our  Middle  and  Eastern  Districts.  Nor  does  it  become
abundant  until  you  reach  the  shores  of  North  Carolina,  beyond  which  it
increases  the  farther  south  you  proceed.  It  winters  in  the  Floridas,  and
along  the  shores  of  the  Mexican  Gulf;  but  I never  saw  it  far  up  the
Mississippi.  While  on  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  on  the  14th  of
August,  I saw  several  individuals  on  their  way  southward,  flying  very
high,  and  keeping  up  their  remarkable  cries.

The  flesh  of  every  species  of  Tern  is  oily,  like  that  of  the  Gulls  and
Jagers,  and  the  smallest  hole  made  by  shot  affords  an  exit  to  the  grease,
which  is  apt  to  destroy  the  beauty  of  their  elastic  plumage,  so  that  it  is
very  difficult  to  preserve  them,  both  on  account  of  this  circumstance,  and
of  the  quantity  of  oil  that  flows  from  their  bill.  In  no  species  have  I
found  this  to  be  more  remarkably  the  case  than  in  the  Cayenne  Tern.


Sterna  cayana,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  804 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds
of  the  United  States,  p.  353.

Cayenne  Tern,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  268.


Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCLXXIII.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  stout,  nearly  straight,  compressed,  very
acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched,  the  ridge
broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  the  sides  con-
vex, the  edges  sharp  and  direct,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  short ; nos-
trils basal,  lateral,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the
angle  very  narrow,  acute,  extending  to  the  middle,  the  dorsal  line  straight,


CAYENNE  TERN.


509


the  sides  slightly  convex,  nearly  erect,  the  sharp  edges  inflected,  the  tip
very  acute.

Head  rather  large,  oblong  ; neck  of  moderate  length  and  thick  ; body
rather  slender  ; feet  short,  stout.  Tibia  bare  for  a considerable  space  ;
tarsus  short,  roundish,  covered  all  round  with  small  scales ; first  toe  very
small,  third  longest,  fourth  a little  shorter,  the  anterior  connected  by  re-
ticulated webs  having  an  incurved  margin ; claws  slightly  curved,  com-
pressed, acute,  that  of  hind  toe  smallest,  of  middle  toe  by  much  the  largest,
and  having  the  inner  edge  thin  and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  fore  part  of'  the  head
elongated  behind,  rather  compact  on  the  back  and  wings.  Wings  ex-
tremely long,  narrow,  and  pointed  ; primary  quills  tapering  but  rounded,
the  first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondary  short,  rather  nar-
row, tapering,  rounded.  Tail  long,  deeply  forked,  of  twelve  feathers,  of
which  the  outer  taper  to  a rounded  point.

Rill  bright  carmine,  the  tips  paler.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  black.
The  top  of  the  head  and  occiput  is  greenish  black  ; the  back  and  wings
light  greyish-blue;  the  primary  quills  bluish-grey  on  their  outer  webs,
darker  on  the  outer  part  of  the  inner,  their  inner  part  white,  as  are  the
ends  and  inner  webs  of  the  secondaries ; upper  tail-coverts  and  tail  grey-
ish-white ; all  the  other  parts  are  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  19  inches,  to  end  of  wings  ; extent  of
wings  44 ; wing  from  flexure  15 ; tail  7 ; bill  along  the  back  2|,  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  l^  ; tarsus  S/g  ; middle  toe  1,  its  claw
Weight  144  oz.

The  figure  of  the  Crab  in  the  plate  was  introduced  on  account  of  its
singularly  bright  red  colour,  which,  when  the  animal  is  boiled,  changes
to  pale  yellow.  It  is  rather  common  along  the  rocky  shores  of  some  of
the  Florida  Keys,  and  is  excellent  eating.


( )


THE  SEMIPALMATED  SNIPE,  OR  WILLET.

ToTANUS  SEMIPALMATUS,  TemM.

PLATE  CCLXXIV.  Male  and  Female.

Many  individuals  of  this  fine  species  spend  the  winter  in  our  Southern
States,  and  the  extent  of  its  migration  northwards  is  comparatively  limit-
ed. Some  are  occasionally  seen  as  far  eastward  as  the  neighbourhood  of
Boston,  and  a few  have  been  known  to  breed  not  far  from  New  Bedford  in
Massachusetts  ; but  beyond  that  state  the  species  may  be  said  to  be  un-
known. Their  propensity  to  remain  at  all  seasons  in  the  immediate  vici-
nity of  the  coast  is  such,  that  they  are  very  seldom  met  with  far  inland,
even  along  large  rivers,  on  the  margins  of  which  they  might  find  the  food
they  usually  prefer.  I once  shot  one  in  autumn  on  the  lower  part  of  the
Ohio,  but  it  was  much  emaciated,  and  I concluded  that  its  appearance
there  was  merely  accidental.  From  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  to  New
York  it  is  pretty  generally  found  during  the  breeding  season  ; but  all  the
individuals  betake  themselves  in  winter  to  the  shores  of  Carolina,  Georgia,
Florida,  and  the  countries  bordering  the  Mexican  Gulf.  I have  very
little  doubt  that  those  seen  by  Mr  Say  on  the  banks  of  the  Missouri  had
accidentally  visited  that  country,  as  the  favourite  haunts  of  this  species  at
all  seasons  are  the  salt-marshes  and  sea-shores.  It  is  well  ascertained  that
it  occurs  on  the  western  coast,  and  I have  seen  many  skins  of  it  recently
brought  from  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia  River.  It  is  probably  from
thence  that  it  migrates  to  the  shores  of  the  Saskatchewan,  where  it  was
observed  by  Dr  Richardson  along  the  small  saline  lakes.

In  the  Middle  States,  the  Semipalmated  Snipe  is  known  to  every  fish-
erman gunner  by  the  name  of  “ Willet and  from  the  Carolinas  south-
ward by  that  of  “ Stone  Curlew.”  In  the  latter  districts,  during  autumn
and  winter,  it  resorts  to  the  stony  shores  of  estuaries,  the  banks  of  racoon
oysters,  and  the  extensive  salt-marshes  so  common  there  along  the  coast.
On  the  1st  of  May  1832,  while  rambling  over  some  large  and  partially
submersed  islets  of  the  Floridas  called  Duck  Keys,  scantily  covered  with
bushes  and  some  mangroves,  I saw  a good  number  of  these  birds  in  com-
pany with  the  Great  Marbled  Godwit.  The  Willets  were  all  paired
and  very  clamorous,  although  we  found  none  of  their  nests.  To  my  grea


SEMIPALMATED  SNIPE.


511


surprise,  I saw  them  alight  on  the  bushes  and  trees  with  as  much  ease  as
if  they  had  been  land  birds,  stand  erect,  open  their  wings  to  the  sun,  and
await  our  approach,  exhibiting,  when  thus  perched,  much  less  shyness
than  when  on  the  ground.  Until  then  I had  never  observed  such  a habit
in  this  bird,  and  indeed  had  felt  surprised  at  seeing  the  Bartram  Snipe,
Totanus  Bartramius,  alight  on  fences  and  trees.  Nothing  of  this  kind  is
mentioned  by  Wilson,  who,  however,  speaks  of  both  species  as  if  he  were
well  acquainted  with  their  habits.  A few  days  after  my  visit  to  the  Duck
Keys,  some  nests  containing  eggs  were  found  on  other  islets  not  far  dis-
tant.

Along  the  shores  of  the  Carolinas,  this  species  begins  to  lay  about  the
beginning  of  April ; but  in  the  Middle  States,  in  New  Jersey,  for  example,
it  seldom  makes  its  appearance  before  the  15th  of  April,  and  does  not  be-
gin to  breed  until  a month  later.  At  the  approach  of  the  love  season,
the  Willets  shew  a great  degree  of  vivacity,  ramble  much  on  wing,  and
fill  the  air  with  their  sharp  cries.  Once  mated,  they  attend  to  the  secu-
rity of  their  eggs  and  brood  with  affectionate  care,  and  are  silent  until  dis-
turbed by  the  approach  of  some  of  their  numerous  enemies.  The  sight
of  a Crow,  a Turkey  Buzzard,  a quadruped  of  any  kind,  and  more  espe-
cially of  a gunner,  at  once  excites  the  greatest  alarm ; and,  rising  on  wing,
they  fly  above  and  around  you  at  a considerable  distance,  vociferating
their  anger  with  great  vehemence,  and  continually  endeavouring  to  allure
you  away  from  the  spot  where  their  treasure  is  concealed.  Should  they
have  young  broods,  they  not  unfrequently  alight  within  sight,  emit  click-
ing and  querulous  notes,  raise  their  wings  upright,  and  run  over  the
ground  as  if  wounded,  moving  in  so  pitiable  a manner  as  frequently  to
excite  a good  feeling  towards  them  in  the  gunner,  who,  should  he  be  a
parent  himself,  is  almost  sure  to  leave  them  unmolested.  When  much
pursued,  the  birds  join  and  form  a flock,  the  individuals  of  which  con-
tinue to  wheel  through  the  air,  at  some  distance  from  their  nests,  until
their  enemy  has  departed.

The  Semipalmated  Snipe  is  at  all  times  a shy  and  wary  bird,  so  that
in  approaching  it  the  sportsman  requires  to  use  the  greatest  caution.  The
method  which  I found  most  effectual  was  to  employ  a well-trained  dog,
and  conceal  myself  among  the  rankest  herbage  of  the  marshes.  The
Willets  rarely  failed  to  fly  close  over  the  dog,  and  as  he  now  and  then,
playfully,  as  it  were,  approached  me,  the  birds  came  within  shooting  dis-
tance. On  such  occasions,  if  one  is  brought  down,  another  may  follow.


512


SEMIPALM ATED  SNIPE.


provided  the  sportsman  is  quick;  but,  after  being  thus  shot  at,  the  Wil-
lets  generally  take  a long  circuit,  and  remove  towards  some  clear  spot  near
the  water,  where  they  alight  and  watch  your  motions.  The  cries  of  one
suffice  to  alarm  all  M'ithin  hearing,  and  you  see  all  of  them  with  out-
stretched legs  and  necks  running  away  as  you  approach.  Often  at  the
very  instant  when  you  are  preparing  to  shoot,  they  all  rise  on  wing,  fly
across  some  bay  or  creek,  and  betake  themselves  to  the  marsh,  where  they
are  safe  from  your  pursuit.

During  winter  you  frequently  see  these  birds  in  the  Southern  States
along  the  naked  shores.  The  moment  they  see  you  the  cry  of  alarm  is
sounded,  and  the  flock,  which  now  consists  of  one,  two,  or  perhaps  three
families,  suffer  you  to  come  almost  within  shot,  as  if  purposely  to  tanta-
lize you,  but  at  this  moment  fly  off*  circuitously  over  the  water,  and  alight
at  the  distance  of  some  hundred  yards.  At  such  times  you  may  procure
them  by  floating  your  boat  quietly  along  the  shores ; but  the  experiment
rarely  succeeds  on  the  same  flock  more  than  once.  When  they  are  on
large  racoon-oyster  beds,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  approach  them ; and
if  there  should  be  a few  Curlews  or  Oyster-catchers  among  them,  it  were
better  for  you  to  go  in  search  of  some  other  game.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  strong,  rapid,  and  greatly  protracted.  Its
movements  on  wing  greatly  resemble  those  of  the  Oyster-catcher,  and,
unless  during  the  breeding  season,  are  performed  low  over  the  waters.
They  seldom  rise  without  emitting  their  usual  notes,  which  resemble  the
syllables  wiH-willet,  or  zeill,  will,  willet,  and  are  different  from  the  softer
and  more  prolonged  whistling  notes  which  they  emit  during  the  love  sea-
son.  They  genei'ally  travel  in  flocks,  even  in  spring,  and  congregate  for
the  purpose  of  breeding,  being  attracted  when  passing  by  the  notes  of
those  which  have  already  arrived  at  a chosen  spot.  The  males  and  females
remain  together  until  autumn,  when  several  families  join  and  live  peace-
ably together.  When  wounded  and  brought  to  the  water,  they  swim
tolerably  well,  but  do  not  dive,  although  they  now  and  then,  on  being
approached,  try  to  submerse  themselves.

The  Willets  retire  to  the  interior  of  the  larger  salt-marshes  for  the
purpose  of  forming  their  nests  and  raising  their  broods  in  security.  There,
in  the  vicinity  of  the  shallow  pools,  which  frequently  occur  in  such  places,
the  bird  prepares  a nest  on  the  ground,  among  the  rank  grass,  of  which  the
tenement  itself  is  composed.  It  is  usually  raised  to  the  height  of  from
three  to  five  inches,  and  is,  I believe,  annually  augmented  or  repaired.


SEMIPALMATED  SNIPE.


513


Wilson  says  that  this  augmentation  or  raising  of  the  nest  is  carried  on
whilst  the  Willet  is  laying  and  sitting;  but  this  I have  never  observed.
The  eggs,  usually  four  in  number,  are  placed  with  the  broad  end  outwards,
as  is  the  case  with  those  of  most  birds  of  this  tribe.  They  measure  two
inches  and  one-eighth  in  length,  by  one  inch  and  a half  in  breadth,  are
much  flattened  at  the  larger  end,  and  more  or  less  pointed  at  the  other.
The  shell  is  smooth,  of  a dull  yellowish-olive  tint,  irregularly  spotted  and
blotched  with  dark  umber.  The  eggs  afford  excellent  eating.  Both  birds
incubate,  sitting  alternately  day  and  night.  The  young  run  about  on
leaving  the  shell,  and  are  carefully  fed  by  their  parents.  They  are  of  a
greyish  hue,  and  covered  with  down,  but  soon  shew  feathers,  grow  rapid-
ly, become  fat  and  juicy,  and  by  the  time  they  are  able  to  fly,  afford  excel-
lent food.  At  the  first  moult  they  acquire  their  full  plumage.

The  food  of  the  Willet  consists  of  aquatic  insects,  small  crabs,  and
fiddlers,  which  they  procure  either  by  pursuing  them  on  foot  or  by  prob-
ing for  them  in  their  burrows,  along  the  mud  bars,  and  in  the  crevices  of
the  creeks  and  salt-water  ditches.  I have  also  observed  it  turning  over
stones  and  shells  to  seek  for  worms  beneath  them.

The  males  are  smaller  than  the  females.  I have  presented  you  with
figures  of  the  adult  both  in  the  winter  and  summer  plumage.

ScoLOPAX  SEMiVALMATUs,  Lath.  Iiid.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  722.

Totanus  semipalmatus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,
p.  323.

Semipalmated  Snipe,  Scolopax  semipalmata,  Wits.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  27.
pi.  56.  fig.3.

Totanus  semipalmatus,  Semipalmated  Tatler,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna-
Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  388.

Semipalmated  Snipe  or  Willet,  NuttaM,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  144.

Adult  Male  in  spring.  Plate  CCLXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  long,  slender,  compressed,  tapering,  straight  or  recurved  in  an  al-
most imperceptible  degree.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,
the  ridge  convex,  flattened  at  the  base,  the  sides  grooved  to  the  middle,
afterwards  convex,  the  edges  broad  and  flattened,  the  breadth  of  the
mandible  a little  increased  towards  tbe  point,  which  is  narrowed,  slightly
deflected  and  obtuse.  Nostrils  subbasal,  linear,  pervious,  nearer  the  edge
than  the  dorsal  line.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  narrow  and

K k


VOL.  III.


514


SEMIPALMATED  SNIPE.


medial,  beyond  it  the  outline  slightly  ascending  and  straight,  sides  grooved
as  far  as  the  angle,  and  convex,  the  edges  broad  and  flat,  the  point  nar-
row and  slightly  incurved.

Head  small,  oblong,  narrowed  before.  Neck  rather  long,  slender.
Body  slender.  Feet  long  and  slender ; tibia  bare  for  nearly  half  its  length,
scutellate  before  and  behind ; tarsus  long,  slender,  covered  before  and  be-
hind with  numerous  scutella,  the  narrow  lateral  spaces  with  extremely
small  oblong  scales.  Toes  small,  slender,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,
marginate,  the  anterior  toes  connected  by  basal  membranes  which  extend
along  their  sides,  the  outer  membrane  larger  than  the  inner ; first  toe  ex-
tremely small,  second  and  fourth  about  equal,  third  little  longer.  Claws
small,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  obtuse,  that  of  third  toe  with  a dilated
inner  edge.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short,
on  the  neck  short  and  very  soft.  Wings  long,  very  acute,  narrow ; pri-
maries tapering  and  rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  second  little  shorter,
the  rest  rapidly  graduated;  secondaries  obliquely  rounded,  the  inner
elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  of  twelve  narrow,  rounded  feathers,
the  two  middle  ones  a little  longer  than  the  rest.

Bill  light  blue,  dusky  towards  the  end.  Iris  brown.  Feet  light  blue;
claws  black.  Head  and  neck  brownish-grey,  streaked  with  blackish-
brown  ; the  throat,  and  a band  from  the  bill  over  the  eye  white.  Fore
part  of  back  and  scapulars  brownish-grey,  variegated  with  central  mark-
ings and  bars  of  blackish-brown  ; the  hind  part  of  the  back  brownish-grey
with  a gloss  of  olive.  Wing-coverts  grey  with  central  lines  of  brownish-
black  ; primary  coverts  and  primary  quills  brownish-black,  but  the  latter
white  in  their  basal  half ; outer  secondaries  white,  inner  like  the  scapulars.
Lower  wing-coverts  dusky  ; breast  and  sides  white,  the  latter  undulatingly
barred  with  brownish-black ; abdomen  and  lower  and  upper  tail-coverts
white,  some  of  them,  however,  with  a few  dusky  bars.  The  four  middle
tail-feathers  are  barred  with  brownish-black  and  brownish-grey,  the  rest
pale  grey  fading  to  white  on  the  outer,  and  all  more  or  less  minutely
mottled  with  pale  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  15,  to  end  of  claws
17i  ; extent  of  wings  27| ; wing  from  flexure  ; tail  3/^  ; bill  along  the
back  ; along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  9.^^  ; tarsus  2^ ; middle
toe  l-/j,  its  claw  i.  Weight  7 oz.


SEMIPALMATED  SNIPE.


515


Adult  Female  in  winter.  Plate  CCLXXIV.  Fig.  2.

In  winter  the  upper  parts  are  light  brownish-grey,  the  fore  part  of  the
neck  and  the  sides  of  the  same  colour  but  paler ; the  throat,  breast,  ab
domen,  and  rump  white ; the  lower  and  upper  tail-coverts  with  a few  un-
dulated lines  of  brownish-grey  ; the  wings  as  in  summer ; as  is  the  tail,
only  that  the  middle  feathers  are  grey.

Length  15|  inches;  wing  from  flexure  85;  extent  of  wings  31;
tail  ; bill  along  the  back  2/g,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ;

tarsus  \j\  ; middle  toe  I/5,  its  claw  Weight  10  oz.


K k 2


( 516  )


- THE  NODDY  TERN.

Sterna  stolida,  Linn.

PLATE  CCLXXV.

About  the  beginning  of  May,  the  Noddies  collect  from  all  parts  of
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  the  coasts  of  Florida,  for  the  purpose  of  re-
turning to  their  breeding  places,  on  one  of  the  Tortugas  called  Noddy
Key.  They  nearly  equal  in  number  the  Sooty  Terns,  which  also  breed  on
an  island  a few  miles  distant.  The  Noddies  form  regular  nests  of  twigs
and  dry  grass,  which  they  place  on  the  bushes  or  low  trees,  but  never  on  the
ground.  On  visiting  their  island  on  the  1 1th  of  May  1832, 1 was  surprised
to  see  that  many  of  them  were  repairing  and  augmenting  nests  that  had  re-
mained through  the  winter,  while  others  were  employed  in  constructing  new
ones,  and  some  were  already  sitting  on  their  eggs.  In  a great  many  in-
stances, the  repaired  nests  formed  masses  nearly  two  feet  in  height,  and
yet  all  of  them  had  only  a slight  hollow  for  the  eggs,  broken  shells  of
which  were  found  among  the  entire  ones,  as  if  they  had  been  purposely
placed  there.  The  birds  did  not  discontinue  their  labours,  although  there
were  nine  or  ten  of  us  walking  among  the  bushes,  and  when  we  had  gone
a few  yards  into  the  thicket,  thousands  of  them  flew  quite  low  over  us,
some  at  times  coming  so  close  as  to  enable  us  to  catch  a few  of  them  with
the  hand.  On  one  side  might  be  seen  a Noddy  carrying  a stick  in  its  bill,
or  a bird  picking  up  something  from  the  ground  to  add  to  its  nest ; on
the  other  several  were  seen  sitting  on  their  eggs  unconscious  of  danger,
while  their  mates  brought  them  food.  The  greater  part  rose  on  wing  as
we  advanced,  but  re-alighted  as  soon  as  we  had  passed.  The  bushes  were
rarely  taller  than  ourselves,  so  that  we  could  easily  see  the  eggs  in  the  nests.
This  was  quite  a new  sight  to  me,  and  not  less  pleasing  than  unexpected.

The  Noddy,  like  most  other  species  of  Terns,  lays  three  eggs,  which
average  two  inches  in  length,  by  an  inch  and  three-eighths  in  breadth,  and
are  of  a reddish-yellow  colour,  spotted  and  patched  with  dull  red  and  faint
purple.  They  afford  excellent  eating,  and  our  sailors  seldom  failed  to  col-
lect bucketfuls  of  them  daily  during  our  stay  at  the  Tortugas.  The
wreckers  assured  me  that  the  young  birds  remain  along  with  the  old
through  the  winter,  in  which  respect  the  Noddy,  if  this  account  be  correct.


NODDY  TERN.


517


differs  from  other  species,  the  young  of  which  keep  by  themselves  until
spring.

At  the  approach  of  a boat,  the  Noddies  never  flew  off  their  island,  in
the  manner  of  the  Sooty  Terns.  They  appeared  to  go  farther  out  to  sea
than  those  birds,  in  search  of  their  food,  which  consists  of  fishes  mostly
caught  amid  the  floating  sea-weeds,  these  Terns  seizing  them,  not  by  plung-
ing perpendicularly  downwards,  as  other  species  do,  but  by  skimming
close  over  the  surface  in  the  manner  of  Gulls,  and  also  by  alighting  and
swimming  round  the  edges  of  the  weeds.  This  I had  abundant  opportuni-
ties of  seeing  while  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.

The  flight  of  this  bird  greatly  resembles  that  of  the  Night  Hawk
when  passing  over  meadows  or  rivers.  When  about  to  alight  on  the
water,  the  Noddy  keeps  its  wings  extended  upwards,  and  touches  it  first
with  its  feet.  It  swims  with  considerable  buoyancy  and  grace,  and  at
times  immerses  its  head  to  seize  on  a fish.  It  does  not  see  well  by  night,
and  it  is  perhaps  for  this  reason  that  it  frequently  alights  on  the  spars  of
vessels,  where  it  sleeps  so  sound  that  the  seamen  often  catch  them.  When
seized  in  the  hand,  it  utters  a rough  cry,  not  unlike  that  of  a young
American  Crow  taken  from  the  nest.  On  such  occasions,  it  does  not  dis-
gorge its  food,  like  the  Cayenne  Tern  and  other  species,  although  it  bites
severely,  with  quickly  repeated  movements  of  the  bill,  which,  on  missing
the  object  aimed  at,  snaps  like  that  of  our  larger  Fly-catchers.  Some
which  I kept  several  days,  refused  all  kinds  of  food,  became  dull  and
languid,  and  at  length  died.

While  hovering  over  us  near  their  nests,  these  birds  emitted  a low
querulous  murmur,  and,  if  unmolested,  would  attempt  to  alight  on  our
heads.  After  a few  visits,  however,  they  became  rather  more  careful  of
themselves,  although  the  sitting  birds  often  suffered  us  to  put  a hat  over
them.  Like  the  Sooty  Tern,  this  species  incubates  both  day  and  night.
The  differences  exhibited  by  Terns  with  respect  to  their  mode  of  nestling
and  incubation,  are  great,  even  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  and  under  the
same  degree  of  atmospheric  temperature.  This  species  breeds  on  bushes
or  low  trees,  placing  several  nests  on  the  same  bush,  or  in  fact  as  many
as  it  will  hold.  The  Sterna  fuliginosa  scoops  out  a slight  hollow  in  the
sand,  under  the  bushes,  without  forming  any  nest,  and  incubates  closely
like  the  former.  The  Sandwich,  the  Cayenne,  and  the  Roseate  Terns,
drop  their  eggs  on  the  sand  or  the  bare  rock,  and  seldom  sit  upon  them
until  evening,  or  during  cloudy  or  rainy  weather.  The  Cayenne,  Sooty,


518


NODDY  TERN.


and  Noddy  Terns  differ  greatly  in  their  flight,  their  manner  of  feeding,
and  the  extent  of  their  migrations.  The  Tail  of  the  Noddy  is  cuneate,
instead  of  being  forked,  in  which  respect  it  differs  essentially  from  that  of
the  other  species.  Perhaps  the  naturalists  who  placed  it  in  the  same  genus
with  the  Roseate  Tern,  may  have  been  nodding  over  their  books.

Since  writing  the  above  account,  I have  read  the  article  on  this  spe-
cies by  my  esteemed  friend  Mr  Nutt  all,  and  am  surprised  to  find
him  state  that  “ the  Noddies  breed  in  great  numbers  in  the  Bahama
Islands,  laying  their  eggs  on  the  shelvings  of  rocks.”  No  authority  is
given  for  this,  which  I regret,  because  had  he  given  the  fact  as  observed
by  himself,  it  would  have  astonished  me  as  much  as  my  account  of  the
breeding  of  the  Noddy  in  the  Tortugas  may  astonish  others.


Sterna  stolida,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  227 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  805.

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  356.

Noddy,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  285.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXV.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  strong,  slender,  nearly  straight,  compressed,
very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arched,  the
ridge  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  the  sides
convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  ex-
tended to  beyond  half  the  length  of  the  bill,  slightly  deflected  towards
the  edge  ; nostrils  submedial,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandible
with  the  angle  very  narrow,  acute,  extending  to  the  middle,  the  dorsal
line  straight,  or  very  slightly  concave,  the  sides  convex,  the  sharp  edges
inflected,  the  tip  extremely  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed ; neck  of  moderate  length ;
body  slender ; feet  very  short,  rather  stout.  Tibia  bare  for  a short  space ;
tarsus  very  short,  roundish,  covered  anteriorly  with  small  scutella,  late-
rally and  behind  with  reticulated  scales ; toes  slender,  the  first  very  small,
the  third  longest,  the  fourth  nearly  as  long,  the  second  much  shorter,  all
scutellate  above,  the  anterior  united  by  reticulated  webs,  having  an  in-
curved margin  ; claws  curved,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  small-
est, of  middle  toe  by  much  the  largest,  and  having  the  inner  edge  thin
and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  head ; the  feathers  in
general  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  very  long,  narrow,  and  pointed ;


NODDY  TERN.


519


primary  quills  tapering  but  rounded,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  rapidly
graduated  ; secondaries  short,  broad,  rather  acute,  the  inner  more  taper-
ing. Tail  long,  cuneate,  of  twelve  tapering  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  brown.  Feet  dull  brownish-red,  the  webs  dusky,
the  claws  black.  The  general  colour  is  sooty  brown  ; the  primaries  and
tail-feathers  brownish-black  ; the  upper  part  of  the  head  greyish-white  ;
a black  spot  anterior  to  and  over  the  eye.

Length  to  end  of  tail  16x%,  to  end  of  wings  1 612,  to  end  of  claws
13x2  ; extent  of  wings  32  ; wing  from  flexure  10x§ ; tail  5| ; bill  along
the  back  If,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2j^ ; tarsus  middle
toe  1|,  its  claw  Weight  4J  oz.


( 520  )


STILL  BECALMED.

On  the  4th  of  June  we  were  still  in  the  same  plight,  although  the  cur-
rents of  the  Gulf  had  borne  us  to  a great  distance  from  the  place  where,
as  I have  informed  you,  we  had  amused  ourselves  with  catching  Dolphins.
These  currents  are  certainly  very  singular,  for  they  carried  us  hither  and
thither,  at  one  time  rendering  us  apprehensive  of  drifting  on  the  coast  of
Florida,  at  another  threatening  to  send  us  to  Cuba.  Sometimes  a slight
motion  in  the  air  revived  our  hopes,  swelled  our  sails  a little,  and  carried
us  through  the  smooth  waters  like  a skater  gliding  on  ice ; but  in  a few
hours  it  was  again  a dead  calm.

One  day  several  small  birds,  after  alighting  on  the  spars,  betook  them-
selves to  the  deck.  One  of  them,  a female  Rice  Bunting,  drew  our  at-
tention more  particularly,  for,  a few  moments  after  her  arrival,  there  came
down,  as  if  in  her  wake,  a beautiful  Peregrine  Falcon.  The  plunderer
hovered  about  for  a while,  then  stationed  himself  on  the  end  of  one  of
the  yard-arms,  and  suddenly  pouncing  on  the  little  gleaner  of  the  mea-
dows, clutched  her  and  carried  her  off  in  exultation.  But,  Reader,  mark
the  date,  and  judge  besides  of  my  astonishment  when  I saw  the  Falcon
feeding  on  the  Finch  while  on  wing,  precisely  with  the  same  ease  and
composure  as  the  Mississippi  Kite  might  shew  while  devouring  high  in
air  a Red-throated  Lizard,  swept  from  one  of  the  magnificent  trees  of  the
Louisiana  woods.

There  was  a favourite  pet  on  board,  belonging  to  our  Captain,  and
which  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  female  companion  of  a cock,  in
other  words,  a common  hen.  Some  liked  her  because  she  now  and  then
dropped  a fresh  egg, — a rare  article  at  sea,  even  on  board  the  Delos ;
others,  because  she  exhibited  a pleasing  simphcity  of  character ; others
again,  because,  when  they  had  pushed  her  overboard,  it  gave  them  plea-
sure to  see  the  poor  thing  in  terror  strike  with  her  feet,  and  strive  to  reach
her  floating  home,  which  she  would  never  have  accomplished,  however,
had  it  not  been  for  the  humane  interference  of  our  Captain,  Mr  Joseph
H ATCH  of  Kennebunk.  Kind,  good-hearted  man  ! when,  several  weeks
after,  the  same  pet  hen  accidentally  flew  overboard,  as  we  were  scudding
along  at  a furious  rate,  I thought  I saw  a tear  stand  in  his  eye,  as  she


STILL  BECALMED.


521


floated  panting  in  our  wake. — But  as  yet  we  are  becalmed,  and  heartily
displeased  at  old  .iEolus  for  overlooking  us.

One  afternoon  we  caught  two  sharks.  In  one  of  them,  a female,  about
seven  feet  long,  we  found  ten  young  ones,  all  alive,  and  quite  capable  of
swimming,  as  we  proved  by  experiment ; for,  on  casting  one  of  them  into
the  sea,  it  immediately  made  off,  as  if  it  had  been  accustomed  to  shift  for
itself.  Of  another,  that  had  been  cut  in  two,  the  head  half  swam  off  out
of  our  sight.  The  rest  were  cut  in  pieces,  as  was  the  old  shark,  as  bait
for  the  dolphins,  which  1 have  already  said  are  fond  of  such  food.

Our  captain,  who  was  much  intent  on  amusing  me,  informed  me  that
the  rudder-fishes  were  plentiful  astern,  and  immediately  set  to  dressing
hooks  for  the  purpose  of  catching  them.  There  was  now  some  air  above
us,  the  cotton  sheets  aloft  bulged  out,  the  ship  moved  through  the  water,
and  the  captain  and  I repaired  to  the  cabin  window.  I was  furnished
with  a fine  hook,  a thread  line,  and  some  small  bits  of  bacon,  as  was  the
captain,  and  we  dropped  our  bait  among  the  myriads  of  delicate  little
fishes  below.  Up  they  came,  one  after  another,  so  fast  in  succession,  that,
according  to  my  journal,  we  caught  three  hundred  and  seventy  in  about
two  hours.  What  a mess  ! and  how  delicious  when  roasted  ! If  ever  I
am  again  becalmed  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  I shall  not  forget  the  rudder-
fish.  The  little  things  scarcely  measured  three  inches  in  length  ; they
were  thin  and  deep  in  form,  and  afforded  excellent  eating.  It  was  curi-
ous to  see  them  keep  to  the  lee  of  the  rudder  in  a compact  body ; and  so
voracious  were  they,  that  they  actually  leaped  out  of  the  water  at  the
sight  of  the  bait,  as  “ sunnies”  are  occasionally  wont  to  do  in  our  rivers.
But  the  very  instant  that  the  ship  became  still,  they  dispersed  around  her
sides,  and  would  no  longer  bite.  I made  a figure  of  one  of  them,  as  in-
deed I tried  to  do  of  every  other  species  that  occurred  during  this  death-
like calm.  Not  one  of  these  fishes  did  I ever  see  when  crossing  the  At-
lantic, although  many  kinds  at  times  come  close  to  the  stern  of  any  ves-
sel in  the  great  sea,  and  are  called  by  the  same  name.

Another  time  we  caught  a fine  Porpoise,  which  measured  about  two
yards  in  length.  This  took  place  at  night,  when  the  light  of  the  moon
afforded  me  a clear  view  of  the  spot.  The  fish,  contrary  to  custom,  was
grained,  instead  of  being  harpooned ; but  in  such  a way  and  so  effectual-
ly, through  the  forehead,  that  it  was  thus  held  fast,  and  allowed  to  flounce
and  beat  about  the  bows  of  the  ship,  until  the  person  who  had  struck  it
gave  the  line  holding  the  grains  to  the  Captain,  slided  down  along  the


622


STILL  BECALMED.


bob-stays  with  a rope,  and  after  a while  managed  to  secure  it  by  the  tail.
Some  of  the  crew  then  hoisted  it  on  board.  When  it  arrived  on  deck,  it
gave  a deep  groan,  flapped  with  great  force,  and  soon  expired.  On
opening  it  next  morning,  eight  hours  after  death,  we  found  its  intestines
stiU  warm.  They  were  arranged  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  a pig ;
the  paunch  contained  several  cuttlefishes  partially  digested.  The  lower
jaw  extended  beyond  the  upper  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch,  and  both
were  furnished  with  a single  row  of  conical  teeth,  about  half  an  inch  long,
and  just  so  far  separated  as  to  admit  those  of  one  jaw  between  the  corres-
ponding ones  of  the  other.  The  animal  might  weigh  about  four  hundred
pounds ; its  eyes  were  extremely  small,  its  flesh  was  considered  delicate
by  some  on  board ; but  in  my  opinion,  if  it  be  good,  that  of  a large  alli-
gator is  equally  so ; and  on  neither  do  I intend  to  feast  for  some  time.
The  Captain  told  me  that  he  had  seen  these  Porpoises  leap  at  times  per-
pendicularly out  of  the  water  to  the  height  of  several  feet,  and  that  small
boats  have  now  and  then  been  sunk  by  their  falling  into  them,  when  en-
gaged with  their  sports.

During  all  this  time  flocks  of  Pigeons  were  crossing  the  Gulf,  between
Cuba  and  the  Floridas ; many  a Rose-breasted  Gull  played  around  by
day  ; Noddies  alighted  on  the  rigging  by  night ; and  now  and  then,  the
Frigate  bird  was  observed  ranging  high  over  head  in  the  azure  of  the
cloudless  sky.

The  directions  of  the  currents  were  tried,  and  our  Captain,  who  had
an  extraordinary  genius  for  mechanics,  was  frequently  employed  in  turn-
ing powder  horns  and  other  articles.  So  calm  and  sultry  was  the  weather
that  we  had  a large  awning  spread,  under  which  we  took  our  meals,  and
spent  the  night.  At  length  we  got  so  wearied  of  it,  that  the  very  sailors
I thought  seemed  disposed  to  leap  overboard,  and  swim  to  land.  But
at  length,  on  the  thirty-seventh  day  after  our  departure,  a smart  breeze
overtook  us.  Presently  there  was  an  extraordinary  bustle  on  board;
about  twelve  the  Tortugas  light-house  bore  north  of  us,  and  in  a few
hours  more  we  gained  the  Atlantic.  iEolus  had  indeed  awakened  from
his  long  sleep ; and  on  the  nineteenth  day  after  leaving  the  Capes  of
Florida,  I was  landed  at  Liverpool.


( 623  )


THE  KING  DUCK.

Fuligula  spectabilis,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCLXXVI.  Male  akd  Female.

This  beautiful  species  rarely  advances  farther  south  along  our  eastern
coast  than  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Bay  of  Boston.  I have,  however,  been
assured  by  old  and  trustworthy  gunners  that  the  King  Duck,  about  thirty
years  ago,  was  by  no  means  of  rare  occurrence  there  during  winter,  and  that
a few  had  been  known  to  breed  in  company  with  the  Eider  along  the  coast.
At  the  period  of  my  arrival  at  Labrador,  the  greater  number  of  the  King
Ducks  had  proceeded  farther  north  ; and  although  some  were  seen  there,
we  found  none  of  their  nests.  I can  say  nothing  of  the  habits  of  this
bird,  which,  although  they  may  be  similar  to  those  of  the  Eider,  must
yet  differ  in  many  particulars,  as  is  the  case  with  all  birds  that  are  nearly
allied  in  form.  The  eggs  of  the  King  Duck  collected  by  Captain  James
Clark  Ross,  R.  N.,  measure  two  inches  and  live-eighths  by  one  inch  and
three-fourths,  and  have  a smooth  shell,  of  an  uniform  dull  greenish-co-
lour.

Anas  spectabilis,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  ii.  p.  198 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  iL  p.  845.

Fuligula  spectabilis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  389.

SoMATEKiA  SPECTABILIS,  KiNG  DucK,  Swains.  and  Richards.  Fauna-Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  447-

King  Duck,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  414.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  much  deeper  than  broad  at  the  base,  some-
what depressed  towards  the  end,  which  is  broad  and  rounded.  Upper
mandible  with  a soft  tumid  compressed  substance  at  the  base,  extending
perpendicularly  upon  the  forehead,  and  by  a medial  band  of  feathers  di-
vided into  two  broad  lobes,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  this  descending  to  the
unguis,  then  slightly  curved,  the  ridge  broadly  convex,  the  sides  sloping
and  convex,  the  edges  perpendicular,  with  about  forty-five  narrow  inter-


524


KING  DUCK.


nal  lamellae,  the  unguis  very  large,  broadly  elliptical.  Nostrils  submedi-
al,  oblong,  large,  pervious,  near  the  ridge.  Lower  mandible  flattened,
with  the  angle  very  long,  rather  narrow  and  rounded,  the  dorsal  line  short
and  slightly  convex,  the  edges  with  about  fifty  lamellae,  the  unguis  very
large  and  elliptical.

Head  large,  compressed.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  bulky  and  much
depressed.  Feet  very  short,  strong,  placed  rather  far  behind ; tarsus  very
short,  compressed,  anteriorly  having  a series  of  narrow  scutella  in  its
whole  length,  and  a partial  series  above  the  fourth  toe,  the  rest  reticu-
lated with  angular  and  oblong  scales ; hind  toe  small,  with  a free  mem-
brane beneath  ; anterior  toes  longer  than  the  tarsus,  connected  by  reticu-
lated membranes  having  a sinus  at  their  free  margins,  the  inner  with  a
broad  lobed  marginal  membrane,  the  outer  with  a thickened  edge  ; all
obliquely  scutellate  above ; the  third  and  fourth  about  equal  and  longest.
Claws  small,  arched,  compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  first  toe  very  small  and
more  curved,  of  middle  toe  largest,  more  depressed,  and  with  a dilated  in-
ner edge.

Plumage  short,  dense,  blended.  Feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head
extremely  small,  on  the  upper  part  very  narrow,  on  the  sides  of  the  head
very  short,  stiff  and  hair-like.  Wings  rather  short,  narrow,  and  pointed  ;
primary  quills  curved,  strong,  tapering,  the  second  longest,  the  first  al-
most as  long,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  short,  broad,  round-
ed, excepting  the  inner,  which  are  elongated,  tapering,  and  curved  out-
wards. Tail  very  short,  much  rounded,  of  fourteen  stiff  narrow  feathers.

Bill  flesh-coloured,  the  sides  of  the  upper  mandible  and  the  soft  frontal
lobes  bright  orange.  Iris  bright  yellow.  Feet  dull  orange,  the  webs
dusky,  the  claws  brownish-black.  The  band  of  feathers  separating  the
frontal  lobes,  and  those  along  their  upper  and  posterior  edges,  black  ;
lower  eyelid,  and  a forked  patch  on  the  throat,  the  same.  The  upper
part  of  the  head  light  purplish-grey ; the  hair-like  feathers  on  the  sides
of  the  head  pale  bluish-green  ; the  fore  neck  cream  coloured ; tlie  sides
and  hind  part  of  the  neck,  a patch  on  the  wings,  and  another  on  each  side
of  the  rump,  white.  The  hind  part  of  the  back,  the  scapulars,  the  larger
wing  coverts,  and  the  secondary  quills,  brownish-black,  the  latter  glossed
with  green  ; primary  quills  and  tail  blackish-brown.  Breast  and  abdomen
blackish-brown  ; lower  wing-coverts  white,  the  outer  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  25  inches,  to  end  of  wings  23 ; wing  from  flexure


KING  DUCK.


325


11|  ; tail  3| ; bill  from  the  base  of  the  tumid  part  li,  along  the  edge  of
lower  mandible  ; tarsus  If  ; middle  toe  §,  its  claw

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXXVI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  differs  greatly  from  the  male.  The  bill  is  shorter,  its
tumid  basal  lobes  narrow  and  not  ascending  perpendicularly,  so  that  the
forehead  is  low  as  in  most  Ducks.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and  upper
part  of  the  neck  ’are  small,  soft,  and  uniform.  The  colour  of  the  bill  is
pale  greenish-grey  ; the  iris  dull  yellow  ; the  feet  duU  ochre.  The  head
and  neck  are  pale  greyish-yellow,  with  small  lines  of  brownish-black.
The  feathers  of  the  back  are  brownish-black  towards  the  end,  with  yel-
lowish-grey edges,  the  scapulars  brownish-red  on  the  margins.  The  quills
and  tail-feathers  are  deep  greyish-brown  ; the  recurved  secondaries  broad-
ly edged  externally  with  yellowish-grey.  The  fore  part  of  the  lower  neck
and  breast,  the  sides,  and  lower  tail-coverts,  have  a central  mark  and  sub-
marginal band  of  brownish-black,  the  middle  of  the  breast  scarcely  spotted,
being  of  the  general  colour  of  the  lower  parts,  which  is  pale  yellowish-
brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  20  inches,  to  end  of  wings  17 ; wing  from
flexure  lOJ  ; tail  3| ; bill  from  the  separation  of  the  lobes  I5  ; tarsus  ;
middle  toe  2^,  its  claw  |.


( 526  )


HUTCHINS’S  GOOSE.

Anser  Hutchinsii,  Richardson.

PLATE  CCLXXVII.  Adult.

In  the  first  article  in  this  volume,  that  of  the  Canada  Goose,  in  which  I
have  described  the  habits  of  that  bird  at  considerable  length,  I had  occa-
sion to  allude  to  a small  species  called  by  the  gunners  of  Maine  the  Winter
or  Flight  Goose,  which  they  described  to  me  as  resembling  the  large  and
common  kind  in  almost  every  particular  except  its  size.  Although  it  was
not  my  good  fortune  while  there  to  meet  with  the  bird  spoken  of  by  men
who  were  well  acquainted  with  it,  I have  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  very  species
which  has  been  named  in  honour  of  Mr  Hutchins,  and  that  its  periodical
appearance  along  our  eastern  coast  will  ere  long  be  fully  estabhshed.  This
is  the  more  to  be  expected  as  Dr  Richardson  informs  us  that  it  is  abun-
dant about  Hudson’s  Bay,  where  it  was  long  mistaken  for  the  Brent,  or  an
emaciated  Canada  Goose.  In  the  mean  time,  having  been  presented  with
a specimen  of  the  bird  in  question  by  my  highly  esteemed  and  gallant
friend  Captain  James  Clark  Ross,  I have  embraced  the  opportunity  thus
offered,  of  laying  before  you  a representation,  the  first  I believe  that  has
yet  appeared,  of  Hutchins’s  Goose.

For  fifteen  months,  rendered  trebly  long  and  wearisome  by  heavy  and
difficult  marches,  under  the  most  distressing  feelings,  that  most  amiable
and  accomplished  traveller,  carried  with  him  many  specimens  of  rare  birds,
with  the  view  of  contributing  to  the  advancement  of  our  knowledge.
Would,  Reader,  that  you  could  sympathize  with  me  in  the  feelings  of
pride  and  pleasure  with  which  I call  him  friend.  May  his  name  be  as
extensively  known  as  his  worth  deserves  !

Some  weeks  after  my  drawing  was  finished,  and  when  I had  arrived
in  Edinburgh,  I had  the  gratification  of  receiving  a long  and  most  inte-
resting letter  from  him,  of  which  I present  you  with  an  extract.  “ I
have  very  great  pleasure  in  having  it  now  in  my  power  to  offer  to  your
acceptance  the  specimen  of  this  interesting  species  from  which  your  draw-
ing was  taken.  It  was  the  child  of  my  solicitude,  and  my  constant  com-
panion during  a long  and  tedious  journey,  after  the  abandonment  of
our  ship,  until  our  being  received  on  board  the  Isabella,  an  interval  of


HUTCHINS’S  GOOSE.


527


fifteen  months ; and  this  will  account  in  a great  measure  for  the  miserable
plight  in  which  the  specimen  first  came  into  your  hands.  I will  dispose
of  it  according  to  your  wishes,  and  am  most  happy  to  place  it  in  the
hands  of  one  who  knows  so  well  how  to  appreciate  the  interesting  asso-
ciations connected  with  it.

“ These  birds  arrived  in  flocks  about  the  middle  of  June,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Felix  Harbour,  and  soon  dispersed  in  pairs  to  their  breeding
place.  At  Igloolik,  the  only  place  where  we  had  before  met  with  them,
their  nests  were  found  in  the  marshes  near  the  sea  ; but  on  this  occasion
several  pairs  constructed  their  nests  on  a ledge  of  rock  near  the  foot  of  a
high  precipice ; immediately  above  them  the  Dovekies,  Loons,  several
species  of  Gulls,  and  near  its  summit,  the  Jer-Falcon  and  Raven,  built
their  nests.

“ From  three  to  four  eggs  were  found  in  each  nest,  of  a pure  white,  and
of  an  oval  form,  measuring  3.1  inches  by  2.1,  and  weighing  from  1800  to
2000  grains.

“ The  female  bird  is  smaller  than  the  male.  To  the  measurements  given
by  Dr  Richaruson,  which  are  very  accurate,  we  may  add  that  its  extent
of  wings  is  fifty  inches,  and  that  it  averages  about  four  pounds  and  a half
of  weight.  Its  flesh  is  of  a most  exquisite  flavour.”

Anser  Hutchinsii,  Hutchins’s  Barnacle  Goose,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna
Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  470.

Adult.  Plate  CCLXXVII.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  higher  than  broad  at  the  base,  somewhat
conical,  depressed  towards  the  end,  rounded  at  the  tip.  Upper  mandible
with  the  dorsal  line  sloping,  the  ridge  slightly  flattened  at  the  base,  con-
vex in  the  rest  of  its  extent,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  soft,  the  oblique
internal  lamellae  about  thirty  ; the  unguis  roundish,  convex.  Nasal  groove
oblong,  parallel  to  the  ridge,  filled  by  the  soft  membrane  of  the  bill ; nos-
trils medial,  lateral,  longitudinal,  narrow-elliptical,  open,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  straight,  with  the  angle  very  long,  narrow  and  rounded,  the
edges  with  about  forty  obbque  lamellae.

Head  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  long  and  very  slender.  Body
full.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  behind  the  centre  of  the  body legs  bare
a little  above  the  joint ; tarsus  short,  a little  compressed,  covered  all  round
with  angular  scales,  those  behind  smaller;  hind  toe  very  small,  with  a


528


HUTCHINS’S  GOOSE.


narrow  membrane,  third  the  longest,  fourth  considerably  shorter,  but
longer  than  second ; all  reticulated  above  at  the  base,  but  with  narrow
transverse  scutella  towards  the  end  ; the  three  anterior  connected  by  reti-
culated webs,  the  outer  with  a thick  margin,  the  inner  with  the  edge  more
dilated.  Claws  small,  arched,  rather  compressed,  except  that  of  the  middle
toe,  which  is  bent  obliquely  inwards  and  depressed,  with  a curved  edge.

Plumage  close,  blended  on  the  neck  and  lower  parts  of  the  body,  com-
pact on  the  upper.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  very  narrow,  of
the  back  very  broad  and  abrupt,  of  the  breast  and  belly  broadly  rounded.
Wings  long  ; primaries  strong,  curved,  the  second  longest,  but  the  first
and  third  almost  as  long,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  long,
rather  narrow,  rounded.  Tail  short,  slightly  rounded,  of  sixteen  rounded
feathers.

Bill,  feet,  and  claws  black.  Iris  brown.  Head  and  two  upper  thirds
of  the  neck  glossy  black.  A large  subtriangular  patch  of  white  on  each
side  of  the  head  and  neck.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is
brownish-grey,  the  feathers  margined  with  paler  ; of  the  lower  parts  pale
greyish-brown,  margined  with  yellowish-grey  ; the  abdomen  and  lower
tail-coverts  white  ; the  hind  part  of  the  back  brownish-black.  The  pri-
mary quills  and  tail-feathers  are  deep  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  inches,  extent  of  wings  50  ; wing  from  flexure
16| ; tail  5| ; bill  along  the  back  1|,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible

; tarsus  2^;  middle  toe  2,  its  claw  j%.  Weight  4^  lb.

In  the  Fauna  Boreali- Americana,  the  tail-feathers  are  stated  to  be
fourteen.  In  my  specimen  they  are  sixteen,  and  it  is  probable  that  the
full  number  is  eighteen,  as  the  two  middle  ones  seem  to  be  wanting.


SCHINZ’S  SANDPIPER.


Tringa  Schinzii,  Brehm.

PLATE  CCLXXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

Although  I have  met  with  this  species  at  different  times  in  Kentucky,
and  along  our  extensive  shores,  from  the  Floridas  to  Maine,  as  well  as  on
the  coast  of  Labrador,  I never  found  it  breeding.  Indeed,  I have  not
met  with  it  in  the  United  States  excepting  in  the  latter  part  of  autumn
and  in  winter.  Those  procured  in  Labrador  were  shot  in  the  beginning  of
August,  and  were  all  young  birds,  apparently  about  to  take  their  depart-
ure. My  drawing  of  the  two  individuals  represented  in  the  plate  was
made  at  St  Augustine  in  East  Florida,  where  I procured  them  on  the  2d
December  1831.  I have  always  found  these  birds  gentle  and  less  shy  than
any  other  species  of  the  genus.  They  fly  at  a considerable  height  with
rapidity,  deviating  alternately  to  either  side,  and  plunge  toward  the  ground
in  a manner  somewhat  resembling  that  of  the  Solitary  Sandpiper.  When
accidentally  surprised,  they  start  with  a repeated  weet,  less  sonorous  than
that  of  the  bird  just  mentioned.  They  search  for  food  along  the  mar-
gins of  pools,  creeks  and  rivers,  or  by  the  edges  of  sand-bars,  and  mix
with  other  species.

Tringa  Schinzii,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  249. —
Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  69.  pi.  24.  fig.  2.  Winter. — Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna
Bor.  Amer.  part.  ii.  p.  384.

ScHiNz’s  Sandpiper,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  109.

Adult  Male  in  winter.  Plate  CCLXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  straight,
compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  slightly  enlarged  and  rather  obtuse.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  excepting  at  the  tip,  the
ridge  narrow  and  convex,  broader  and  flattened  towards  tbe  end,  the  sides
sloping,  the  edges  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  extending  to  near  the  tip ;
nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and
extremely  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  sloping  outwards,  the
tip  a little  broader  than  that  of  the  upper.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  of  moderate  length.

L 1


VOL.  III.


530


SCHINZ’S  SANDPIPER.


Body  rather  slender.  Feet  rather,  long,  slender  ; tibia  bare  a third  part
of  its  length  ; tarsus  compressed  behind,  covered  anteriorly  and  posteriorly
with  numerous  scutella,  which  scarcely  leave  any  intermediate  space ; hind
toe  extremely  small ; the  rest  of  moderate  length,  slender,  the  fourth
slightly  longer  than  the  second,  the  third  longest;  all  free,  there  being
only  a very  slight  rudimentary  web  between  the  third  and  fourth,  flat  be-
neath, slightly  marginate  with  rather  pointed  scales.  Claws  small,  slightly
arched,  compressed,  rather  acute,  that  of  the  third  toe  much  larger,  with
the  inner  edge  dilated.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  on  the  lower  parts,  the  feathers  distinct
above.  Wings  very  long,  pointed ; primaries  tapering,  obtuse,  the  first
^ongest,  the  second  almost  equal,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; outer  secon-
daries incurved,  narrow,  obliquely  sinuate  at  the  end  of  the  outer  web,
the  inner  rounded  and  extending  beyond  the  outer ; inner  secondaries
very  narrow,  tapering  to  a point,  reaching,  when  the  wing  is  closed,  to
about  half  an  inch  from  its  tip.  Tail  of  moderate  length,  nearly  even,
but  with  the  two  middle  feathers  exceeding  the  rest,  the  number  of  feathers
twelve.

Bill  and  feet  dusky.  Iris  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper
parts  is  brownish-black,  each  feather  edged  with  yellowish-grey,  the  sca-
pulars with  light  red.  Wing-coverts  greyish-brown,  the  shaft  black  ;
primary  and  secondary  coverts  tipped  with  white ; quills  brownish-grey,
darker  towards  the  tips,  the  inner  primaries  and  outer  secondaries  more
or  less  edged  and  tipped  with  white ; the  tail-coverts  white  with  a dusky
spot,  excepting  the  two  central,  which  are  blackish,  with  a few  greyish-
white  markings.  Tail-feathers  light  grey,  the  two  middle  brownish-black
towards  the  end.  Sides  of  the  head,  fore  neck,  anterior  part  of  breast
and  sides  greyish- white,  with  small  lanceolate  central  brownish-black  spots;
the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7 1^2  inches,  to  end  of  wings  7 12,  to  end  of  claws
7t2  ; extent  of  wings  14|,  bill  along  the  back  along  the  edge  of  lower
mandible  J2  ; wing  from  flexure  4 1 5^;  tail  2/2?  tarsus  {2;  middle  toe

its  claw

Adult  Female  in  winter.  Plate  CCLXXVIIl.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  a little  smaller.

In  some  individuals,  about  six  of  the  middle  tail-coverts  are  black,
the  lateral  bai'red  with  white  and  dusky.


( 531  )


THE  SANDWICH  TERN.

Sterna  cantiaca,  Gmel.

PLATE  CCLXXIX.  Adult  and  Young.

On  the  26th  of  May  1832,  while  sailing  along  the  Florida  Keys  in
Mr  Thruston’s  barge,  accompanied  by  his  worthy  pilot  and  my  assist-
ant, I observed  a large  flock  of  Terns,  which,  from  their  size  and  other
circumstances,  I would  have  pronounced  to  be  Marsh  Terns,  had  not  the
difference  in  their  manner  of  flight  convinced  me  that  they  were  of  a spe-
cies hitherto  unknown  to  me.  The  pleasure  which  one  feels  on  such  an
occasion  cannot  easily  be  described,  and  all  that  it  is  necessary  for  me  to
say  on  the  subject  at  present  is,  that  I begged  to  be  rowed  to  them  as
quickly  as  possible.  A nod  and  a wink  from  the  pilot  satisfied  me  that
no  time  should  be  lost,  and  in  a few  minutes  all  the  guns  on  board  were
in  requisition.  The  birds  fell  around  us ; but  as  those  that  had  not  been
injured  remained  hovering  over  their  dead  and  dying  companions,  we
continued  to  shoot  until  we  procured  a very  considerable  number.  On
examining  the  first  individual  picked  up  from  the  water,  I perceived  from
the  yellow  point  of  its  bill  that  it  was  diflTerent  from  any  that  I had
previously  seen,  and  accordingly  shouted  “ A prize ! a prize  ! a new
bird  to  the  American  Fauna !”  And  so  it  was,  good  Reader,  for  no  per-
son before  had  found  the  Sandwich  Tern  on  any  part  of  our  coast.  A
large  basket  was  filled  with  them,  and  we  pursued  our  course.  On  open-
ing several  individuals,  I found  in  the  females  eggs  nearly  ready  for  be-
ing laid.  The  males,  too,  manifested  the  usual  symptoms  of  increased  ac-
tion in  the  organs  distinctive  of  the  sex.  I felt  a great  desire  to  discover
their  breeding  grounds,  which  I had  the  pleasure  of  doing  in  a few  days
after.

The  vigour  and  activity  of  this  bird  while  on  wing  afforded  me  great
pleasure.  Indeed  its  power  of  flight  exceeds  that  of  the  Marsh  Tern,
which  I consider  as  a closely  allied  species.  While  travelling,  it  advances
by  regular  sharp  flappings  of  its  wings,  which  propel  it  forward  much  in
the  manner  of  the  Passenger  Pigeon,  when,  single  and  remote  from  a flock,
it  pushes  on  with  redoubled  speed.  While  plunging  after  the  small  mul-
lets and  other  diminutive  fishes  that  foi'm  the  principal  jDart  of  its  food,  it

I.  1 2


532


SANDWICH  TERN.


darts  perpendicularly  downwards  with  all  the  agility  and  force  of  the
Common  and  Arctic  Terns,  nearly  immersing  its  whole  body  at  times,
but  rising  instantly  after,  and  quickly  regaining  a position  from  which  it
can  advantageously  descend  anew.  Should  the  fish  disappear,  as  the  bird
is  descending,  the  latter  instantly  recovers  itself  without  plunging  into  the
water.  Its  cries  are  sharp,  grating,  and  loud  enough  to  be  heard  at  the
distance  of  half  a mile.  They  are  repeated  at  intervals  while  it  is  travel-
ling, and  kept  up  incessantly  when  one  intrudes  upon  it  in  its  breeding
grounds,  on  which  occasion  it  sails  and  dashes  over  your  head,  chiding  you
with  angry  notes  more  disagreeable  than  pleasant  to  your  ear.

How  many  days  these  birds  had  been  laying,  when  I discovered  the
key  on  which  they  breed,  I cannot  say  ; but  many  of  them  were  still  en-
gaged in  depositing  their  eggs,  and  none  were  as  yet  sitting  on  those
which,  being  three  together,  seemed  to  form  the  full  complement.  They
had  been  dropped  on  the  sand,  at  short  intervals,  with  scarcely  any  ap-
pearance of  a hollow  for  their  reception.  In  some  instances  they  were  laid
at  the  foot  of  a scanty  tuft  of  grass ; but  all  were  fully  exposed  to  the
heat  of  the  sun,  which  at  this  time  I thought  almost  sufficient  to  cook
them.  The  eggs  varied  as  much  in  colour  as  those  of  the  Arctic  Tern  and
Foolish  Guillemot,  and  were  equally  disproportionate  to  the  size  of  the  bird,
their  average  length  being  two  inches  and  one-eighth,  their  greatest  breadth
one  inch  and  three  and  a half  eighths.  They  are  of  an  oval  form,  but  ra-
ther sharp  at  the  larger  end.  The  ground  colour  is  yellowish-grey,  vary-
ing in  depth,  and  all  more  or  less  spotted,  blotched,  or  marked  with  diffe-
rent tints  of  umber,  pale  blue,  and  reddish.  But  to  describe  them  with
absolute  precision  seems  to  me  impossible,  and  until  you  see  my  plates  of
eggs,  I strongly  recommend  to  you  to  inspect  the  valuable  and  accurate
delineations  published  by  my  friend  W.  C.  Hewitson,  Esq.  of  Newcastle-
upon-Tyne,  among  which  you  will  find  not  less  than  three  excellent  re-
presentations of  the  eggs  of  the  Sandwich  Tein.  That  gentleman  de-
scribes them  as  being  “ mostly  two”  for  each  pair  of  birds,  and  “ sometimes
three,”  on  the  islands  on  the  coast  of  Northumberland,  where  he  found
this  species  breeding  in  numbers.  The  eggs  were  so  abundant  and  close
together,  that,  to  use  his  own  words,  “ we  were  obliged  carefully  to  pick
our  steps  in  order  to  avoid  treading  upon  them  ; they  were  either  on  the
grass  as  it  grew,  or  upon  a small  quantity  gathered  together  for  that  pur-
pose.” I add  that  these  eggs  are  most  capital  eating.

I never  saw  the  Sandwich  Tern  on  any  other  portion  of  our  coasts  than


SANDWICH  TERN.


533


between  the  Florida  Keys  and  Charleston,  and  from  whence  it  first  came
there,  or  how  it  went  thence  to  Europe,  is  an  enigma  which  may  perhaps
never  be  solved.  On  asking  the  Wreckers  if  they  had  been  in  the  habit
of  seeing  these  birds,  they  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  added  that
they  paid  them  pretty  frequent  visits  during  the  breeding  season,  on  ac-
count of  their  eggs  as  well  as  of  the  young,  which,  when  nearly  able  to
fly,  they  said  were  also  good  eating.  According  to  their  account,  this  spe-
cies spends  the  whole  winter  near  and  upon  the  keys,  and  the  young  keep
separate  from  the  old  birds.


Sterna  cantiaca,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  Sp.  15 Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  735.

Sterna  Boysii,  Lath.  Ind.  Omilh.  vol.  ii.  p.  806.

Sandwich  Tern,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  276.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXIX.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  tapering,  compressed,  nearly
straight,  very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  arch-
ed, the  ridge  rather  broad  at  the  base,  very  narrow  towards  the  tip,  the
sides  sloping  at  the  base,  slightly  convex  and  nearly  perpendicular  to-
wards the  end,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  very  acute.  Nasal
groove  extending  to  a little  beyond  the  middle  of  the  bill  and  deflected
towards  its  edge  ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower  mandi-
ble with  the  angle  very  narrow  and  acute,  extending  nearly  to  the  middle,
the  dorsal  line  beyond  it  straight,  the  sides. convex,  towards  the  end  more
erect,  the  ridge  vei’y  narrow,  the  tip  extremely  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong;  neck  of  moderate  length;  body  slender.
Feet  very  small  ; tibia  bare  for  a considerable  space  ; tarsus  very  short,
anteriorly  scutellate,  laterally  and  behind  reticulated  ; toes  small,  slender,
the  first  extremely  small,  the  third  longest,  the  fourth  about  the  same
length,  the  second  much  shorter,  all  scutellate  above,  the  anterior  con-
nected by  reticulated  webs  of  which  the  margins  are  deeply  concave.
Claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  very  small,  of  middle
toe  by  much  the  largest,  and  having  the  inner  edge  thin  and  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  very  short  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  ;
the  feathers  on  the  occiput  and  upper  part  of  hind  neck  pointed  and  elon-
gated. Wings  very  long,  narrow  and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,
the  outer  slightly  curved  inwards  at  the  end,  the  first  longest,  the  rest  ra-
pidly graduated ; secondary  short,  bi'oad,  incurved,  rounded,  the  inner


334


SANDWICH  TERN.


proportionally  longer  and  narrower.  Tail  rather  long,  deeply  forked,  of
twelve  feathers,  the  outer  tapering  to  a point.

Bill  black,  excepting  the  tips,  which  are  yellow  ; inside  of  the  mouth
deep  blue.  Iris  brown.  Feet  black.  The  upper  part  of  the  head,
occiput  and  part  of  hind  neck  bluish-black.  Sides  of  the  head,  neck
all  round,  and  the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white,  the  breast  frequently
tinged  with  pink.  The  fore  part  of  the  back,  the  scapulars  and  the
upper  surface  of  the  wings  pale  greyish-blue  ; the  tips  and  the  greater
parts  of  the  inner  webs  of  the  scapulars,  and  quills  white,  as  are  the  rump
and  the  tail ; the  four  outer  quills  blackish,  but  covered  with  light  grey
down,  on  the  outer  webs  and  over  a considerable  extent  of  the  inner,  their
shafts  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15f  inches,  to  end  of  wings  ; to  end  of
claws  12 J ; extent  of  wings  33| ; wing  from  flexure  12^;  tail  6;  bill
along  the  back  2;^,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2j§;  tarsus
middle  toe  j®|,  its  claw  /g.  Weight  6^  oz.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  Male.

The  young,  after  the  first  moult,  are  of  a light  greyish-blue  colour
on  the  upper  parts,  the  feathers  tipped  and  banded  in  an  undulating  man-
ner with  brownish-black  ; the  upper  part  of  the  head  and  the  hind  neck
are  of  the  latter  colour,  but  mottled  with  white.  The  quills  are  as  in  the
adult,  the  tail  grey,  with  irregular  brownish-black  markings  towards  the
tips  of  the  feathers.  The  lower  parts  are  also  pale  grey,  but  much  lighter
than  the  upper.  The  bill  and  feet  are  black,  but  the  tip  of  the  former
has  not  vet  assumed  a yellow  tint.


( 535  )


THE  BLACK  TERN.

Sterna  nigra,  Linn.

PLATE  CCLXXX.  Adult  Male  and  Young.

The  Black  Tern  begins  to  arrive  from  the  Mexican  territories  over
the  waters  of  the  Western  Country,  about  the  middle  of  April,  and  con-
tinues to  pass  for  about  a month.  At  that  season  I have  observed  it  as-
cending the  Mississippi  from  New  Orleans  to  the  head  waters  of  the  Ohio,
then  cutting  over  the  land,  and  arriving  at  the  Great  Lakes,  beyond
which  many  proceed  still  farther  northward.  But  I have  rarely  met
with  them  along  our  Atlantic  shores  until  autumn,  when  the  young,  which,
like  those  of  all  other  Terns  with  which  I am  acquainted,  mostly  keep  by
themselves  until  spring,  make  their  appearance  there.  Nor  did  I see  a
single  individual  when  on  my  way  to  Labrador,  or  during  my  visit  to
that  country.  They  re-appear  in  the  Western  Country,  in  the  course  of
their  southern  migration,  in  the  months  of  September  and  October ; but
many  pairs  breed  in  the  intermediate  range.

When  residing  at  Louisville  in  Kentucky,  I found  the  Black  Tern
abundant  in  the  neighbourhood,  breeding  on  the  margins  of  ponds  at  a
short  distance  from  the  Ohio.  I also  found  them  with  nests  and  eggs  on
a pond  near  Vincennes,  in  the  State  of  Indiana.  Now,  however,  they
have  abandoned  those  places,  and  merely  pass  over  the  country  on  their
way  to  and  from  the  northern  regions.

Often  have  I watched  their  graceful  light  and  rapid  flight,  as  they
advanced  and  passed  over  in  groups  of  twenty,  thirty  or  more,  from  the
delightful  residence  of  my  worthy  friend  and  kind  relative  Nicholas
Berthoud,  Esq.  of  Shippingport,  during  the  month  of  May,  when  Na-
ture, opening  her  stores  anew,  benignly  smiled  upon  the  favoured  land
of  Kentucky.  The  gay  birds  were  seen  ranging  from  the  basin  at  the
foot  of  the  rapids  to  the  lower  part  of  the  narrow  channel  which  separates
Sandy  Island  from  the  shore,  up  the  clear  stream  and  down  again,  plung-
ing at  short  intervals  into  the  water  to  seize  their  prey,  and  continuing
their  pleasing  occupations  through  the  whole  day.  When  the  period  of
reproduction  arrived,  they  would  all  betake  themselves  to  the  ponds,  and
search  along  their  moist  shores  for  tufts  of  rank  grass  such  as  might  form


586


BLACK  TERN.


suitable  places  for  their  nests.  One  of  their  favourite  ponds  still  remains
in  part,  although  a great  portion  of  it  has  been  drained.  It  is  now  known
by  the  name  of  Hope-Distillery  Pond,  and  lies  a few  hundred  yards  from
the  Ohio,  but  is  nearly  surrounded  with  buildings  of  various  kinds.  Alex-
ander Wilson,  to  whom  I shewed  the  old  nests  of  the  Black  Tern  at
this  place,  did  not  seem  to  be  acquainted  with  the  bird,  and  thought  that
they  were  those  of  some  species  of  Rail.

The  nest  is  usually  placed  on  the  top  of  a broken  tussock  of  the  rank-
est grasses,  of  which  it  is  itself  composed,  it  being  of  a flattish  form,  and
about  two  inches  thick.  It  is  enlarged  or  renewed  every  year,  some  nests
being  found  to  be  from  four  to  six  inches  in  height.  In  some  instances
the  water  surrounds  the  foot  of  the  tussock  on  which  it  is  placed.  They
begin  to  lay  on  the  first  days  of  June.  The  eggs,  of  which  the  full  num-
ber is  four,  greatly  resemble  in  colour  those  of  the  Sandwich  and  Arctic
Terns.  When  disturbed  at  this  season,  these  birds  are  as  noisy  as  any  of
the  tribe  ; but  they  remain  close  over  the  place,  and  go  to  the  river  only
at  intervals  to  procure  food.  Both  sexes  incubate  by  turns,  and  the  eggs
are  kept  constantly  covered.  They  average  in  length  one  inch  and  three-
eighths  by  one  inch  across,  and  are  nearly  of  an  elliptical  form,  being  but
slightly  pointed  at  one  end;  their  ground  colour  is  greenish-buff,  spotted
and  dashed  with  reddish  umber  and  black,  more  abundantly  toward  the
middle.  I took  the  trouble  of  counting  the  number  of  nests  round  the
})ond,  and  found  it  more  than  seventy.  About  the  middle  of  August  the
young  fly  well,  and  are  able  to  seek  food  for  themselves.  I have  seen  the
parent  birds  feed  them  on  wing  in  the  manner  of  swallows.

They  alight  less  frequently  on  the  water  than  the  larger  species.  On
shore  they  walk  like  swallows.  During  autumn  they  hunt  for  food  over
the  wet  prairies,  passing  low,  and  picking  up  the  insects  as  they  proceed
without  alighting.  At  this  season,  both  old  and  young  have  become  more
silent.  They  are  at  all  times  less  shy  than  most  others  of  the  tribe.  Their
principal  food  consists  of  aquatic  insects  and  small  fry,  and  their  flesh  is
tolerably  good.

Since  I wrote  the  above  notice,  I have  been  informed  by  my  youngest
son  that  this  species  was  still  seen  about  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  in  con-
siderable numbers,  a few  years  ago ; but  that,  although  he  observed  them
there  in  spring,  summer,  and  early  autumn,  he  did  not  discover  their
breeding  grounds,  which  are  perhaps  now  farther  inland  tlian  formerly.


BLACK  TERN.


537


Sterna  nigra,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  i.  p.  227. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  810 —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  355.

Short-tailed  Tern,  Sterna  plumbea,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  83.  pi.  60.
fig.  3.  Young.

Sterna  nigra.  Black  Tern,  Swains,  and  Richards,  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  415.

Black  Tern,  or  Stern,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  282.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  same  length  as  the  head,  slender,  tapering,  compressed,
nearly  straight,  very  acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly
arched,  the  ridge  convex  at  the  base,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  the  sides
sloping  at  the  base,  slightly  convex  and  nearly  perpendicular  towards  the
tip,  the  edges  sharp,  the  tip  acute.  Nasal  groove  reaching  nearly  to  the
middle  of  the  mandible ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  direct,  pervious.  Lower
mandible  with  the  angle  very  narrow,  acute,  extending  beyond  the  middle,
the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  erect  and  slightly  convex,  the  edges
sharp  and  s lightly  inflected,  the  tip  extremely  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong ; neck  rather  short ; body  slender.
Feet  small;  tibia  bare  for  a short  space  ; tarsus  very  short,  covered  an-
tei’iorly  with  small  scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  reticular  scales ;
toes  very  slender,  the  first  extremely  small,  the  third  longest,  the  fourth
nearly  as  long,  the  second  much  shorter,  all  scutellate  above,  the  anterior
connected  by  short  reticulate  webs,  having  a concave  margin,  and  not  ex-
tending much  beyond  the  middle  of  the  toes.  Claws  long,  slender,  arched,
compressed,  acute,  that  of  hind  toe  smallest,  of  middle  toe  largest,  and
having  a thin  dilated  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended,  on  the  head  short,  on  the  back  some-
what compact.  Wings  very  long,  narrow  and  pointed ; primary  quills
tapering,  the  outer  slightly  curved  inwards  at  the  end,  the  first  longest,
the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondary  short,  broad,  incurved,  rounded.
Tail  of  moderate  length,  emarginate,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  brown.  Feet  reddish-brown,  claws  black.
Head,  neck,  breast,  sides  and  abdomen,  greyish-black  ; lower  tail-coverts
white,  lower  wing-coverts  bluish-grey.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper
parts  is  dark  bluish-grey  ; the  outer  web  of  the  first  quill  greyish-black.

Length  to  end  of  tail  9 inches,  to  end  of  wings  11  ; extent  of  wings
24 ; wing  from  flexure  8| ; tail  3| ; bill  along  the  back  l^V?  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  Ix^^;  tarsus  ; middle  toe  its  claw
Weight  3 oz.


338


BLACK  TERN.


Young  Male  in  Autumn.  Plate  CCLXXX.

The  bill,  iris,  and  feet  nearly  as  in  the  adult.  The  upper  parts  are
greyish-blue,  the  feathers  of  the  fore  part  of  the  back,  and  especially  the
scapulars,  brown  towards  the  end ; the  upper  and  hind  part  of  the  head
greyish-black,  of  which  there  is  a darker  mark  behind,  and  another  before
the  eye ; the  forehead  greyish- white,  as  are  the  sides  of  the  head,  the  fore
neck,  the  breast,  and  the  abdomen ; the  sides  dusky  grey  ; the  lower  wing-
coverts  greyish-white.  The  quills  are  darker  towards  the  end,  and  the
first  primary  is  black  along  the  outer  web.

Length  to  end  of  tail  7f  inches,  to  end  of  wings  9A  ; wing  from
flexure  7| ; tail  2j§  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  edge  of  lower  man-
dible 1 1^;  tarsus  ; middle  toe  its  claw


( 539  )


NATCHEZ  IN  1820.

One  clear  frosty  morning  in  December  I approached  in  my  flat-boat
the  City  of  Natchez.  The  shores  were  crowded  with  boats  of  various
kinds,  laden  with  the  produce  of  the  western  country ; and  there  was  a
hustle  about  them,  such  as  you  might  see  at  a general  fair,  each  person
being  intent  on  securing  the  advantage  of  a good  market.  Yet  the  scene
was  far  from  being  altogether  pleasing,  for  I was  yet  “ under  the  hill
but  on  removing  from  the  lower  town,  I beheld  the  cliffs  on  which  the
city,  properly  so  called,  has  been  built.  Vultures  unnumbered  flew  close
along  the  ground  on  expanded  pinions,  searching  for  food ; large  pines
and  superb  magnolias  here  and  there  raised  their  evergreen  tops  toward
the  skies ; while  on  the  opposite  shores  of  the  Mississippi,  vast  alluvial
beds  stretched  along,  and  the  view  terminated  with  the  dense  forest.
Steamers  moved  rapidly  on  the  broad  waters  of  the  great  stream ; the
sunbeams  fell  with  a peculiarly  pleasant  effect  on  the  distant  objects ; and
as  I watched  the  motions  of  the  White-headed  Eagle  while  pursuing  the
Fishing  Hawk,  I thought  of  the  wonderful  ways  of  that  Power  to  whom
I too  owe  my  existence.

Before  reaching  the  land  I had  observed  that  several  saw-mills  were
placed  on  ditches  or  narrow  canals,  along  which  the  water  rushed  from
the  inner  swamps  towards  the  river,  and  by  which  the  timber  is  conveyed
to  the  shore ; and  on  inquiring  afterwards,  I found  that  one  of  those  tem-
porary establishments  had  produced  a net  profit  of  upwards  of  six  thou-
sand dollars  in  a single  season.

There  is  much  romantic  scenery  about  Natchez.  The  Lower  Town
forms  a most  remarkable  contrast  with  the  Upper,  for  in  the  former  the
houses  were  not  regularly  built,  being  generally  dwellings  formed  of  the
abandoned  flat  boats,  placed  in  rows  as  if  with  the  view  of  forming  a long
street.  The  inhabitants  formed  a medley  which  it  is  beyond  my  power
to  describe  ; hundreds  of  laden  carts  and  other  vehicles  jogged  along  the
declivity  between  the  two  towns ; but  when,  by  a very  rude  causeway,  I
gained  the  summit,  I was  relieved  by  the  sight  of  an  avenue  of  those
beautiful  trees  called  here  the  Pride  of  China.  In  the  Upper  Town  I
found  the  streets  all  laid  off  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  tolerably
well  lined  with  buildings,  constructed  with  painted  bricks  or  boards.


540


NATCHEZ  IN  1820.


The  agricultural  richness  of  the  surrounding  country  was  shewn  by  the
heaps  of  cotton  bales  and  other  produce  that  encumbered  the  streets.  The
churches,  however,  did  not  please  me  ; but  as  if  to  make  up  for  this,  I
found  myself  unexpectedly  accosted  by  my  relative  Mr  Berthodd,  Avho
presented  me  with  letters  from  my  wife  and  sons.  These  circumstances  put
me  in  high  spirits,  and  we  proceeded  towards  the  best  hotel  in  the  place,
that  of  Mr  Gaunter.  The  house,  which  was  built  on  the  Spanish  plan,
and  of  great  size,  was  surrounded  by  large  virandas  overlooking  a fine
garden,  and  stood  at  a considerable  distance  from  any  other.  At  this
period  the  City  of  Natchez  had  a population  not  exceeding  three  thousand
individuals.  I have  not  visited  it  often  since,  but  I have  no  doubt  that,
like  all  the  other  towns  in  the  western  district  of  our  country,  it  has  great-
ly increased.  It  possessed  a bank,  and  the  mail  arrived  there  thrice  in
the  week  from  all  parts  of  the  Union.

The  first  circumstance  that  strikes  a stranger  is  the  mildness  of  the
temperature.  Several  vegetables  as  pleasing  to  the  eye  as  agreeable  to
the  palate,  and  which  are  seldom  seen  in  our  eastern  markets  before  May,
were  here  already  in  perfection.  The  Pewee  Fly-catcher  had  chosen  the
neighbourhood  of  the  city  for  its  winter  quarters,  and  our  deservedly
famed  Mocking  Bird  sang  and  danced  gratis  to  every  passer  by.  I was
surprised  to  see  the  immense  number  of  Vultures  that  strode  along  the
streets,  or  slumbered  on  the  roofs.  The  country  for  many  miles  inland
is  gently  undulated.  Cotton  is  produced  abundantly,  and  wealth  and
happiness  have  taken  up  their  abode  under  most  of  the  planter’s  roofs,
beneath  which  the  wearied  traveller  or  the  poor  wanderer  in  search  of  a
resting  place,  is  sure  to  meet  with  comfort  and  relief.  Game  is  abundant,
and  the  free  Indians  were  wont  in  those  days  to  furnish  the  markets  with
ample  supplies  of  venison  and  Wild  T urkey.  The  Mississippi,  which
bathes  the  foot  of  the  hill,  some  hundred  feet  below  the  town,  supplies
the  inhabitants  with  fish  of  various  kinds.  The  greatest  deficiency  is  that
of  water,  which  for  common  purposes  is  dragged  on  sledges  or  wheels  from
the  river,  while  that  used  for  drinking  is  collected  in  tanks  from  the  roofs,
and  becomes  very  scarce  during  protracted  droughts.  Until  of  late  years,
the  orange-tree  bore  fruit  in  the  open  air  ; but  owing  to  the  great  change
that  has  taken  place  in  the  temperature,  severe  though  transient  frosts  oc-
casionally occur,  which  now  prevent  this  plant  from  coming  to  perfection
in  the  open  air.

The  remains  of  an  old  Spanish  Fort  are  still  to  be  seen  at  a short  dis-


NATCHEZ  IN  1820.


541


tance  from  the  city.  If  I am  correctly  informed,  about  two  years  previ-
ous to  this  visit  of  mine,  a large  portion  of  the  hill  near  it  gave  way,  sank
about  a hundred  feet,  and  carried  many  of  the  houses  of  the  lower  town
into  the  river.  This,  it  would  appear,  was  occasioned  by  the  quicksand
running  springs  that  flow  beneath  the  strata  of  mixed  pebbles  and  clay,
of  which  the  hill  is  composed.  The  part  that  has  subsided  presents  the
appearance  of  a basin  or  bowl,  and  is  used  as  a depot  for  the  refuse  of  the
town,  on  which  the  Vultures  feed  when  they  can  get  nothing  better.
There  it  was  that  I saw  a White-headed  Eagle  chase  one  of  those  filthy
birds,  knock  it  down,  and  feast  on  the  entrails  of  a horse,  which  the  Car-
rion Crow  had  partly  swallowed.

I did  not  meet  at  Natchez  with  many  individuals  fond  of  Ornitho-
logical pursuits,  but  the  hospitality  with  which  I was  received  was  such
as  I am  not  likely  to  forget.  Mr  Garnier  subsequently  proved  an  ex-
cellent friend  to  me,  as  you  may  find  elsewhere  recorded.  Of  another  in-
dividual, whose  kindness  towards  me  is  indelibly  impressed  on  my  heart,
I would  say  a few  words,  although  he  was  such  a man  as  Fenelon  alone
could  describe.  Charles  Carre''  was  of  French  origin,  the  son  of  a
nobleman  of  the  old  regime.  His  acquirements  and  the  benevolence  of
his  disposition  were  such,  that  when  I first  met  with  him,  I could  not  help
looking  upon  him  as  another  Mentor.  Although  his  few  remaining
locks  were  grey,  his  countenance  still  expressed  the  gaiety  and  buoyant
feelings  of  youth.  He  had  the  best  religious  principles ; for  his  heart  and
his  purse  were  ever  open  to  the  poor.  Under  his  guidance  it  was  that  I
visited  the  whole  neighbourhood  of  Natchez  ; for  he  was  acquainted  with
all  its  history,  from  the  period  at  which  it  had  first  come  under  the  power
of  the  Spaniards  to  that  of  their  expulsion  from  the  country,  its  posses-
sion by  the  French,  and  subsequently  by  ourselves.  He  was  also  well
versed  in  the  Indian  languages,  spoke  French  with  the  greatest  purity,  and
was  a religious  poet.  Many  a pleasant  hour  have  I spent  in  his  com-
pany ; but  alas  ! he  has  gone  the  way  of  all  the  earth  !


( 542  )


THE  GREAT  WHITE  HERON

ArDEA  OCCIDENTALIS.

PLATE  CCLXXXI.


I AM  now  about  to  present  you  with  an  account  of  the  habits  of  the
largest  species  of  the  Heron  tribe  hitherto  found  in  the  United  States,
and  which  is  indeed  remarkable  not  only  for  its  great  size,  but  also  for
the  pure  white  of  its  plumage  at  every  period  of  its  life.  Writers  who
have  subdivided  the  family,  and  stated  that  none  of  the  True  Herons  are
white,  will  doubtless  be  startled  when  they,  for  the  first  time,  look  at  my
plate  of  this  bird.  I think,  however,  that  our  endeavours  to  discover  the
natural  arrangement  of  things  cannot  be  uniformly  successful,  and  it  is
clear  that  he  only  who  has  studied  all  can  have  much  chance  of  disposing
all  according  to  their  relations.

On  the  24th  of  April  1832,  I landed  on  Indian  Key  in  Florida,  and
immediately  after  formed  an  acquaintance  with  Mr  Egan,  of  whom  I have
already  several  times  spoken.  He  it  was  who  first  gave  me  notice  of  the
species  which  forms  the  subject  of  this  article,  and  of  which  I cannot  find
any  description.  The  next  day  after  that  of  my  arrival,  when  1 was
prevented  from  accompanying  him  by  my  anxiety  to  finish  a drawing,
he  came  in  with  two  young  birds  alive,  and  another  lying  dead  in  a
nest,  which  he  had  cut  off  from  a mangrove.  You  may  imagine  liow
delighted  I was,  when  at  the  very  first  glance  I felt  assured  that  they
were  different  from  any  that  I had  previously  seen.  The  two  living  birds
were  of  a beautiful  white,  slightly  tinged  with  cream-colour,  remark-
ably fat  and  strong  for  their  age,  which  the  worthy  Pilot  said  could
not  be  more  than  three  weeks.  The  dead  bird  was  quite  putrid  and
much  smaller.  It  looked  as  if  it  had  accidentally  been  trampled  to
death  by  the  parent  birds  ten  or  twelve  days  before,  the  body  being
almost  flat  and  covered  with  filth.  The  nest  with  the  two  live  birds  was
placed  in  the  yard.  The  young  Herons  seemed  quite  unconcerned  when
a person  approached  them,  although  on  displaying  one's  hand  to  them,
they  at  once  endeavoured  to  strike  it  witli  their  bill.  My  Newfoundland
dog,  a well-trained  and  most  sagacious  animal,  was  whistled  for  and  came


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


543


vip ; on  which  the  birds  rose  partially  on  their  legs,  ruffled  all  their  feathers,
spread  their  wings,  opened  their  bills,  and  clicked  their  mandibles  in  great
anger,  but  without  attempting  to  leave  the  nest.  I ordered  the  dog  to  go
near  them,  but  not  to  hurt  them.  They  waited  until  he  went  within
striking  distance,  when  the  largest  suddenly  hit  him  with  its  bill,  and
hung  to  his  nose.  Plato,  however,  took  it  all  in  good  part,  and  merely
brought  the  bird  towards  me,  when  I seized  it  by  the  wings,  which  made  it
let  go  its  hold.  It  walked  off  as  proudly  as  any  of  its  tribe,  and  I was
delighted  to  find  it  possessed  of  so  much  courage.  These  birds  were  left
under  the  charge  of  Mrs  Egan,  until  I returned  from  my  various  excur-
sions to  the  different  islands  along  the  coast.

On  the  26th  of  the  same  month,  Mr  Thruston  took  me  and  my  com-
panions in  his  beautiful  barge  to  some  keys  on  which  the  Florida  Cormo-
rants were  breeding  in  great  numbers.  As  we  were  on  the  way  we  ob-
served two  tall  white  Herons  standing  on  their  nests ; but  although  I was
anxious  to  procure  them  abve,  an  unfortunate  shot  from  one  of  the  party
brought  them  to  the  water.  They  were,  I was  told,  able  to  fly,  but  pro-
bably had  never  seen  a man  before.  While  searching  that  day  for  nests
of  the  Zenaida  Dove,  we  observed  a young  Heron  of  this  species  stalking
among  the  mangroves  that  bordered  the  key  on  which  we  were,  and  im-
mediately pursued  it.  Had  you  been  looking  on,  good  Reader,  you  might
have  enjoyed  a hearty  laugh,  although  few  of  us  could  have  joined  you.
Seven  or  eight  persons  were  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  this  single  bird,
which,  with  extended  neck,  wings,  and  legs,  made  off  among  the  tangled
trees  at  such  a rate,  that,  anxious  as  I was  to  obtain  it  alive,  I several
times  thought  of  shooting  it.  At  length,  however,  it  was  caught,  its  bill
was  securely  tied,  its  legs  were  drawn  up,  and  fastened  by  a strong  coid,
and  the  poor  thing  was  thus  conveyed  to  Indian  Key,  and  placed  along  with
its  kinsfolk.  On  seeing  it,  the  latter  immediately  ran  towards  it  with  open
bills,  and  greeted  it  with  a most  friendly  welcome,  passing  their  heads
over  and  under  its  own  in  the  most  curious  and  indeed  ludicrous  manner.
A bucketful  of  fish  was  thrown  to  them,  which  they  swallowed  in  a few
minutes.  After  a few  days,  they  also  ate  pieces  of  pork-rhind,  cheese,
and  other  substances.

While  sailing  along  the  numerous  islands  that  occur  between  Indian
Key  and  Key  West,  I saw  many  birds  of  this  species,  some  in  pains,  some
single,  and  others  in  flocks  ; but  on  no  occasion  did  I succeed  in  getting
within  shot  of  one.  Mr  Egan  consoled  me  by  saying  that  he  knew  some


544


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


places  beyond  Key  West  where  I certainly  should  obtain  several,  were
we  to  spend  a day  and  a night  there  for  the  purpose.  Dr  Benjamin
Strobel  afterwards  gave  me  a similar  assurance.  In  the  course  of  a week
after  reaching  Key  West,  I in  fact  procured  more  than  a dozen  birds  of
different  ages,  as  well  as  nests  and  eggs,  and  their  habits  were  carefully
examined  by  several  of  my  party.

At  three  o’clock  one  morning,  you  might  have  seen  Mr  Egan  and
myself,  about  eight  miles  from  our  harbour,  paddling  as  silently  as  possi-
ble over  some  narrow  and  tortuous  inlets,  formed  by  the  tides  through  a
large  flat  and  partially  submersed  key.  There  we  expected  to  find  many
White  Herons ; but  our  labour  was  for  a long  time  almost  hopeless,  for,
although  other  birds  occurred,  we  had  determined  to  shoot  nothing  but
the  Great  White  Heron,  and  none  of  that  species  came  near  us.  At  length,
after  six  or  seven  hours  of  hard  labour,  a Heron  flew  right  over  our  heads,
and  to  make  sure  of  it,  we  both  fired  at  once.  The  bird  came  down  dead.
It  proved  to  be  a female,  which  had  either  been  sitting  on  her  eggs  or
had  lately  hatched  her  young,  her  belly  being  bare,  and  her  plumage
considerably  worn.  We  now  rested  a while,  and  breakfasted  on  some  bis-
cuit soaked  in  molasses  and  water,  reposing  under  the  shade  of  the  man-
groves, where  the  mosquitoes  had  a good  opportunity  of  breaking  their
fast  also.  We  went  about  from  one  key  to  another,  saw  a great  number
of  White  Herons,  and  at  length,  towards  night,  reached  the  Marion,
rather  exhausted,  and  having  a solitary  bird.  Mr  Egan  and  I had  been
most  of  the  time  devising  schemes  for  procuring  others  with  less  trouble,
a task  which  might  easily  have  been  accomplished  a month  before,  when,
as  he  said,  the  birds  were  “ sitting  hard.”  He  asked  if  I would  return
that  night  at  twelve  o’clock  to  the  last  key  which  we  had  visited.  I men-
tioned the  proposal  to  our  worthy  Captain,  who,  ever  willing  to  do  all
in  his  power  to  oblige  me,  when  the  service  did  not  require  constant
attendance  on  board,  said  that  if  I would  go,  he  would  accompany  us  in
the  gig.  Our  guns  were  soon  cleaned,  provisions  and  ammunition  placed
in  the  boats,  and  after  supping  we  talked  and  laughed  until  the  appoint-
ed time.

“ Eight  Bells”  made  us  bound  on  our  feet,  and  off  we  pushed  for  the
islands.  The  moon  shone  bright  in  the  clear  sky  ; but  as  the  breeze  had
died  away,  we  betook  ourselves  to  our  oars.  The  state  of  the  tide  was
against  us,  and  we  had  to  drag  our  boats  several  miles  over  the  soapy
shallows  ; but  at  last  we  found  ourselves  in  a deep  channel  beneath  the


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


545


hanging  mangroves  of  a large  key,  where  we  had  observed  the  Herons
retiring  to  roost  the  previous  evening.  There  we  lay  quietly  until  day-
break. But  the  mosquitoes  and  sandflies  ! Reader,  if  you  have  not  been
in  such  a place,  you  cannot  easily  conceive  the  torments  we  endured  for  a
whole  hour,  when  it  was  absolutely  necessary  for  us  to  remain  perfectly
motionless.  At  length  day  dawned,  and  the  boats  parted,  to  meet  on  the
other  side  of  the  key.  Slowly  and  silently  each  advanced.  A Heron
sprung  from  its  perch  almost  directly  over  our  heads.  Three  barrels  were
discharged, — in  vain  ; the  bird  flew  on  unscathed ; the  pilot  and  I had
probably  been  too  anxious.  As  the  bird  sped  away,  it  croaked  loudly,
and  the  noise,  together  with  the  report  of  our  guns,  roused  some  hun-
dreds of  these  Herons,  which  flew  from  the  mangroves,  and  in  the  grey
light  appeared  to  sail  over  and  around  us  like  so  many  spectres.  I almost
despaired  of  procuring  any  more.  The  tide  was  now  rising,  and  when  we
met  with  the  other  boat  we  were  told,  that  if  we  had  waited  until  we
could  have  shot  at  them  while  perched,  we  might  have  killed  several ; but
that  now  we  must  remain  until  full  tide,  for  the’birds  had  gone  to  their
feeding  grounds.

The  boats  parted  again,  and  it  was  now  arranged  that  whenever  a
Heron  was  killed,  another  shot  should  be  fired  exactly  one  minute  after,  by
which  each  party  would  be  made  aware  of  the  success  of  the  other.  Mr
Egan,  pointing  to  a nest  on  which  stood  two  small  young  birds,  desired
to  be  landed  near  it.  I proceeded  into  a narrow  bayou,  where  we  re-
mained quiet  for  about  half  an  hour,  when  a Heron  flew  over  us  and  was
shot.  It  was  a very  fine  old  male.  Before  firing  my  signal  shot,  I heard
a report  from  afar,  and  a little  after  mine  was  discharged  I heard  another
shot,  so  I felt  assured  that  two  birds  had  been  killed.  When  I reached
the  Captain’s  boat  I found  that  he  had  in  fact  obtained  two  ; but  Mr  Egan
had  waited  two  hours  in  vain  near  the  nest,  for  none  of  the  old  birds  came
up.  We  took  him  from  his  hiding  place,  and  brought  the  Herons  along
with  us.  It  was  now  nearly  high  water.  About  a mile  from  us,  more
than  a hundred  Herons  stood  on  a mud-bar  up  to  their  bellies.  The  pilot
said  that  now  was  our  best  chance,  as  the  tide  would  soon  force  them  to
fly,  when  they  would  come  to  rest  on  the  trees.  So  we  divided,  each
choosing  his  own  place,  and  I went  to  the  lowest  end  of  the  key,  where  it
was  separated  from  another  by  a channel.  I soon  had  the  pleasure  of  ob-
serving all  the  Herons  take  to  wing,  one  after  another,  in  quick  succes-
sion. I then  heard  my  companions’  guns,  but  no  signal  of  success.  Ob-


VOL.  III.


M m


546-


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


taining  a good  chance  as  I thought,  I fired  at  a remarkably  large  bird,
and  distinctly  heard  the  shot  strike  it.  The  Heron  merely  croaked,  and
pursued  its  course.  Not  another  bird  came  near  enough  to  be  shot  at,
although  many  had  alighted  on  the  neighbouring  key,  and  stood  perched
like  so  many  newly  finished  statues  of  the  purest  alabaster,  forming  a fine
contrast  to  the  deep  blue  sky.  The  boats  joined  us.  Mr  Egan  had  one
bird,  the  Captain  another,  and  both  looked  at  me  with  surprise.  We
now  started  for  the  next  key,  where  we  expected  to  see  more.  When  we
had  advanced  several  hundred  yards  along  its  low  banks,  we  found  the
bird  at  which  I had  shot  lying  with  extended  wings  in  the  agonies  of
death.  It  was  from  this  specimen  that  the  drawing  was  made.  I was
satisfied  with  the  fruits  of  this  day’s  excursion.  On  other  occasions  I
procured  fifteen  more  birds,  and  judging  that  number  sufficient,  I left  the
Herons  to  their  occupations.

This  species  is  extremely  shy.  Sometimes  they  would  rise  when  at  the
distance  of  half  a mile  from  us,  and  fly  quite  out  of  sight.  If  pursued,
they  would  return  to  the  very  keys  or  mud-flats  from  which  they  had
risen,  and  it  was  almost  impossible  to  approach  one  while  perched  or
standing  in  the  water.  Indeed,  I have  no  doubt  that  half  a dozen  speci-
mens of  Ardea  Herodias  could  be  procured  for  one  of  the  present,  in  the
same  time  and  under  similar  circumstances.

The  Great  White  Heron  is  a constant  resident  on  the  Florida  Keys,
where  it  is  found  more  abundant  during  the  breeding  season  than  any-
where else.  They  rarely  go  as  far  eastward  as  Cape  Florida,  and  are  not
seen  on  the  Tortugas,  probably  because  these  islands  are  destitute  of  man-
groves. They  begin  to  pair  early  in  March,  but  many  do  not  lay  their
eggs  until  the  middle  of  April.  Their  courtships  were  represented  to  me
as  similar  to  those  of  the  Great  Blue  Heron.  Their  nests  are  at  times
met  with  at  considerable  distances  from  each  other,  and  although  many
are  found  on  the  same  keys,  they  are  placed  farther  apart  than  those  of
the  species  just  mentioned.  They  are  seldom  more  than  a few  feet  above
high  water-mark,  which  in  the  Floridas  is  so  low,  that  they  look  as  if  only
a yard  or  two  above  the  roots  of  the  trees.  From  twenty  to  thirty  nests
which  I examined  were  thus  placed.  They  were  large,  about  three  feet
in  diameter,  formed  of  sticks  of  different  sizes,  but  without  any  appear-
ance of  lining,  and  quite  flat,  being  several  inches  thick.  The  eggs  are
always  three,  measure  two  inches  and  three  quarters  in  length,  one  inch
and  eight-twelfths  in  breadth,  and  have  a rather  thick  shell,  of  a uniform


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


547


plain  light  bluish-green  colour.  Mr  Egan  told  me  that  incubation  con-
tinues about  thirty  days,  that  both  birds  sit,  (the  female,  however,  being
most  assiduous,)  and  with  their  legs  stretched  out  before  them,  in  the
same  manner  as  the  young  when  two  or  three  weeks  old.  The  latter,  of
which  I saw  several  from  ten  days  to  a month  old,  were  pure  white,  slightly
tinged  with  cream  colour,  and  had  no  indications  of  a crest.  Those  which
I carried  to  Charleston,  and  which  were  kept  for  more  than  a year,  ex-
hibited nothing  of  the  kind.  I am  unable  to  say  how  long  it  is  before
they  attain  their  full  plumage  as  represented  in  the  plate,  when,  as  you
see,  the  head  is  broadly  but  loosely  and  shortly  tufted,  the  feathers  of  the
breast  pendent,  but  not  remarkably  long,  and  there  are  none  of  the  nar-
row feathers  seen  in  other  species  over  the  rump  or  wings.

These  Herons  are  sedate,  quiet,  and  perhaps  even  less  animated  than
the  A.  Herodias.  They  walk  majestically,  with  firmness  and  great  ele-
gance. Unlike  the  species  just  named,  iheyjlock  at  their  feeding  grounds,
sometimes  a hundred  or  more  being  seen  together  ; and  what  is  still  more
remarkable  is,  that  they  betake  themselves  to  the  mud-flats  or  sand-bars
at  a distance  from  the  Keys  on  which  they  roost  and  breed.  They  seem,
in  so  far  as  I could  judge,  to  be  diurnal,  an  opinion  corroborated  by  the
testimony  of  Mr  Egan,  a person  of  great  judgment,  sagacity  and  inte-
grity. While  on  these  banks,  they  stand  motionless,  rarely  moving  to-
wards their  prey,  but  waiting  until  it  comes  near,  when  they  strike  it  and
swallow  it  alive,  or  when  large  beat  it  on  the  water,  or  shake  it  violently,
biting  it  severely  all  the  while.  They  never  leave  their  feeding  grounds
until  driven  off  by  the  tide,  remaining  until  the  water  reaches  their  body.
So  wary  are  they,  that  although  they  may  return  to  roost  on  the  same
keys,  they  rarely  alight  on  trees  to  which  they  have  resorted  before,  and
if  repeatedly  disturbed  they  do  not  return,  for  many  weeks  at  least.
When  roosting,  they  generally  stand  on  one  foot,  the  other  being  drawn
up,  and,  unlike  the  Ibises,  are  never  seen  lying  flat  on  trees,  where,  how-
ever, they  draw  in  their  long  neck,  and  place  their  head  under  their
wing.

I was  often  surprised  to  see  that  while  a flock  was  resting  by  day  in
the  position  just  described,  one  or  more  stood  with  outstretched  necks,
keenly  eyeing  all  around,  now  and  then  suddenly  starting  at  the  sight  of
a Porpoise  or  Shark  in  chase  of  some  fish.  The  appearance  of  a man  or
a boat,  seemed  to  distract  them ; and  yet  I was  told  that  nobody  ever

Mm2


548


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


goes  in  pursuit  of  them.  If  surprised,  they  leave  their  perch  with  a rough
croaking  sound,  and  fly  directly  to  a great  distance,  but  never  inland.

The  flight  of  the  Great  White  Heron  is  firm,  regular,  and  greatly
protracted.  They  propel  themselves  by  regular  slow  flaps,  the  head  being
drawn  in  after  they  have  proceeded  a few  yards,  and  their  legs  extended
behind,  as  is  the  case  with  all  other  Herons.  They  also  now  and  then  rise
high  in  the  air,  where  they  sail  in  wide  circles,  and  they  never  alight  with-
out performing  this  circling  flight,  unless  when  going  to  feeding  grounds
on  which  other  individuals  have  already  settled.  It  is  truly  sui’prising  that
a bird  of  so  powerful  a flight  never  visits  Georgia  or  the  Carolinas,  nor  goes
to  the  Mainland.  When  you  see  them  about  the  middle  of  the  day  on  their
feeding  grounds  they  “ loom”  to  about  double  their  size,  and  present  a
singular  appearance.  It  is  difficult  to  kill  them  unless  with  buck-shot,
which  we  found  ourselves  obliged  to  use.

When  I left  Key  West,  on  our  return  towards  Charleston,  I took
with  me  two  young  birds  that  had  been  consigned  to  the  care  of  my
friend  Dr  B.  Strobel,  who  assured  me  that  they  devoured  more  than
their  weight  of  food  per  day,  I had  also  two  young  birds  of  the  Ardea
Herodias  alive.  After  bringing  them  on  board,  I placed  them  all  toge-
ther in  a very  large  coop  ; but  was  soon  obliged  to  separate  the  two  species,
for  the  white  birds  would  not  be  reconciled  to  the  blue,  which  they  would
have  killed.  While  the  former  had  the  privilege  of  the  deck  for  a few
minutes,  they  struck  at  the  smaller  species,  such  as  the  young  of  Ardea
riifescens  and  A.  Liidoviciana,  some  of  which  they  instantly  killed  and
swallowed  entire,  although  they  were  abundantly  fed  on  the  flesh  of  green
Turtles.  None  of  the  sailors  succeeded  in  making  friends  with  them.

On  reaching  Indian  Key,  I found  those  which  had  been  left  with  Mrs
Egan,  in  excellent  health  and  much  increased  in  size,  but  to  my  surprise
observed  that  their  bills  were  much  broken,  which  she  assured  me  had
been  caused  by  the  great  force  with  which  they  struck  at  the  fishes
thrown  to  them  on  the  rocks  of  their  enclosure, — a statement  which  I
found  confirmed  by  my  own  observation  in  the  course  of  the  day.  It  was
almost  as  difficult  to  catch  them  in  the  yard,  as  if  they  had  never  seen  a
man  before,  and  we  were  obliged  to  tie  their  bills  fast,  to  avoid  being
wounded  by  them  while  carrying  them  on  board.  They  thrived  well,  and
never  manifested  the  least  animosity  towards  each  other.  One  of  them
which  accidentally  walked  before  the  coop  in  which  the  Blue  Herons  were,


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


549


thrust  its  bill  between  the  bars,  and  transfixed  the  head  of  one  of  these
birds,  so  that  it  was  instantaneously  killed.

When  we  arrived  at  Charleston,  four  of  them  were  still  alive.  They
were  taken  to  my  friend  John  Bachman,  who  was  glad  to  see  them.  He
kept  a pair,  and  offered  the  other  to  our  mutual  friend  Dr  Samuel  Wil-
son, who  accepted  them,  but  soon  afterwards  gave  them  to  Dr  Gibbes
of  Columbia  College,  merely  because  they  had  killed  a number  of  Ducks.
My  friend  Bachman  kept  two  of  these  birds  for  many  months ; but  it
was  difficult  for  him  to  procure  fish  enough  for  them,  as  they  swallowed
a bucketful  of  mullets  in  a few  minutes,  each  devouring  about  a gallon
of  these  fishes.  They  betook  themselves  to  roosting  in  a beautiful  arbour
in  his  garden  ; where  at  night  they  looked  with  their  pure  white  plumage
like  beings  of  another  world.  It  is  a curious  fact,  that  the  points  of  their
bills,  of  which  an  inch  at  least  had  been  broken,  grew  again,  and  were  as
regularly  shaped  at  the  end  of  six  months  as  if  nothing  had  happened  to
them.  In  the  evening  or  early  in  the  morning,  they  would  frequently
set,  like  pointer  dogs,  at  moths  which  hovered  over  the  flowers,  and  with
a well-directed  stroke  of  their  bill  seize  the  fluttering  insect  and  instant-
ly swallow  it.  On  many  occasions,  they  also  struck  at  chickens,  grown
fowls  and  ducks,  which  they  would  tear  up  and  devour.  Once  a cat
which  was  asleep  in  the  sunshine,  on  the  wooden  steps  of  the  viranda,  was
pinned  through  the  body  to  the  boards,  and  killed  by  one  of  them.  At
last  they  began  to  pursue  the  younger  children  of  my  worthy  friend,  who
therefore  ordered  them  to  be  killed.  One  of  them  was  beautifully  mounted
by  my  assistant  Mr  Henry  Ward,  and  is  now  in  the  Museum  of  Charles-
ton. Dr  Gibbes  was  obliged  to  treat  his  in  the  same  manner ; and  I after-
wards saw  one  of  them  in  his  collection.  Of  the'fifteen  skins  of  this  species
which  I carried  to  Philadelphia,  one  was  presented  to  the  Academy  of
Natural  Sciences  of  that  beautiful  city,  another  was  given  in  exchange
for  various  skins,  and  two  I believe  are  now  in  the  possession  of  George
Cooper,  Esq.  of  New  York.  Two  were  sent  along  with  other  specimens
to  Mr  Selby  of  Twizel  House,  Northumberland.  On  my  arrival  in
England,  I presented  a pair  to  His  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Sussex,
who  gave  them  to  the  British  Museum,  where  I have  since  seen  them
mounted.  I also  presented  a specimen  to  the  Zoological  Society  of  Lon-
don

Mr  Egan  kept  for  about  a year  one  of  these  birds,  which  lie  raised


\


550


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


from  the  nest,  and  which,  when  well  grown,  was  allowed  to  ramble  along
the  shores  of  Indian  Key  in  quest  of  food.  One  of  the  wings  had  been
cut,  and  the  bird  was  known  to  all  the  resident  inhabitants,  but  was  at
last  shot  by  some  Indian  Hunter,  who  had  gone  there  to  dispose  of  a col-
lection of  sea  shells.

Some  of  the  Herons  feed  on  the  berries  of  certain  trees  during  the
latter  part  of  autumn  and  the  beginning  of  winter.  Dr  B.  B.  Strobel
observed  the  Night  Heron  eating  those  of  the  “ Gobolimbo,”  late  in  Sep-
tember at  Key  West.

Among  the  varied  and  contradictory  descriptions  of  Herons,  you  wiU
find  it  alleged  that  these  birds  seize  fish  while  on  wing  by  plunging  the
head  and  neck  into  the  water  ; but  this  seems  to  me  extremely  doubtful.
Nor,  I believe,  do  they  watch  for  their  prey  while  perched  on  trees.  Ano-
ther opinion  is,  that  Herons  are  always  thin,  and  unfit  for  food.  This,
however,  is  by  no  means  generally  the  case  in  America,  and  I have
thought  these  birds  very  good  eating  when  not  too  old.

Great  White  Heron,  Ardea  occidentalis.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXI.

Bill  much  longer  than  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering  to  a
point,  the  mandibles  nearly  equal,  but  the  point  of  the  upper  consider-
ably extended  beyond  that  of  the  lower.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dor-
sal line  nearly  straight,  the  ridge  broadly  convex  at  the  base,  convex  and
narrowed  towards  the  end,  a groove  from  the  base  to  near  the  tip,  beneath
which  the  sides  are  convex,  the  edges  extremely  thin  and  sharp,  towards
the  end  broken  into  irregular  serratures,  the  tip  acute.  Lower  mandible
with  the  angle  extremely  narrow  and  elongated,  the  dorsal  line  beyond
it  ascending  and  slightly  curved,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  ascending
and  slightly  concave,  the  edges  as  in  the  upper,  the  tip  acuminate.  Nos-
trils basal,  linear-oblong,  longitudinal,  with  a membrane  above  and  be-
hind.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  extremely  long,
slender.  Body  slender  and  compressed ; wings  large.  Feet  very  long ;
tibia  elongated,  its  lower  half  bare,  very  slender,  covered  all  round  with
large  elongated  hexagonal  scales  ; tarsus  long,  thicker  than  the  lower  part
of  the  tibia,  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  large  scutella,  excepting


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


351


at  the  two  extremities  where  there  are  large  angular  scales.  Toes  of  mo-
derate length,  rather  slender,  scutellate  above,  flattened,  and  reticularly
granulate  beneath,  the  thick  margins  covered  with  small  scales,  the  sides
with  larger ; the  third  and  fourth  toes  connected  at  the  base  by  a reticu-
lated web ; the  third  toe  much  longer  than  the  fourth,  which  is  consider-
ably longer  than  the  second,  the  first  about  half  the  length  of  the  third  ;
claws  of  moderate  size,  strong,  compressed,  curved,  obtuse,  the  first
largest,  the  third  next  in  size,  and  with  an  inner  regularly  pectinated  edge,
all  more  or  less  convex  beneath.

Space  between  the  bill  and  eye,  and  around  the  latter,  as  well  as  at
the  angle  of  the  mouth  bare,  as  is  the  lower  half  of  the  tibia.  Plumage
soft,  the  edges  of  the  feathers  loose  and  blended.  Feathers  of  the  upper
part  of  the  head  and  hind  neck  elongated  and  tapering  ; of  the  back  long
and  loose,  of  the  rump  soft  and  downy  ; scapulars  very  long,  rather  com-
pact, the  upper  loose.  Feathers  of  the  fore  neck  elongated,  of  the  sides
of  the  breast  anteriorly  very  long,  loose  and  tapering  ; of  the  rest  of  the
lower  parts  broader  but  pointed ; of  the  tibia  shortish.  Wings  large,
rounded ; primaries  curved,  strong,  broad,  tapering,  the  three  first  slightly
sinuate  on  the  inner  web ; third  quill  longest,  fourth  scarcely  shorter,
third  almost  as  long  as  fourth,  first  a quarter  of  an  inch  shorter;  secondaries
very  large,  broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  extending  as  far  as  the  longest
primary  when  the  wing  is  closed.  Tail  short,  slightly  rounded,  of  twelve
broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  yellow,  the  upper  mandible  dusky  green  at  its  base  ; loral  space
yellowish-green ; orbital  space  light  blue.  Iris  bright  yellow.  Tibia  and
hind  part  of  tarsus  yellow  ; fore  part  of  tibia  and  toes  olivaceous,  sides  of
the  latter  greenish-yellow ; claws  light  brown.  The  whole  of  the  plumage
is  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  54  inches,  to  end  of  wings  54,  to  end  of  claws
70;  extent  of  wings  83;  wing  from  flexure  19;  tail  7 ; bill  along  the
back  6|,  along  the  edges  8f  ; bare  part  of  tibia  6 ; tarsus  8|^ ; middle
toe  4d§,  its  claw  Weight  9^  lb.

The  Female  is  smaller,  but  similar  to  the  male.  The  dimensions  of
an  individual  were  as  follows.

Length  to  end  of  tail  50,  to  end  of  wings  50,  to  end  of  claws  65  ;
extent  of  wings  75  ; wing  from  flexure  18| ; tail  6| ; bill  along  the  back
5{g,  along  the  edges  7|,  its  depth  at  base  ; tarsus  7^;  middle  toe
4;^^,  its  claw  Weight  lb.


552


GREAT  WHITE  HERON.


The  Young  are  at  first  covered  with  white  down,  and  when  fledged  are
of  the  same  colour.  An  individual  just  able  to  fly  was  of  the  following
dimensions.

Length  to  end  of  tail  43|,  to  end  of  claws  56 ; wing  from  flexure  18 ;
bin  ; along  the  edge  7^  ; tarsus  6^  ; middle  toe  4|,  its  claw  |.
The  serrature  of  the  middle  claw  is  distinct  at  this  age.

In  this  species,  the  skin  is  uncommonly  tender,  and  of  a yellow  co-
lour.


( 553  )


THE  WHITE-WINGED  SILVERY  GULL

LARUS  LEUCOPTERUS,  FabER.

PLATE  CCLXXXII.  Adult  Male,  and  Young.

I HAVE  not  met  with  this  species  farther  south  than  the  Bay  of  New
York.  During  the  winter  it  is  not  rare  about  Boston  and  farther  east-
ward. At  the  approach  of  summer,  before  the  pairing  of  the  Herring
Gull,  Larus  argentatus,  the  White-winged  Gulls  collect  in  flocks,  and  set
out  for  the  distant  north,  where  they  breed.

The  flight  of  this  species  so  much  resembles  that  of  the  Herring  Gull,
that  were  it  not  for  its  smaller  size,  and  the  different  colour  of  its  wings,
it  could  not  be  distinguished  from  the  other.  It  is  less  shy,  however,
proceeds  farther  up  the  rivers  and  salt-water  creeks,  and  alights  oftener
on  the  water  as  well  as  on  the  salt-meadows,  than  that  species.  While  at
Portland  in  Maine,  I observed  a good  number  of  these  Gulls  flying  over
the  inner  harbour  close  to  the  shores,  descending  towards  the  water,  and
picking  up  garbage  in  the  manner  of  the  Herring  Gulls,  with  which  they
associated.  Their  notes  were  not  so  loud,  nor  so  often  heard.

I was  surprised  to  find  but  very  few  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  and
these  did  not  seem  to  be  breeding,  for  although  we  carefully  watched  them,
we  did  not  succeed  in  finding  any  nests.


Larus  leucopterus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  361.

Larus  leucopterus,  White-Winged  Silvery  Gull,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna
Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  418.

Larus  arcticus,  Macgillivray,  Wern.  Trans,  vol.  v.  p.  268.

White-winged  Silvery  Gull,  TSullall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  305.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  strong,  nearly  straight,  compressed.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  at  the  base,  arched  and  de-
clinate  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  slightly  convex,  the
edges  sharp,  nearly  direct,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  rather
long  and  narrow ; nostril  in  its  fore  part,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,
wider  anteriorly,  open  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  a prominence


554


WHITE-WINGED  SILVERY  GULL.


at  the  end  of  the  angle,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  then
nearly  straight  and  ascending,  the  sides  flat  and  slightly  inclined,  the
edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  rather  large.  Neck  of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  full.
Wings  very  long.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender ; tibia  bare
below  ; tarsus  somewhat  compressed,  covered  before  with  numerous  broad
scutella,  laterally  and  behind  with  roundish  scales,  on  the  outer  side  also
with  a row  of  small  scutella ; toes  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  all
covered  above  with  scutella ; the  anterior  connected  by  reticulated  webs,
the  two  lateral  with  an  external  thick  margin  ; the  first  extremely  small,
the  third  longest,  the  fourth  longer  than  second ; claw  of  hind  toe  small-
est, of  third  largest,  with  an  inner  thin  edge,  of  second  next  in  size,  all
more  or  less  compressed  and  obtuse.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  elastic,  very  soft  and  blended,  on  the
back  rather  compact.  Wing  svery  long,  broad,  pointed ; primaries  tapering,
the  first  longest,  the  second  slightly  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ;
secondaries  broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  rather  narrow.
Tail  of  moderate  length,  even,  of  twelve  broad  feathers.

Bill  gamboge-yellow,  with  a spot  of  orange-red  near  the  end  of  lower
mandible ; the  angle  of  the  mouth  and  the  edges  of  the  eyelids  are  also
orange-red.  Iris  pale  yellow.  Feet  pale  flesh-colour;  claws  greyish- brown.
The  whole  plumage  is  pure  white,  excepting  the  back  and  upper  surface
of  wings ; the  tips  of  the  secondaries,  the  terminal  third  or  so  of  the  pri-
maries, their  shafts,  and  the  upper  tail-coverts  also  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  26  inches,  to  end  of  wings  28|^ ; extent  of  wings
50  ; bill  along  the  back  If,  along  the  edge?  2^ ; tarsus  2^,  middle  toe
its  claw  ; wing  from  flexure  17^ ; tail  6|.

Young  in  winter.  Plate  CCLXXXII.  Fig.  2.

Bill  yellow,  the  tips  black.  Edges  of  eyelids  pale  reddish- orange ; iris
brown.  Feet  yellowish  flesh  colour ; claws  greyish-brown.  The  plumage
is  vellowish-grey,  marked  on  the  head  and  neck  with  longitudinal  streaks
of  pale  brown,  on  the  back  and  wings  with  transverse  undulations,  those
on  the  tail  much  fainter ; the  first  six  quills  destitute  of  markings.


( 535  )


THE  WANDERING  SHEARWATER.

PUFFINUS  CINEREUS,  Cuv.

PLATE  CCLXXXIII.  Male.

I HAVE  found  this  species  ranging  from  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence  to
that  of  Mexico,  but  have  very  seldom  seen  it  near  the  coast.  While  sail-
ing round  Nova  Scotia,  on  my  way  to  Labrador,  early  in  June,  I ob-
served one  evening  about  sunset,  a great  number  flying  from  the  rocky
shores,  which  induced  me  to  think  that  they  bred  there.  Scarcely  one
was  to  be  seen  during  the  day,  and  this  circumstance  strengthened  my
opinion,  as  I was  aware  that  these  birds  are  in  the  habit  of  remaining
about  their  nests  at  that  time.  In  September  the  case  is  very  different ;
for  they  are  then  seen  far  out  at  sea,  at  all  hours  by  day  and  through  the
night.

In  calm  weather,  they  are  fond  of  alighting  on  the  water,  in  company
with  the  Fulmars,  and  are  then  easily  approached.  They  swim  buoyant-
ly, and  have  a graceful  appearance  while  playing  among  themselves.
Two  that  had  been  caught  with  hooks,  walked  as  well  as  Ducks,  and
made  no  pretence  of  sitting  on  their  rumps,  as  some  writers  have  said
they  do.  On  being  approached,  they  opened  their  bills,  raised  their  fea-
thers, and  squirted  an  oily  substance  through  their  nostrils,  which  they
continued  to  do  when  held  in  the  hand,  at  the  same  time  scratching  with
their  sharp  claws  and  bills.  They  refused  all  sorts  of  food ; and  as  they
were  unpleasant  pets,  they  were  set  at  liberty.  To  my  great  surprise,
instead  of  flying  directly  off,  as  1 expected,  they  launched  toward  the
water,  dived  several  yards  obliquely,  and  on  coming  to  the  surface,  splashed
and  washed  themselves  for  several  minutes  before  they  took  to  wing,  when
they  flew  away  with  their  usual  ease  and  grace.

The  flight  of  this  wanderer  of  the  ocean  is  extremely  rapid  and  pro-
tracted. When  it  blows  hard,  it  skims  along  the  troughs  of  the  waves
on  extended  wings  in  large  curves,  shewing  its  upper  and  lower  parts  al-
ternately, evidently  with  the  view  of  being  aided  by  the  wind.  In  calm
weather  its  flight  is  much  lower  and  less  rapid,  and  it  rarely  throws  its
body  sideways,  but  seems  to  feed  more  abundantly  than  during  boiste-
rous weather.  Like  the  small  Petrels,  it  frequently  uses  its  feet  to  sup-


556


WANDERING  SHEARWATER.


port  itself  on  the  surface,  without  actually  alighting.  In  the  stomach  of
those  which  I opened,  I found  fishes,  portions  of  crabs,  sea-weeds,  and
oily  substances.  It  does  not  appear  that  this  species  goes  far  north,  as
was  formerly  supposed ; for  none  of  the  late  northern  voyagers  mention
having  seen  it,  although  they  found  the  Fulmar  abundant.

PuFFiKUS  ciNEKEDS,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  370.

Procellaria  cinerea,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  10.

Cinereous  Puffin,  Nuttall,  Manual,  p.  334.

Adult  Male.  -Plate  CCLXXXIII.

Bill  about  the  same  length  as  the  head,  rather  slender,  nearly  as  deep
as  broad  at  the  base,  compressed  towards  the  end,  slightly  curved  upwards,
with  the  tips  decurved.  Upper  mandible  with  a cere  at  the  base  extend-
ing narrow  to  the  nostrils,  which  are  placed  above,  each  covered  with  a
lateral  convex  plate,  and  open  anteriorly,  with  an  elliptical  aperture ;
the  dorsal  line  as  far  as  the  nostrils  nearly  straight,  then  suddenly  de-
flected, after  which  it  is  slightly  concave,^  but  towards  the  tip  incurved,
the  ridge  very  broad  and  convex  at  the  base,  narrower  beyond  the  nos-
trils, from  which  a groove  proceeds  obliquely  to  the  commencement  of
the  hooked  tip;  the  sides  convex  and  nearly  erect,  the  edges  sharp.
Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line
beyond  it,  decurved,  the  sides  sloping  outwards,  the  edges  sharp  and  in-
flected, the  curved  tip  grooved  above.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  rather  compressed.  Neck  short  and  stout.
Body  moderate,  deeper  than  broad.  Wings  long.  Feet  rather  large ;
tibia  bare  for  a short  space  below ; tarsus  of  moderate  length,  compressed,
covered  all  round  with  angular  scales,  the  hind  ones  much  smaller ; hind
toe  obsolete,  but  with  a small  conical  deflected  claw;  fore  toes  long,  slen-
der, connected  by  reticulated  webs,  the  lateral  ones  with  thin  edges ; outer
toe  slightly  longer  than  the  third,  but  with  a shorter  claw,  the  first  con-
siderably shorter  ; toes  scutellate  above ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,
that  of  third  toe  with  an  enlarged  sharp  edge.

Plumage  soft,  close,  blended ; on  the  back  compact,  the  feathers
rounded.  Wings  very  long,  pointed  ; primary  quills  tapering,  the  first
longest,  the  second  considerably  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated;  .se-
condaries short,  broad,  obliquely  rounded,  the  inner  not  elongated.  I’afl
of  moderate  length,  graduated,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.


WANDERING  SHEARWATER.


557


Bill  yellowish -green,  the  tips  brownish-black,  tinged  with  green.
Edges  of  eyelids  dark-grey  ; iris  brown.  Feet  light  greenish-grey,  webs
and  claws  yellowish  flesh-colour.  The  upper  parts  in  general  are  deep
brown,  the  hind  neck  paler  and  tinged  with  grey  ; the  primary  quills  and
tail  broMTiish-black.  The  lower  parts  are  greyish-white  ; the  lower  wing-
coverts  white,  those  next  the  edge  of  the  wing  greyish-black  towards  the
end,  the  axillary  feathers  white,  greyish-brown  towards  the  end,  lower  tail-
coverts  similar.

Length  to  end  of  tail  20  inches,  to  end  of  wings  21  ; to  end  of  claws
21  j ; extent  of  wings  45 ; wing  from  flexure  ; tail  5 ; bill  along  the
back  2t^5,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2J;  tarsus  2j;  middle  toe  2|,
its  claw  4.  Weight  1 lb.  9f  oz.


( 558  )


THE  PURPLE  SANDPIPER.

TmyGA  MARiTiMA,  Brunn.

PLATE  CCLXXXIV.  Adblt  in  summer  and  in  winter.

I AM  surprised  that  my  worthy  friend  Thomas  Nuttall  speaks  of
this  species  as  being  scarcely  ever  seen  in  the  United  States,  where,  to  my
knowledge,  it  is  on  the  contrary  very  abundant,  and  nowhere  more  so
than  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Harbour  of  Boston,  in  the  markets  of
which  city  it  is  sold  in  autumn  and  winter.  When  I was  there,  a gun-
ner whom  I employed  brought  me  several  dozens,  which  he  had  killed
in  the  course  of  a single  afternoon.  I have  also  seen  some  in  the  markets
of  New'  York.  Farther  south,  however,  they  are  rarely  met  with.

Timid  though  not  shy,  they  are  seen  in  flocks  of  eight  or  ten,  on  the
rocky  shores  of  the  sea.  They  seem  to  shun  sandy  beaches,  and  seldom
advance  far  inland.  While  I was  on  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  I observed  nu-
merous small  flocks  winging  their  w'ay  northward,  in  the  month  of  May.
On  one  occasion,  a flock  alighted  almost  at  my  feet,  so  that  I was  obliged
to  retire  to  a proper  distance  before  shooting  at  them.

Their  flight  is  pretty  rapid,  and  when  necessary  sustained,  for  I have
observed  them  flying  in  compact  bodies  across  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence.
When  started  along  the  shores,  they  emit  a feeble  weet,  which  is  repeated
two  or  three  times,  take  a sweep  over  the  water,  and  return'to  the  same
spot  or  near  it,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  the  Spotted  Sandpiper.  They
are  generally  very  busy  while  searching  for  food,  run  nimbly  with  the
body  lowered  on  the  legs,  which  are  much  bent,  go  to  the  edge  of  the
water,  seize  on  small  shell-fish,  shrimps  and  worms,  and  search  industri-
ously among  the  sea-weeds  for  marine  insects.  Their  marked  predilec-
tion for  rocky  shores  has  caused  them  to  be  named  “ Rock  Snipes”  by  the
gunners  of  our  eastern  coast.  In  autumn  and  winter  the  young  birds
become  fat,  and  afford  delicate  eating.

I was  sadly  disappointed  at  not  finding  them  breeding  on  any  part
of  the  coast  of  Labrador  which  I visited,  the  more  so  because  Dr
Richardson  says  they  are  abundant  on  the  shores  of  Hudson’s  Bay,
where  they  breed.  He  gives  no  description  of  the  nest  or  localities  on
which  they  deposit  their  eggs,  which  are  said  to  be  “ pyriform,  16^  lines


PURPLE  SANDPIPER.


559


long,  and  an  inch  across  at  their  greatest  breadth.  Their  colour  is  yel-
lowish-grey, interspersed  with  small  irregular  spots  of  pale  brown,  crowded
at  the  obtuse  end,  and  rare  at  the  other.”


Tringa  maritima,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  318 —
Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  382.

Purple  Sandpiper,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  115.

Adult  in  summer.  Plate  CCLXXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  almost  straight,  subulate,  compressed  at  the
base,  flexible ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  almost  straight,  being
slightly  deflected  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  narrow  and  convex,  towards  the
end  broader,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  rather  obtuse.  Nostrils  basal,  late-
ral, linear ; nasal  groove  extending  to  near  the  end  of  the  bill.  Lower
mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  it
slightly  concave,  the  sides  sloping  upwards  with  a narrow  groove,  the  tip
rounded.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  shortish.  Body  full.
Feet  of  moderate  length,  slender  ; tibia  bare  for  a short  space;  tarsus  ra-
ther short,  compressed,  anteriorly  covered  with  scutella,  laterally  reticu-
lated ; toes  of  moderate  length,  excepting  the  first,  which  is  very  small,
third  longest  and  including  the  claw  longer  than  the  tarsus,  fourth  slight-
ly longer  than  second ; fore  toes  scutellate  above,  without  webs  at  the
base,  the  middle  one  with  an  inner  thickish  margin,  the  lateral  each  with
an  outer  one  ; claws  considerably  curved,  compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  hind
toe  very  small,  of  middle  toe  largest,  with  a dilated  thin  inner  edge.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  on  the  back  rather  compact,  the  feathers  round-
ed. Wings  rather  long,  pointed  ; primaries  tapering,  rounded,  the  first
longest,  the  second  slightly  shorter ; outer  secondaries  short,  obliquely
truncate,  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  short,  rounded,  the  central
feathers  elongated.

Bill  deep  orange,  towards  the  end  dusky.  Edges  of  eyelids  grey,  iris
orange.  Feet  light  orange,  claws  dusky.  Head  greyish-brown  tinged
with  purple,  its  sides  and  those  of  the  neck  deep  purple ; back  and  wings
brownish-black,  with  purple  reflections,  the  margins  of  the  feathers  white ;
quills  brownish-black,  their  shafts,  the  tips  of  all  the  secondaries,  and  the
greater  part  of  the  middle  ones,  white ; middle  tail-feathers  brownish-
black,  tinged  with  purple,  the  lateral  shaded  into  ash-grey.  Upper  part


560


PURPLE  SANDPIPER.


of  throat  greyish  white,  fore  neck  grey  ; breast,  sides,  and  abdomen
white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  9|,  to  end  of  wings  9iV?  to  end  of  claws  10  ;
extent  of  wings  14<| ; wing  from  flexure  5,  tail  2^  ; bill  along  the  back
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  tarsus  middle  toe  yj,  its
claw  Weight  SJ  oz.

Adult  in  Winter.  Plate  CCLXXXIV.  Fig.  2.

The  principal  differences  in  the  winter  plumage  are,  that  the  lower
parts  are  pale  grey,  while  the  upper  have  the  purple  tints  much  fainter,
the  white  edgings  substituted  by  dull  grey.


( 561  )


THE  FORKED-TAILED  GULL.

Larus  Sabini,  Sabine.

PLATE  CCLXXXV.  Male.

On  my  return  from  Labrador,  I had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  this  inte
resting  little  Gull  flying  over  the  harbour  of  Halifax  in  Nova  Scotia.  It  was
in  company  with  our  Common  American  Gull.  Although  I have  not  ob-
served it  on  our  eastern  shores  or  farther  south  on  the  coast,  it  is  not  im-
probable that  it  rambles  there  in  winter  along  with  other  species  which,  like
itself,  breed  far  north.  Its  flight  in  some  measure  resembles  that  of  the
Common  Tern,  although  it  is  more  decided,  and,  consequently,  more  like
that  of  the  smaller  species  of  its  own  genus.  In  the  course  of  a voyage  from
Pictou  in  Nova  Scotia  to  Hull  in  England,  lately  performed  by  my  friend
Mr  Thomas  MacCulloch,  he  saw  great  numbers  of  this  species  when
more  than  a hundred  miles  off  Newfoundland.  They  flew  around  the  ship
in  company  with  an  almost  equal  number  of  Ross’s  Gull.

Dr  Richardson  gives  the  following  account  of  the  Forked-tailed  Gull,
in  the  Fauna  Boreali-Americana.  “ This  interesting  species  of  Gull  was
discovered  by  Captain  Edward  Sabine.  It  was  first  seen  on  the  25th
of  July  at  its  breeding  station  on  some  low  rocky  islands  lying  off  the
west  coast  of  Greenland,  associated  in  considerable  numbers  with  the
Arctic  Tern,  the  nests  of  both  birds  being  intermingled.  It  is  analogous
to  the  Tern  not  only  in  its  forked  tail,  and  in  its  choice  of  a breeding
place,  but  also  in  the  boldness  which  it  displays  in  the  protection  of  its
young.  The  parent  birds  flew  with  impetuosity  towards  persons  approach-
ing their  nests,  and  when  one  was  killed,  its  mate,  though  frequently  fired
at,  continued  on  the  wing  close  to  the  spot.  They  were  observed  to  get
their  food  on  the  sea-beach,  standing  near  the  water’s  edge,  and  picking
up  the  marine  insects  which  were  cast  on  shore.  A solitary  individual
was  seen  in  Prince  Regent’s  Inlet,  on  Sir  Edward  Parry’s  first  voyage,
and  many  specimens  were  procured  in  the  course  of  the  second  voyage  on
Melville  Peninsula.  Captain  Sabine  also  killed  a pair  at  Spitzbergen,
so  that  it  is  a pretty  general  summer  visitor  to  the  Arctic  Seas,  and  is  en-
titled to  be  enumerated  amongst  the  European  as  well  as  the  American
birds.  It  arrives  in  the  high  northern  latitudes  in  June,  and  retires  to


VOL.  III.


N n


562


FORKED-TAILED  GULL.


the  southward  in  August.  Specimens  procured  in  June  and  July  corres-
ponded exactly  with  the  one  described  below.  When  newly  killed,  they
aU  had  a delicate  pink  blush  on  their  under  plumage.  The  eggs,  two  in
number,  are  deposited  on  the  bare  ground,  and  are  hatched  in  the  last
week  of  July.  They  are  an  inch  and  a half  in  length,  and  have  an  olive
colour  with  many  brown  blotches.”

At  the  approach  of  autumn,  it  frequently  happens  that  several  species
of  gulls  associate  together,  and  at  times  congregate  in  great  numbers  on
the  outer  margins  of  sand-bars  and  in  the  large  estuaries.  There  they
keep  up  a constant  cackling,  run  about,  dress  their  plumage,  and  await
the  rising  of  the  waters.  If  disturbed  at  such  times,  they  shew  greater
shyness  than  perhaps  at  any  other.  One  of  the  oldest  birds  sounds  an
alarm,  and  all  simultaneously  take  to  wing,  disperse,  and  gradually  rise
to  a great  elevation,  flying  in  wide  circles,  and  moving  seaward.  I have
thought  it  remarkable  that  these  birds  seldom  shun  the  fishermen,  while
towards  any  one  bearing  the  semblance  of  a gunner  they  act  with  extreme
caution.  Although  loquacious  when  congregated,  they  are  when  separated
quite  silent,  especially  when  on  wing.  In  squally  and  rainy  weather  they
skim  low  over  the  water  or  the  land,  always  against  the  wind.  They  are
very  tenacious  of  life,  and  often,  when  wounded,  revive  after  you  had  con-
sidered them  incapable  of  breathing.  The  instant  they  are  caught  they  are
wont  to  mute  and  eject  the  contents  of  their  stomach,  as  well  as  when  sud-
denly compelled  to  take  to  wing,  or  when  pursued  by  predaceous  birds.
In  particular  states  of  the  weather  they  appear  at  a distance  much  larger
than  they  reaUy  are,  and,  on  such  occasions,  they  also  seem-much  nearer,
so  that  the  gunner  is  greatly  deceived,  and  may  shoot  at  them  when  too
far  off.

Lab.cs  Sabini,  Sabine,  (J.)  Linn.  Trans,  vol.  xiL  p.  520.  pi.  29.

Larus  Sabinii,  Fork-tailed  Gull,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  iL  p.  428.

Fork-tailed  Gull,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  295.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  shorter  than  the  head,  nearly  straight,  rather  slender,  com-
pressed. Upper  mandible  with  its  dorsal  line  straight  to  the  middle,  then
curved  and  declinate,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  slightly  convex,  the
edges  sharp  and  inflected,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  rather


FORKED-TAILED  GULL.


563


long  and  narrow ; nostrils  in  its  fore  part,  longitudinal,  submedial,  linear,
pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  a slight  prominence  at  the  end  of  the
angle,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  then  straight  or  slightly
concave,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  nearly  flat.

Head  of  moderate  size.  Neck  short.  Body  rather  slender.  Wings
very  long.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  rather  strong  ; tibia  bare  below  for
a short  space,  covered  behind  with  narrow  scutella ; tarsus  compressed,
anteriorly  covered  with  numerous  scutella  and  three  inferior  series  of
transverse  scales,  laterally  with  rounded  scales,  posteriorly  with  oblique
scutella.  Toes  slender,  scutellate  above  ; first  extremely  small,  se-
cond much  shorter  than  fourth,  third  longest,  anterior  toes  connected  by
reticulated  webs,  the  outer  and  inner  slightly  marginate ; claws  small,
compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  with  an  expanded  inner  edge.

Plumage  close,  soft,  blended.  Wings  very  long  and  pointed ; pri-
maries tapering  and  rounded,  first  longest,  second  almost  equal,  the  rest
rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  obliquely  pointed,  the  rounded  extremity
extending  beyond  the  tip  of  the  shaft,  which  is  exterior  to  it,  the  inner
feathers  more  elongated.  Tail  of  moderate  length,  forked,  of  twelve  fea-
thers.

Bill  black  at  the  base  for  more  than  half  its  length,  the  rest  pure  yel-
low. Edges  of  eyelids  vermilion,  as  is  the  inside  of  the  mouth.  Feet
black.  Head  and  upper  part  of  neck  all  round  blackish-grey,  that  colour
terminated  below  by  a ring  of  pure  black  encircling  the  neck.  Lower
neck  all  round,  the  whole  lower  surface,  the  upper  tail-coverts  and  the
tail,  pure  white.  The  back  and  wings  are  bluish-grey,  excepting  a large
terminal  portion  of  the  secondaries,  and  the  tips  of  the  primaries,  which
are  white,  the  primaries  themselves  being  black,  with  their  shafts  brown-
ish-black. The  first  quill  of  the  specimen  figured  had  no  white  on  the
tip,  but  some  individuals  differ  in  this  respect.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13  inches,  to  end  of  wings  14f ; extent  of  wings
33 ; wing  from  flexure  10| ; tail  5 ; bill  along  the  ridge  1,  along  the
edges  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe  1,  its  claw  Weight  7 oz.

The  Female  is  rather  less  than  the  male,  but  in  other  respects  similar.


N n 2


( 564  )


THE  LOST  PORTFOLIO.

While  I was  at  Natchez,  on  the  31st  of  December  1820,  my  kind
friend  Nicholas  Berthoud,  Esq.  proposed  to  me  to  accompany  him  in
his  keel-boat  to  New  Orleans.  At  one  o’clock,  the  steam-boat  Columbus
hauled  off  from  the  landing,  and  took  our  bark  in  tow.  The  steamer  was
soon  ploughing  along  at  full  speed,  and  little  else  engaged  our  minds  than
the  thought  of  our  soon  arriving  at  the  emporium  of  the  commerce  of  the
Mississippi.  Towards  evening,  however,  several  inquiries  were  made  re-
specting particular  portions  of  the  luggage,  among  which  ought  to  have
been  one  of  my  portfolios  containing  a number  of  drawings  made  by  me
while  gliding  down  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  from  Cincinnati  to  Natchez,
and  of  which  some  were  to  me  peculiarly  valuable,  being  of  birds  previ-
ously unfigured,  and  perhaps  undescribed.  The  portfolio  was  nowhere
to  be  found,  and  I recollected  that  I had  brought  it  under  my  arm  to  the
margin  of  the  stream,  and  there  left  it  to  the  care  of  one  of  my  friend’s
servants,  who,  in  the  hurry  of  our  departure,  had  neglected  to  take  it  on
board.  Besides  the  drawings  of  birds,  there  was  in  this  collection  a sketch
in  black  chalk,  to  which  I always  felt  greatly  attached  while  from  home.
It  is  true  the  features  which  it  represented  were  indelibly  engraved  in  my
heart ; but  the  portrait  of  her  to  whom  I owe  so  much  of  the  happiness
that  I have  enjoyed  was  not  the  less  dear  to  me.  When  I thought  du-
ring the  following  night  of  the  loss  I had  sustained  in  consequence  of  my
own  negligence,  imagined  the  possible  fate  of  the  collection,  and  saw  it  in
the  hands  of  one  of  the  numerous  boatmen  lounging  along  the  shores,
who  might  paste  the  drawings  to  the  walls  of  his  cabin,  nail  them  to  the
steering-oars  of  his  flat-boat,  or  distribute  them  among  his  fellows,  I felt
little  less  vexed  than  I did  some  years  before  when  the  rats,  as  you  know,
devoured  a much  larger  collection.

It  was  useless  to  fret  myself,  and  so  I began  to  devise  a scheme  for
recovering  the  drawings.  I wrote  to  Mr  Gaenier  and  my  venerable
friend  Charles  Carre'.  Mr  Berthoud  also  wrote  to  a mercantile  ac-
quaintance. The  letters  were  forwarded  to  Natchez  from  the  first  land-
ing place  at  which  we  stopped,  and  in  the  course  of  time  we  reached  the
great  eddy  running  by  the  Levee  or  artificial  embankment  at  New  Orleans.
But  before  I present  you  with  the  answers  to  the  letters  sent  to  our  ac-


THE  LOST  PORTFOLIO.


565


quaintances  at  Natchez,  allow  me  to  offer  a statement  of  our  adventures
on  the  Mississippi.

After  leaving  the  eddy  at  Natchez,  we  passed  a long  file  of  exquisite-
ly beautiful  Bluffs.  At  the  end  of  twenty  hours  we  reached  Bayou  Sara,
where  we  found  two  brigs  at  anchor,  several  steamers,  and  a number  of
flat-boats,  the  place  being  of  considerable  mercantile  importance.  Here
the  Columbus  left  us  to  shift  for  ourselves,  her  commander  being  anxious
to  get  to  Baton  Rouge  by  a certain  hour,  in  order  to  secure  a good  cargo
of  cotton.  We  now  proceeded  along  the  great  stream,  sometimes  float-
ing and  sometimes  rowing.  The  shores  gradually  became  lower  and
flatter,  orange-trees  began  to  make  their  appearance  around  the  dwel-
lings of  the  wealthy  planters,  and  the  verdure  along  the  banks  assum-
ed a brighter  tint.  The  thermometer  stood  at  68°  in  the  shade  at  noon ;
butterflies  fluttered  among  the  flowers,  of  which  many  were  in  full  blow  ;
and  we  expected  to  have  seen  alligators  half-awake  floating  on  the  num-
berless logs  that  accompanied  us  in  our  slow  progress.  The  eddies  were
covered  with  ducks  of  various  kinds,  more  especially  with  the  beautiful
species  that  breeds  by  preference  on  the  great  sycamores  that  every  now
and  then  present  themselves  along  our  southern  waters.  Baton  Rouge  is  a
very  handsome  place,  but  at  present  I have  not  time  to  describe  it.  Levees
now  began  to  stretch  along  the  river,  and  wherever  there  was  a sharp  point
on  the  shore,  negroes  were  there  amusing  themselves  by  raising  shrimps,
and  now  and  then  a cat-fish,  with  scooping-nets.

The  river  increased  in  breadth  and  depth,  and  the  sawyers  and  plant-
ers, logs  so  called,  diminished  in  number  the  nearer  we  drew  towards  the
famed  city.  At  every  bend  we  found  the  plantations  increased,  and  now
the  whole  country  on  both  sides  became  so  level  and  destitute  of  trees
along  the  water’s  edge,  that  we  could  see  over  the  points  before  us,  and
observe  the  great  stream  stretching  along  for  miles.  Within  the  levees
the  land  is  much  lower  than  the  surface  of  the  river  when  the  water  is
high  ; but  at  this  time  we  could  see  over  the  levee  from  the  deck  of  our
boat  only  the  upper  windows  of  the  planters’  houses,  or  the  tops  of  the  trees
about  them,  and  the  melancholy  looking  cypresses  covered  with  Spanish
moss  forming  the  back  ground.  Persons  rode  along  the  levees  at  full  speed ;
pelicans,  gulls,  vultures,  and  carrion  crows  sailed  over  the  stream,  and  at
times  there  came  from  the  shore  a breeze  laden  with  the  delicious  perfume
of  the  orange-trees,  which  were  covered  with  blossoms  and  golden  fruits.

Having  passed  Bayou  Lafourche,  our  boat  was  brought-toon  account


566


THE  LOST  PORTFOLIO.


of  the  wind,  which  blew  with  violence.  We  landed,  and  presently  made
our  way  to  the  swamps,  where  we  shot  a number  of  those  beautiful  birds
called  Boat-tailed  Grakles.  The  mocking  birds  on  the  fence-stakes  sa-
luted us  with  so  much  courtesy  and  with  such  delightful  strains,  that  we
could  not  think  of  injuring  them ; but  we  thought  it  no  harm  to  shoot  a
whole  covey  of  partridges.  In  the  swamps  we  met  with  warblers  of  vari-
ous kinds,  lively  and  beautiful,  waiting  in  these  their  winter  retreats  for
the  moment  when  Boreas  should  retire  to  his  icy  home,  and  the  gentle
gales  of  the  south  should  waft  them  toward  their  breeding  places  in  the
north.  Thousands  of  swallows  flew  about  us,  the  cat-birds  mewed  in
answer  to  their  chatterings,  the  cardinal  grosbeak  elevated  his  glowing
crest  as  he  stood  perched  on  the  magnolia  branch,  the  soft  notes  of  the
doves  echoed  among  the  woods,  natui’e  smiled  upon  us,  and  we  were
happy.

On  the  fourth  of  January  we  stopped  at  Bonnet  CaiTe,  where  I en-
tered a house  to  ask  some  questions  about  birds.  I was  received  by  a
venerable  French  gentleman,  whom  I found  in  charge  of  about  a dozen
children  of  both  sexes,  and  who  was  delighted  to  hear  that  I was  a stu-
dent of  nature.  He  was  well  acquainted  with  my  old  friend  Charles
Carre',  and  must,  I thought,  be  a good  man,  for  he  said  he  never  suffei*ed
any  of  his  pupils  to  rob  a bird  of  her  eggs  or  young,  although,  said  he
with  a smile,  “ they  are  welcome  to  peep  at  them  and  love  them.”  The
boys  at  once  surrounded  me,  and  from  them  I received  satisfactory  an-
swers to  most  of  my  queries  respecting  birds.

The  sixth  of  January  was  so  cold  that  the  thermometer  fell  to  30°,
and  we  had  seen  ice  on  the  running  boards  of  our  keel  boat.  This  was
quite  unlooked  for,  and  we  felt  uncomfortable ; but  before  the  middle  of
the  day,  all  nature  was  again  in  full  play.  Several  beautiful  steamers
passed  us.  The  vegetation  seemed  not  to  have  suffered  from  the  frost ;
green  pease,  artichokes  and  other  vegetables  were  in  prime  condition.
This  reminds  me  that  on  one  of  my  late  journeys,  I ate  green  pease  in
December  in  the  Floridas,  and  had  them  once  a- week  at  least  in  my  course
over  the  whole  of  the  Union,  until  I found  myself  and  my  family  feeding
on  the  same  vegetable  more  than  a hundred  miles  to  the  North  of  the  St
John’s  River  in  New  Brunswick.

Early  on  the  seventh,  thousands  of  tall  spars,  called  masts  by  the
mariners,  came  in  sight ; and  as  we  drew  nearer,  we  saw  the  port  filled
with  ships  of  many  nations,  each  bearing  the  flag  of  its  country.  At


THE  LOST  PORTFOLIO.


567


length  we  reached  the  Levee,  and  found  ourselves  once  more  at  New
Orleans.  In  a short  time  my  companions  dispersed,  and  I commenced  a
search  for  something  that  might  tend  to  compensate  me  for  the  loss  of  my
drawings.

On  the  16th  of  March  following,  I had  the  gratification  of  receiving  a
letter  from  Mr  A.  P.  Bodley,  of  Natchez,  informing  me  that  my  port-
folio had  been  found  and  deposited  at  the  office  of  “ the  Mississippi  Re-
publican,” whence  an  order  from  me  would  bberate  it.  Through  the
kindness  of  Mr  Garnier,  I received  it  on  the  5th  of  April.  So  very  ge-
nerous had  been  the  finder  of  it,  that  when  I carefully  examined  the
drawings  in  succession,  I found  them  all  present  and  uninjured,  save  one,
which  had  probably  been  kept  by  way  of  commission.


( 668  )


THE  WHITE-FRONTED  GOOSE.

Anser  albifrons,  Bechst.

PLATE  CCLXXXVI.  Male.

Neither  Wilson  nor  Nottall  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the
regularity  with  which  this  species  migrates  through  the  United  States.
When  I shewed  a drawing  of  it  to  the  first  of  these  authors,  he  pronounced
it  to  be  a young  Snow  Goose,  although  I described  to  him  its  peculiar
notes.  During  the  whole  of  my  residence  in  Kentucky,  a winter  never
passed  without  my  seeing  a good  number  of  them  ; and  at  that  season
they  are  frequently  offered  for  sale  in  the  markets  of  New  Orleans.  An
English  gentleman,  who  was  on  his  way  to  the  settlement  of  Birkbeck  in
the  Prairies  west  of  the  Ohio,  and  who  spent  a few  weeks  with  me  at
Henderson,  was  desirous  of  having  a tasting  of  some  of  our  game.  His
desire  was  fully  gratified,  and  the  first  that  was  placed  before  him  was  a
White-fronted  Goose.  I had  killed  seven  of  these  birds,  the  evening
before,  in  a pond  across  the  Ohio,  which  was  regularly  supplied  with
flocks  from  the  beginning  of  October  to  the  end  of  March.  He  pro-
nounced it  “ delicious,”  and  I have  no  reason  to  dissent  from  his  opinion.
From  the  numbers  seen  high  on  the  Arkansas  River,  I presume  that
many  winter  beyond  the  southern  limits  of  the  United  States.  They  are
exceedingly  rare,  however,  along  our  Atlantic  coast.  In  Kentucky  they
generally  arrive  before  the  Canada  Goose,  betaking  themselves  to  the
grassy  ponds ; and  of  the  different  species  which  visit  that  country  they
are  by  far  the  least  shy.  The  flocks  seldom  exceed  from  thirty  to  fifty
individuals.  Their  general  appearance  is  that  exhibited  in  the  plate,  and
which  I consider  as  their  winter  plumage,  feehng  pretty  confident  that
in  summer  the  lower  part  of  the  body  becomes  pure  black.

The  flight  of  the  White-fronted  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Canada
Goose,  being  Arm  and  well  sustained.  When  travelling,  these  birds  pass
at  a considerable  height,  arranged  in  the  same  angular  order,  and  ap-
parently guided  by  one  of  the  older  Ganders.  They  walk  with  ease,  and
can  run  with  considerable  speed  when  wounded.  In  feeding  they  im-
merse their  necks,  like  other  species ; but  during  continued  rains  they
visit  the  cornfields  and  large  savannahs.  While  in  Kentucky  they  feed
on  the  beech  nuts  and  acorns  that  drop  along  the  margins  of  their  fa-


WHITE-FRONTED  GOOSE.


569


vovirite  ponds.  In  the  fields  they  pick  up  the  grains  of  maize  left  by  the
squirrels  and  racoons,  and  nibble  the  young  blades  of  grass.  In  their
gizzards  I have  never  found  fishes  or  water  lizards,  but  often  broken
shells  of  different  kinds  of  snails.

They  leave  us  a fortnight  sooner  than  the  Canada  Geese,  and  start
along  with  the  Snow  Geese,  but  keep  in  separate  flocks.  In  this  order
they  have  been  observed  travelling  over  the  fur  countries  by  Dr  Richard-
son, who  informs  us  that  they  breed  in  the  woody  districts  skirting  Mac-
kenzie’s River  to  the  north  of  the  sixty-seventh  parallel,  and  also  on  the
islands  of  the  Arctic  Sea ; but  that  they  are  not  common  about  Hudson’s
Bay.  The  egg  of  this  Goose  measures  two  inches  and  three-quarters  in
length,  by  one  and  three-quarters  in  breadth.  The  shell  is  smooth,  of  a
dull  yellowish-green,  with  indistinct  patches  of  a darker  tint  of  the  same
colour.

Anas  albifrons,  GmeU  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  509 — Lath.  lud.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  842.

Anser  albifrons,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  376

Swains,  and  Richard.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  456.

White-fronted  or  Laughing  Goose,  Nuttall,  Manual,  voL  ii.  p.  346.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  much  higher  than  broad  at  the  base,  some-
what conical,  depressed  towards  the  end,  rounded  at  the  tip.  Upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  bne  sloping,  the  ridge  broad  and  flattened,  but
slightly  convex,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  with  twenty-eight  oblique
lamellae,  the  unguis  circular,  convex,  obscurely  denticulate  along  the  edge.
Nasal  groove  oblong,  parallel  to  the  ridge,  filled  by  the  soft  membrane
of  the  bill ; nostrils  medial,  lateral,  longitudinal,  narrow-elliptical,  open,
pervious.  Lower  mandible  nearly  straight,  with  the  angle  very  long
and  rather  narrow,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  with  about  forty  oblique,
slightly  recurved  lamellae.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long  and
slender.  Body  full,  slightly  depressed.  Feet  rather  short,  strong,  placed
rather  behind  the  centre  of  the  body  ; legs  bare  a little  above  the  joint ;
tarsus  rather  short,  a little  compressed,  covered  all  round  with  angular
reticulated  scales,  which  are  smaller  behind ; hind  toe  very  small,  with  a
narrow  membrane ; third  toe  longest,  fourth  considerably  shorter,  but
longer  than  second ; aU  the  toes  reticulated  above  at  the  base,  but  with
narrow  transverse  scutella  towards  the  end;  the  three  anterior  connected  by


570


WHITE-FRONTED  GOOSE.


a reticulated  membrane,  the  outer  having  a thick  margin,  the  inner  with
the  margin  extended  into  a two-lobed  web  ; claws  small,  arched,  rather
compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  the  middle  toe  bent  obliquely  outwards  and
depressed,  with  a curved  edge.

Plumage  close,  full,  compact  above,  blended  on  the  neck  and  lower
part  of  the  body,  very  short  on  the  head.  Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck
very  narrow,  on  the  latter  part  disposed  in  oblique  series  separated  by
grooves,  of  the  back  very  broad  and  abrupt,  of  the  breast  and  belly
broadly  rounded.  Wings  rather  long,  broad  ; primaries  incurved,  broad,
towards  the  end  tapering,  the  second  longest,  first  and  third  about  equal,
first  and  second  sinuate  on  the  inner  web,  second  and  third  on  the  outer ;
secondaries  long,  very  broad,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  rounded,  of
sixteen  broad  rounded  feathers.

Bill  carmine-red,  the  unguis  of  both  mandibles  white.  Edges  of  eye-
lids dull  orange;  iris  hazel.  Feet  orange,  webs  lighter;  claws  white.
Head  and  neck  rich  greyish-brown,  the  upper  part  of  the  former  darker ;
a white  band,  margined  behind  with  blackish-brown  on  the  antei'ior  part  of
the  forehead  along  the  bill.  The  general  colour  of  the  back  is  deep  grey,
the  feathers  of  its  fore  part  broadly  tipped  with  greyish-brown,  the  rest
with  greyish- white  ; the  hind  part  of  the  back  pure  deep  grey.  Wings  grey-
ish-brown, but  towards  the  edge  ash-grey,  as  are  the  primary  coverts,  and
outer  webs  of  the  primaries ; the  rest  of  the  primaries  and  the  secondaries
are  greyish-black,  the  latter  with  a narrow  edge  of  greyish-white,  the  former
edged  and  tipped  with  white.  Breast,  abdomen,  lower  tail-coverts,  sides  of
the  rump  and  upper  tail-coverts,  white,  but  the  breast  and  sides  patched  with
brownish -black ; on  the  latter  intermixed  with  greyish-brown  feathers.

Length  to  end  of  tail  27;^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  26,  to  end  of  claws
28| ; extent  of  wings  60 ; wing  from  flexure  \ ; tail  4f ; bill  along  the

back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  ; middle  toe
its  claw  Weight  5^  lb.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXXXVI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female,  which  is  somewhat  smaller,  resembles  the  male ; the  white
margins  of  the  wing-feathers  not  so  distinct.  Weight  4 lb.  4 oz.

The  gizzard  is  very  large,  its  muscular  coat  an  inch  and  a half  thick
at  the  lower  extremity,  the  cuticular  lining  thick,  very  hard,  and  denti.
culate  on  one  side.  The  intestine  seven  feet  long,  the  ccEca  twelve  inches
and  placed  at  the  distance  of  one  foot  from  the  anus.


( 571  )


THE  IVORY  GULL.

Larus  eburneus,  Phipps.

PLATE  CCLXXXVII.  Adult  and  Young.

Having  ascertained  that  this  beautiful  species  visits  the  southern  coast
of  Labrador  and  Newfoundland  every  winter,  I have  thought  it  probable
that  it  occasionally  extends  its  rambles  as  far  as  our  eastern  shores,  and
therefore  determined  to  include  it  in  my  Illustrations.  The  figures  in  the
plate  were  taken  from  two  specimens  procured  by  Captain  James  Clark
Ross,  one  of  which  was  an  adult  male,  the  other  a young  bird  in  its  se-
cond year.  Captain  Sabine  says  that  the  Ivory  Gulls  are  attracted  in
considerable  numbers  by  whale  blubber,  are  therefore  usually  found  in
company  with  the  Procellaria  glacialis,  and  are  easily  killed,  being  by
no  means  shy.  Dr  Richardson  informs  us  that  they  were  observed
breeding  in  great  numbers  on  the  high  perforated  cliflPs  which  form  the
extremity  of  Cape  Parry,  in  latitude  70°.

Larus  eburneus,  Phipps's  Yoy&ge,  p.  187 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  816  —

Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  419.

Ivory  Gull,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  vi.  p.  yil.—Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  301.

’ Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  robust,  nearly  straight,  compressed.  Up-
per mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  at  the  base,  arched
and  declinate  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  slightly  so,
the  edges  sharp,  a little  inflected,  somewhat  arched,  the  tip  rather  ob-
tuse. Nasal  groove  rather  long  and  narrow ; nostrils  in  its  fore  part,
lateral,  longitudinal,  linear,  wider  anteriorly,  pervious.  Lower  mandible
with  a prominence  at  the  end  of  the  angle,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  the
dorsal  line  slightly  concave  and  ascending,  the  sides  flattened,  the  edges
sharp  and  inflected.

Head  rather  large.  Neck  of  moderate  length,  strong.  Body  rather
full.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  stout ; tibia  bare  below  ; tarsus  somewhat
compressed,  covered  before  with  numerous  scutella,  on  the  s’des  and  be-
hind with  series  of  small  angular  scales ; the  hind  toe  very  small  and  ele-


572


IVORY  GULL.


vated,  the  fore  toes  of  moderate  length,  the  fourth  much  longer  than  the
second,  the  third  longest,  the  hind  one  with  a single  scutellum  and  three
transverse  series  of  scales,  the  rest  scutellate  above  and  connected  by  re-
ticulate membranes  having  a concave  margin,  the  lateral  toes  margined
externally  with  a narrow  membrane.  Claws  stout,  rather  large,  arched,
compressed,  rather  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  with  an  enlarged  inner  edge.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  full,  elastic,  soft  and  blended,  on  the
back  rather  compact.  Wings  very  long,  rather  broad,  acute,  the  first
quill  longest,  the  other  primaries  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  broad
and  rounded,  the  inner  tapering  but  rounded.  Tail  of  moderate  length,
even,  of  twelve  rather  broad  rounded  feathers.

Bill  bright  yellow,  greenish  dusky  at  the  base.  Iris  brown,  edges  of
eyelids  vermilion.  Feet  and  claws  black.  The  whole  of  the  plumage
is  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  19  inches,  to  end  of  wings  20^  ; extent  of  wings
41 ; wing  from  flexure  13^  ; tail  bill  along  the  back  1/j,  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  2;  tarsus  l^'^  ; middle  toe  l^®j,  its  claw
Weight  20  oz.

Young  of  the  second  year,  killed  in  September.  Plate  CCLXXXVII.
Fig.  2.

After  the  second  moult,  the  bill  is  pale  yellow  at  the  end,  dusky  at  the
base  for  two-thirds  of  its  length  ; the  edges  of  the  eyelids  vermilion,  the
iris  brown,  the  feet  black.  The  plumage  is  white  ; the  forehead  and
sides  of  the  head  mottled  with  leaden-grey ; most  of  the  wing-coverts
have  towards  the  end  a spot  of  greyish-black,  and  the  quills,  large  coverts,
and  tail-feathers  are  similarly  marked,  the  markings  on  the  tail  forming
a subterminal  bar.


( 573  )


THE  YELLOWSHANK.

ToTANUS  FLAVIPES,  VlEILL.

PLATE  CCLXXXVIIl.  Male.

The  Yellowshank  is  much  more  abundant  in  the  interior,  or  to  the
westward  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains  than  along  our  Atlantic  coast,  al-
though it  is  also  met  with  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  latter,  from  Florida
to  Maine.  It  exceeds  the  Tell-tale  God  wit  in  numbers  on  tbe  shores  of
the  Ohio,  as  well  as  on  the  margins  of  the  numerous  ponds  and  lakes  in
the  vicinity  of  the  Mississippi,  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  just  mentioned
to  New  Orleans,  and  beyond  that  city  southward.  In  early  autumn,  when
the  sand-bars  of  the  Ohio  are  left  uncovered,  these  active  birds  are  seen
upon  them  in  small  flocks,  formed  each  apparently  of  a single  family,
busily  employed  in  searching  for  food,  and  wading  in  the  water  up  to  the
feathered  part  of  their  legs.  When  the  water  is  high,  they  resort  to
ponds  and  damp  meadows  intersected  by  small  rivulets.  In  the  Carolinas
and  the  Floridas  they  are  pretty  numerous,  in  the  former  betaking  them-
selves to  the  rice-fields,  and  in  the  latter  to  the  wet  savannahs.  They
are  equally  fond  of  frequenting  the  shores  of  our  estuaries  that  are  bordered
by  salt  marshes,  on  the  muddy  edges  of  which  they  find  their  food.  I
have  also  met  with  them  on  the  margins  of  clear  streams  in  the  interior
of  the  States,  and  indeed  should  hardly  be  able  to  mention  a district  in
wbicb  the  species  is  not  to  be  seen,  from  the  beginning  of  September  un-
til May,  when  the  greater  number  retire  northward,  although  some  re-
main and  breed,  even  in  our  Middle  States,  as  Nutt  all  says  they  are
seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Boston  in  the  middle  of  June.  I found  a
few  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  but  did  not  succeed  in  discovering-  tbeir
nests,  which  was  the  more  surprising  that  these  birds,  according  to  my
friend  Thomas  MacCulloch,  breed  in  considerable  numbers  about
Pictou.  He  describes  the  nest  as  placed  among  the  grass  on  the  edges
of  the  rivers  and  large  ponds  of  the  interior.

The  flight  of  the  Yellowshank  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Tell-tale
Godwit.  They  generally  run  to  some  distance  before  they  take  to  wing,
stop  as  if  to  discover  your  intention,  vibrate  tbeir  body  backwards  and
forwards,  intimate  by  their  cries  the  knowledge  they  have  of  the  nature  of


574


YELLOWSHANK.


the  weapon  you  carry,  and,  as  if  convinced  that  you  are  bent  on  mischief,
spring  up,  rise  obliquely  to  some  height,  emit  louder  notes,  and  with
continued  flappings  pass  around  you,  or  remove  to  some  distant  place.
Their  long  yellow  legs,  which  are  stretched  out  behind,  are  quite  conspi-
cuous when  they  ai’e  on  wing.  Should  you  bring  one  to  the  ground
wounded,  it  walks  off"  leisurely,  vibrates  its  body,  and  emits  plaintive
cries  ; and  should  one  fall  into  the  water  under  similar  circumstances,  it
paddles  its  way  towards  the  nearest  shore  with  considerable  speed.  If  you
approach  it,  it  may  immerse  its  head,  but  it  cannot  dive  to  any  depth.

In  very  dry  weather,  I have  observed  this  species  on  the  uplands
searching  for  grasshoppers  and  insects.  It  has  been  alleged  that  when
one  is  wounded,  its  companions  hover  around  so  as  to  be  easily  shot ; but
this  I have  never  observed,  for  although  they  are  perhaps  less  shy  than
the  Tell-tales,  on  such  occasions,  I never  found  one  of  them  to  remain;
they  seemed,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  well  aware  of  the  danger,  and  would
fly  quite  out  of  sight,  rising  high  in  the  air,  and  pursuing  a direct  course,
emitting  cries  at  intervals.

Along  the  shores  of  the  sea,  they  are  now  and  then  seen  in  company
with  other  species,  although  they  cannot  be  said  actually  to  associate  with
them.  In  autumn  they  become  fat,  and  by  many  are  considered  good  eat-
ing, although  they  always  have  a kind  of  fishy  taste  not  at  all  agreeable
to  my  palate.  Their  food  consists  of  diminutive  fishes,  shrimps,  worms,
and  aquatic  insects.

I have  represented  one  of  these  birds  on  the  fore  ground  of  a little
piece  of  water  a few  miles  distant  from  Charleston  in  South  Carolina,  on
the  borders  of  which,  in  the  company  of  my  kind  friend  John  Bachman
and  others,  I have  spent  many  a pleasant  hour,  while  resting  after  fatigu-
ing rambles  in  the  surrounding  woods.

ScoLOPAX  FLAViPES,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  723 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  324.

Yellowshanks  Snipe,  Scolopax  flavipes,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  55.
pi.  58.  fig.  4.

Totanus  flavipes,  Yellowshanks  Tatler,  Swaim.  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.
Amer.  part  ii.  p.  390.

Yellowshanks  Tatler,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  152.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCLXXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  a little  longer  than  the  head,  very  slender,  subcylindrical,  straight,
flexible,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  rather  depressed  and  obtuse.


YELLOWSHANK.


575


Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  ridge  convex,  broader
at  the  base,  slightly  depressed  towards  the  end,  the  sides  sloping,  towards
the  end  convex,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  the  tip  slightly  deflected.
Nasal  groove  long  and  narrow,  extending  to  a little  beyond  the  middle  of
the  bill ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
very  long  and  extremely  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  convex,
with  a slight  groove  in  their  basal  half.

Head  small,  oblong,  anteriorly  narrowed.  Eyes  large.  Neck  rather
long  and  slender.  Body  slender.  Feet  very  long,  slender;  tibia  bare
for  half  its  length,  scutellate  before  and  behind  ; tarsus  also  scutellate  be-
fore and  behind  ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated  ; fore  toes  of  moderate
length,  very  slender,  connected  at  the  base  by  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is
much  larger  ; second  or  inner  toe  considerably  shorter  than  fourth,  third
longest ; all  scutellate  above,  flat  and  marginate  beneath.  Claws  small,
slightly  arched,  much  compressed,  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  much  larger,
with  the  inner  edge  enlarged.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short.
Wings  long,  narrow,  pointed ; primaries  narrow  and  tapering,  first  longest,
second  a little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  short,
broad,  incurved,  obliquely  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.
Tail  short,  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown  ; edges  of  eyelids  dark  grey.  Feet  bright
yellow,  claws  brownish-black.  Upper  part  of  the  head,  lores,  cheeks,
neck,  and  sides  of  the  neck  deep  brownish-grey,  the  edges  of  the  feathers
greyish- white  ; a white  line  from  the  bill  to  the  eye  and  over  it ; upper
part  of  throat  white ; fore  neck  greyish-white,  streaked  with  brownish-grey,
as  are  the  sides,  the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white,  the  lower  tail-coverts
slightly  marked  with  grey.  The  general  colour  of  the  back  and  scapulars
is  olivaceous  brown  tinged  with  grey,  the  feathers  edged  with  small  dusky
and  white  spots.  The  wing-coverts  and  inner  secondary  quills  are  simi-
lar, the  marginal  spots  on  the  latter  forming  bands ; primary  quills  black-
ish-brown, the  shaft  of  the  outer  brownish-white,  of  the  rest  dark  brown,
the  edges  of  the  inner,  and  of  the  middle  secondaries  white ; hind  part  of
back  grey,  upper  tail-coverts  white,  the  larger  obscurely  barred  with  grey.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  to  end  of

claws  extent  of  wings  SO  ; wing  from  flexure  ; tail  2^ ; bill

along  the  back  1 /j,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  l/j ; bare  part  of
tibia  ; tarsus  1^;  middle  toe  its  claw  Weight  oz.


( 576  )


SOLITARY  SANDPIPER.

Totanus  chloropygius,  Vieill.

PLATE  CCLXXXIX.  Male.

The  only  nest  of  this  bird  that  I ever  met  with  was  placed  in  an  ele-
vated part  of  the  woods  near  Bayou  Sara,  on  the  margin  of  a small  pond
scarcely  ten  yards  broad,  overgrown  with  low  bushes,  and  cumbered  with
fallen  branches  of  trees.  It  was  formed  of  grass  and  withered  leaves,  arrang-
ed without  much  care,  and  contained  three  eggs.  Both  birds  were  greatly
disconcerted,  ran  round  me,  and  frequently  alighted  on  the  twigs  and
branches  with  all  the  nimbleness  of  land  birds,  constantly  throwing  their
heads  forward  and  vibrating  their  body  and  tail  in  the  manner  of  the  Louisi-
ana Water  Thrush.  The  eggs  measured  one  inch  one  eighth  and  a half  in
length,  seven  and  a half  eighths  in  breadth ; the  colour  was  greenish-yel-
low, with  spots  and  patches  of  umber,  more  abundant  around  the  crown,
where  the  larger  marks  formed  a conspicuous  circle.  I carried  one  of  the
eggs  home,  and,  on  returning  a few  days  after  to  the  spot,  found  one  of
the  birds  sitting,  which  proved  to  me  that  the  great  anxiety  shewn  at  my
first  visit  was  chiefly  because  the  female  was  about  to  lay  her  last  egg.
The  male  was  absent,  nor  did  it  shew  itself  during  my  stay.  About  a
fortnight  after  I found  the  wings  of  one  of  the  birds  near  the  place ; the
eggs  also  were  gone  ; and  I concluded  that  some  quadruped,  probably  a
racoon,  had  committed  the  havock.  No  bird  of  this  species  was  in  the
neighbourhood.

In  the  Fauna  Boreali- Americana,  Dr  Richardson  says  that  in  high
northern  latitudes  these  birds  deposit  their  eggs  on  the  bare  sand,  which  is
another  proof  in  addition  to  the  many  already  given,  that  great  differences
as  to  the  mode  of  nestling  may  exist  in  the  same  species  in  different  parts  of
the  country.  Indeed,  almost  all  the  habits  of  this  curious  bird  differ  ac-
cording to  the  locality.  In  the  Southern  States,  they  are  particularly  fond
of  low  flat  lands  among  deep  woods  and  cane  brakes,  and  rarely  approach
ponds  of  any  great  extent,  but  prefer  those  which  are  small  and  most  se-
cluded. In  the  Middle  Districts  I have  found  them  along  the  Leigh-
high,  and  in  watery  places  both  on  low  and  on  elevated  ground.  In  the
State  of  Maine  they  frequented  similar  localities.  In  the  prairies  of  In-


SOLITARY  SANDPIPER.


577


diana  I have  seen  them  in  early  spring,  during  rainy  weather,  wading  and
running  through  the  water,  on  the  very  foot-path  before  me,  for  eight  or
ten  yards  at  a time.  When  flushed,  they  would  fly  in  a semicircle  close
over  the  ground,  and  re-alight  at  the  distance  of  a hundred  yards  or  so  on
the  same  path.  Not  one  of  the  species  was  observed  in  Labrador  or  New-
foundland by  my  party  ; and  my  friend  Thomas  MacCulloch  informs
me  that  only  a few  single  birds  are  seen  near  Pictou,  and  that  in  autumn,
when  they  keep  in  marshy  grounds  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sea.

The  flight  of  the  Solitary  Sandpiper  is  swift  and  protracted.  It  moves
in  a zigzag  manner,  and  at  times  makes  its  way  through  the  woods  with
surprising  ease,  seldom  leaving  the  starting  place  without  uttering  a clear
and  pleasant  tweet.  In  re-alighting  it  pitches  downwards  like  the  Com-
mon Snipe.  On  the  ground  they  are  very  active,  and  at  times  so  in-
different to  the  approach  of  man,  that  they  will  merely  fly  across  or  around
a small  pond  for  a considerable  time,  and,  if  shot  at  and  not  touched,
they  will  be  sure  to  be  found  in  the  same  place  a few  hours  after.  Its
alighting  on  trees  has  often  appeared  to  me  as  singular  as  that  of  Bar-
tram’s  Snipe  and  the  Semipalmated  species.  The  Solitary  Snipe  is,  how-
ever, the  most  expert  at  catching  insects  on  the  wing,  especially  the  smaller
kinds  of  dragon-flies,  which  it  chases  from  the  sticks  on  which  they  alight,
and  generally  seizes  before  they  have  flown  across  the  little  ponds,  which  are
the  favourite  place  of  resort  of  this  species.  I have  found  their  stomachs
filled  with  aquatic  insects,  caterpillars  of  various  kinds,  and  black  spiders
of  considerable  size.

I consider  this  bird  to  be  a constant  resident  in  the  United  States,
although  it  ranges  over  a great  space  in  summer  and  winter.  Scarcely
any  difference  is  observable  in  the  sexes ; and  I am  of  opinion  that  the
young  acquire  their  full  plumage  the  first  spring.


Totanus  CHLOROPYGius,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,

p.  325 Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.  part  ii.  p.  393.

Solitary  Sandpiper,  Tringa  solitaria,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  vii.  p.  53.  pi.  58.
fig.  3.

Green-rump  Tatler,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  169.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCLXXXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  a little  longer  than  the  head,  very  slender,  subcylindrical,  straight.


VOL.  III.


o o


578


SOLITARY  SANDPIPER.


flexible,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  rather  depressed  and  obtuse.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  ridge  convex,  broader
at  the  base,  slightly  depressed  towards  the  end,  the  sides  sloping,  towards
the  end  convex,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  the  tip  very  slightly  deflected.
Nasal  groove  long  and  narrow,  extending  to  a little  beyond  the  middle  of
the  bill ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle
very  long  and  extremely  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the  sides  convex,
with  a slight  groove  in  their  basal  half.

Head  small,  oblong,  anteriorly  narrowed.  Eyes  large.  Neck  rather
long  and  slender.  Body  slender.  Feet  long  and  slender ; tibia  bare
nearly  half  its  length,  scutellate  before  and  behind  ; tarsus  also  scutellate
before  and  behind ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated ; fore  toes  rather
long,  very  slender,  connected  at  the  base  by  webs,  of  which  the  outer  is
much  larger ; second  or  inner  toe  considerably  shorter  than  fourth,  third
longest ; all  scutellate  above,  flat  and  marginate  beneath.  Claws  small,
slightly  arched,  much  compressed,  rather  obtuse,  that  of  middle  toe  much
larger,  with  the  inner  edge  enlarged.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended,  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short.
Wings  long,  narrow,  pointed  ; primaries  rather  narrow  and  tapering,  first
and  second  equal,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  short,  broad,
incurved,  obliquely  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  ra-
ther short,  slightly  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  greenish-black.  Iris  brown  ; edges  of  eyelids  dark  grey.  Feet
greenish-grey,  claws  brownish-black.  Upper  part  of  the  head,  lores,
cheeks,  hind  neck  and  sides  of  the  neck  deep  brownish-grey,  the  edges  of
the  feathers  brownish-white ; a dull  white  line  from  the  bill  to  the  eye ;
upper  part  of  throat  greyish-white  ; fore-neck  of  the  same  colour,  streaked
with  brownish-grey,  as  are  the  sides ; the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  greyish-
white.  The  general  colour  of  the  back  and  scapulars  is  deep  greenish-
brown,  the  feathers  edged  with  a few  small  spots  of  white  and  dusky,  those
on  the  inner  secondaries  more  numerous.  Wing-coverts  similar,  except-
ing those  along  the  edge  of  the  wing,  which  with  the  alula  and  primary
coverts  are  deep  brownish-black  ; primary  quills  brownish-black,  secon-
daries greyish-brown  ; lower  wing-coverts  mottled  with  brownish-black
and  white,  the  axillar  feathers  barred  with  greyish-white  and  dusky,  as
are  the  upper  tail-coverts  and  the  tail-feathers,  of  which  the  two  middle
are  merely  spotted  with  white  on  the  edges.


SOLITARY  SANDPIPER.


579


Length  to  end  of  tail  8^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  9,  to  end  of  claws  10 ;
extent  of  wings  16| ; wing  from  flexure  5j  ; tail  2;  bill  along  the  back
Ifj,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  lj%  ; middle  toe
its  claw  Weight  1|  oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCLXXXIX.  Fig.  2.

There  is  no  decided  difference  between  the  sexes  in  the  colouring,  but
the  female  is  somewhat  larger.  From  the  only  instance  in  which  I found
this  species  in  the  act  of  depositing  its  eggs,  I conclude  that  it  generally
forms  its  nest  on  the  higher  grounds  or  along  the  declivities  of  hills.


o o 2


( 38U  )


THE  RED-BACKED  SANDPIPER.

Thing  A alpina,  Lxnn.

PLATE  CCXC.  Male  in  Summee,  and  Adult  in  'Winter.

In  autumn  and  winter,  this  species  is  abundant  along  the  whole  range
of  our  coast,  wherever  the  shores  are  sandy  or  muddy,  from  Maine  to  the
mouths  of  the  Mississippi ; but  I never  found  one  far  inland.  Sometimes
they  collect  into  flocks  of  several  hundred  individuals,  and  are  seen  wheel-
ing over  the  water  near  the  shores  or  over  the  beaches,  in  beautiful  order,
and  now  and  then  so  close  together  as  to  afford  an  excellent  shot,  especially
when  they  suddenly  alight  in  a mass  near  the  sportsman,  or  when,  swiftly
veering,  they  expose  their  lower  parts  at  the  same  moment.  On  such  occa-
sions a dozen  or  more  may  be  killed  at  once,  provided  the  proper  moment
is  chosen.

There  seems  to  be  a kind  of  impatience  in  this  bird  that  prevents  it
from  remaining  any  length  of  time  in  the  same  place,  and  you  may  see  it
scarcely  alighted  on  a sand-bar,  fly  off*  without  any  apparent  reason  to
another,  where  it  settles,  runs  for  a few  moments,  and  again  starts  off  on
wing.  When  searching  for  food  they  run  with  great  agility,  following
the  retiring  waves,  and  retreating  as  they  advance,  probing  the  wet  sands,
and  picking  up  objects  from  their  surface,  ever  jerking  up  the  tail,  and
now  and  then  uttering  a faint  cry,  pleasant  to  the  ear,  and  differing  from
the  kind  of  scream  which  they  emit  while  on  wing.

When  I was  in  the  Floridas  in  winter,  I found  this  species  abundant,
and  my  party  shot  a great  number  of  them,  on  account  of  the  fatness  and
juiciness  of  their  flesh.  They  all  appeared  to  have  their  plumage  greyer
than  those  shot  in  the  Carolinas  at  the  same  season,  and  not  one  exhibited
the  least  redness  on  the  back,  although  that  colour  is  so  conspicuous  in
spring  before  they  leave  us  for  the  north.  They  usually  take  their  de-
parture from  the  south  about  the  first  of  April,  reach  the  Middle  Dis-
tricts by  tbe  fifteenth  of  that  month,  and  in  a few  days  assume  their  summer
plumage.  I have  observed  that  at  this  season  the  male  birds  are  frequently
in  the  habit  of  raising  their  wings  and  running  in  that  position  for  a few
steps,  when  they  close  them,  and  nod  to  the  nearest  female.  None  of  the
other  sex,  however,  seemed  to  take  the  least  notice  of  this  homage.  On


RED-BACKED  SANDPIPER.


581


our  way  to  Labrador  we  saw  flocks  of  these  birds  passing,  but  we  found
none  breeding  in  that  country.  My  friend  Mr  Macgilliveay  has  given
me  the  following  account  of  the  habits  of  this  species  during  the  breed-
ing season.

“ About  the  middle  of  April,  the  Purres  betake  themselves  to  the
moors,  in  the  northern  parts  of  Scotland,  and  in  the  larger  Hebrides,
where  they  may  be  found  scattered  in  the  haunts  selected  by  the  Golden
Plovers,  with  which  they  are  so  frequently  seen  in  company  that  they
have  obtained  the  name  of  Plovers’  Pages.  In  the  Hebrides,  from  this
season  until  the  end  of  August,  none  are  to  be  found  along  the  shores.
The  nest  is  a slight  hollow  in  a dry  place,  having  a few  bits  of  withered
heath  and  grass  irregularly  placed  in  it.  The  eggs,  four  in  number,  are
ovato-pyriform,  an  inch  and  four-twelfths  in  length,  eleven-twelfths  in
breadth,  oil-green  or  light  greenish-yellow,  irregularly  spotted  and  blotch-
ed with  deep  brown,  the  spots  becoming  more  numerous  toward  the  larger
end,  where  they  are  confluent.  The  young,  like  those  of  the  Golden  Plo-
ver and  Lapwing,  leave  the  nest  immediately  after  exclusion,  run  about,
and  when  alarmed,  conceal  themselves  by  sitting  close  to  the  ground  and
remaining  motionless.  If  at  this  period,  or  during  incubation,  a person
approaches  their  retreats,  the  male  especially,  but  frequently  the  female
also,  flies  up  to  meet  the  intruder,  settles  on  a tuft  near  him,  or  runs  along
and  uses  the  same  artifices  for  decoying  him  from  the  nest  or  young  as
the  Plover  or  Ring  Dotterel.  When  the  young  are  fledged,  the  birds
gather  into  small  flocks,  which  often  in  the  evenings  unite  into  larger,  and
join  those  of  the  Golden  Plover.  They  rest  at  night  on  the  smoother
parts  of  the  heath,  and  both  species,  when  resting  by  day,  either  stand  or
lie  on  the  ground.  When  one  advances  within  a hundred  yards  of  such
a flock,  it  is  pleasant  to  see  them  stretch  up  their  wings  as  if  preparing
for  flight,  utter  a few  low  notes,  and  immediately  stand  on  the  alert,  or
run  a few  steps.  At  this  season,  however,  they  are  not  at  all  shy.  To-
wards the  end  of  August,  the  different  colonies  betake  themselves  to
the  sandy  shores.  On  a large  sand-ford  in  Harris,  I have  at  this  season
seen  many  thousands  at  once,  running  about  with  extreme  activity  in
search  of  food.  This  place  seemed  a general  rendezvous,  and  after  a few
weeks  the  host  broke  up  and  dispersed,  few  if  any  remaining  during  the
winter.”


582


RED-BACKED  SANDPIPER.


Tbinoa  Cinclus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  251 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  335.

Winter  plumage.

Teinga  alpina,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  429 Lath,  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  736. —

Summer  plumage.

Teinga  vaeiabilis,  Temm.  Man.  d’Omith.  part  ii.  p.  612.

Teinga  alpina,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  317.

Red-backed  Sandpipee,  Teinga  alpina,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  5.  pi.  56.
fig.  2.  Summer.

PuEEE,  Teinga  Cinclus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  39.  pi.  57.  fig.  3.  Winter.

Teinga  alpina,  The  Ameeican  Dunlin,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  383.

Dunlin  oe  Ox-Bied,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  106.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXC.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  nearly  straight,
being  slightly  curved  towards  the  end,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point
rather  depressed  and  obtuse.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly
straight,  slightly  sloping  at  the  base,  and  slightly  decurved  towards  the
end,  the  ridge  narrow,  towards  the  end  flattened,  at  I the  point  convex,
sides  sloping,  edges  rather  blunt  and  soft.  Nasal  groove  long,  extending
to  near  the  point ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  concave,  the  sides
sloping  outwards,  towards  the  end  convex.

Head  rather  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Eyes  rather  small.  Neck
of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  fuU.  Feet  slender,  of  moderate  length  ;
tibia  bare  a considerable  way  up,  anteriorly  and  posteriorly  scuteUate,  as
is  the  compressed  tarsus ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated,  anterior  toes
of  moderate  length,  slender  ; inner  toe  slightly  shorter  than  outer,  middle
toe  considerably  longer ; all  scuteUate  above,  marginate  with  prominent
papillae,  and  free.  Claws  small,  slightly  arched,  extremely  compressed,
blunt ; edge  of  middle  claw  dilated  and  thin.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  ; on  the  back  the  feathers  rather  distinct.
Wings  long  and  pointed;  primaries  tapering,  obtuse,  the  first  longest,
the  second  a Uttle  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  rather
short,  obliquely  cut  at  the  end  with  a recurved  blunt  point,  the  inner
elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  rather  short,  even,  but  with  the  two  middle
feathers  considerably  longer,  of  twelve  feathers.

BUI  and  feet  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  The  upper  part  of  the  head,
the  back  and  the  scapulars,  are  chestnut-red,  each  feather  brownish-black


RED-BACKED  SANDPIPER.


383


in  the  centre,  and  the  scapulars  barred  with  the  same  colour.  The  wing
coverts  greyish-brown,  as  are  the  quills,  the  bases  and  tips  of  the  secon-
daries and  part  of  the  outer  webs  of  the  middle  primaries  white.  Tail
light  brownish-grey,  the  two  middle  feathers  darker.  Forehead,  sides  of
the  head  and  hind  neck,  pale  reddish-grey,  streaked  with  dusky  ; fore
neck  and  anterior  part  of  breast  greyish-white,  streaked  with  dusky  ; on
the  breast  a large  patch  of  brownish-black  ; abdomen  and  lower  tail-coverts
white,  the  latter  with  dusky  markings.

Length  to  end  of  tail  8^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  ; extent  of  wings
15,  wing  from  flexure  4^2  ; tail  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the
edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  1;  middle  toe  jg,  its  claw
Weight  3 oz.

Adult  in  Winter.  Plate  CCXC.  Fig.  2.

The  bill,  feet  and  eyes  as  above ; the  general  colour  of  the  upper
parts  is  brownish-grey,  varying  in  difierent  individuals  in  intensity  of  tint.
The  wings  and  tail  are  as  in  summer.  Throat  greyish-white,  sides  of  the
head  and  neck,  and  fore  part  of  the  latter,  pale  brownish-grey,  faintly
streaked  with  darker,  as  are  the  sides  ; the  rest  of  the  lower  parts  white,
with  a few  streaks  on  the  breast.


( 584  )


LABRADOR.

When  I look  back  upon  the  many  pleasant  hours  that  I spent  with
the  young  gentlemen  who  composed  my  party,  during  our  excursions
along  the  coast  of  sterile  and  stormy  Labrador,  I think  that  a brief  ac-
count of  our  employments  may  prove  not  altogether  uninteresting  to  my
readers.

We  had  purchased  our  stores  at  Boston,  with  the  aid  of  my  generous
friend  Dr  Parkman  of  that  city ; but  unfortunately  many  things  neces-
sary on  an  expedition  like  ours  were  omitted.  At  Eastport  in  Maine  we
therefore  laid  in  these  requisites.  No  traveller,  let  me  say,  ought  to  ne-
glect any  thing  that  is  calculated  to  ensure  the  success  of  his  undertaking,
or  to  contribute  to  his  personal  comfort,  when  about  to  set  out  on  a long
and  perhaps  hazardous  voyage.  Very  few  opportunities  of  replenishing
stores  of  provision,  clothing  or  ammunition,  occur  in  such  a country  as
Labrador ; and  yet,  we  all  placed  too  much  confidence  in  the  zeal  and
foresight  of  our  purveyors  at  Eastport.  We  had  abundance  of  ammu-
nition, excellent  bread,  meat,  and  potatoes;  but  the  butter  was  quite
rancid,  the  oil  only  fit  to  grease  our  guns,  the  vinegar  too  liberally  diluted
with  cider,  the  mustard  and  pepper  deficient  in  due  pungency.  All  this,
however,  was  not  discovered  until  it  was  too  late  to  be  remedied.  Several
of  the  young  men  were  not  clothed  as  hunters  should  be,  and  some  of  the
guns  were  not  so  good  as  we  could  have  wished.  We  were,  however,  for-
tunate with  respect  to  our  vessel,  which  was  a notable  sailer,  did  not  leak,
bad  a good  crew,  and  was  directed  by  a capital  seaman.

The  hold  of  the  schooner  was  floored,  and  an  entrance  made  to  it
from  the  cabin,  so  that  in  it  we  had  a very  good  parlour,  dining-room,
drawing-room,  library,  &c.  all  those  apartments  however,  being,  united  in-
to one.  An  extravagantly  elongated  deal  table  ranged  along  the  centre^
one  of  the  party  had  slung  his  hammock  at  one  end,  and  in  its  vicinity
slept  the  cook  and  a lad  who  acted  as  armourer.  The  cabin  was  small ;
but  being  fitted  in  the  usual  manner  with  side  berths,  was  used  for  a dor-
mitory. It  contained  a small  table  and  a stove,  the  latter  of  diminu-
tive size,  but  smoky  enough  to  discomfit  a host.  We  had  adopted  in
a great  measure  the  clothing  worn  by  the  American  fishermen  on  that
coast,  namely,  thick  blue  cloth  trowsers,  a comfortable  waistcoat,  and  a


LABRADOR.


585


pea-jacket  of  blanket.  Our  boots  were  large,  round-toed,  strong,  and
well  studded  with  large  nails  to  prevent  sliding  on  the  rocks.  Worsted
comforters,  thick  mittens,  and  round  broad-brimmed  hats,  completed  our
dress,  which  was  more  picturesque  than  fashionable.  As  soon  as  we  had
an  opportunity,  the  boots  were  exchanged  for  Esquimaux  mounted  mo-
cassins of  seal-skin,  impermeable  to  water,  light,  easy,  and  fastening  at  top
about  the  middle  of  the  thigh  to  straps,  which  when  buckled  over  the  hips
secured  them  well.  To  complete  our  equipment,  we  had  several  good
boats,  one  of  which  was  extremely  light  and  adapted  for  shallow  water.

No  sooner  had  we  reached  the  coast  and  got  into  harbour,  than  we
agreed  to  follow  certain  regulations  intended  for  the  general  benefit.
Every  morning  the  cook  was  called  before  three  o’clock.  At  half-past
three,  breakfast  was  on  the  table,  and  every  body  equipt.  The  guns,
ammunition,  botanical  boxes,  and  baskets  for  eggs  or  minerals,  were  all
in  readiness.  Our  breakfast  consisted  of  coffee,  bread,  and  various  other
materials.  At  four,  all  except  the  cook  and  one  seaman,  went  off  in  dif-
ferent directions,  not  forgetting  to  carry  with  them  a store  of  cooked  provi-
sions. Some  betook  themselves  to  the  islands,  others  to  the  deep  bays  ;
the  latter  on  landing  wandered  over  the  country,  until  noon,  when  laying
themselves  down  on  the  rich  moss,  or  sitting  on  the  granite  rock,  they
would  rest  for  an  hour,  eat  their  dinner,  and  talk  of  their  successes  or
disappointments.  I often  regret  that  I did  not  take  sketches  of  the  curi-
ous groups  formed  by  my  young  friends  on  such  occasions,  and  when,  af-
ter returning  at  night,  all  were  engaged  in  measuring,  weighing,  compar-
ing and  dissecting  the  birds  we  bad  procured,  operations  which  were  car-
ried on  with  the  aid  of  a number  of  candles  thrust  into  the  necks  of  bot-
tles. Here  one  examined  the  ffowers  and  leaves  of  a plant,  there  another
explored  the  recesses  of  a diver’s  gullet,  while  a third  skinned  a gull  or  a
grous.  Nor  was  our  journal  forgotten.  Arrangements  were  made  for
the  moiTow,  and  at  twelve  we  left  matters  to  the  mangement  of  the  cook,
and  retired  to  our  roosts.

If  the  wind  blew  hard,  all  went  on  shore,  and,  excepting  on  a few  re-
markably rainy  days,  we  continued  our  pursuits  much  in  the  same  man-
ner during  our  stay  in  the  country.  The  physical  powers  of  the  young
men  were  considered  in  making  our  arrangements.  Shattuck  and  In-
GALS  went  together  ; the  Captain  and  Cooledge  were  fond  of  each  other,
the  latter  liaving  also  been  an  officer  ; Lincoln  and  my  son  being  the
strongest  and  most  determined  hunters,  generally  marched  by  themselves;


586


LABRADOR.


and  I went  with  one  or  other  of  the  parties  according  to  circumstances,
although  it  was  by  no  means  my  custom  to  do  so  regularly,  as  I had
abundance  of  work  on  hand  in  the  vessel.

The  return  of  my  young  companions  and  the  sailors  was  always
looked  for  with  anxiety.  On  getting  on  board,  they  opened  their  bud-
gets, and  laid  their  contents  on  the  deck,  amid  much  merriment,  those
who  had  procured  most  specimens  being  laughed  at  by  those  who  had
obtained  the  rarest,  and  the  former  joking  the  latter  in  return.  A sub-
stantial meal  always  awaited  them,  and  fortunate  we  were  in  having  a
capital  cook,  although  he  was  a little  too  fond  of  the  bottle.

Our  “fourth  of  July”  was  kept  sacred,  and  every  Saturday  night  the
toast  of  “ wives  and  sweethearts”  was  the  first  given,  “ parents  and  friends’’
the  last.  Never  was  there  a more  merry  set.  Some  with  the  violin  and
flute  accompanied  the  voices  of  the  rest,  and  few  moments  were  spent  in
idleness.  Before  a month  had  elapsed,  the  spoils  of  many  a fine  bird
hung  around  the  hold ; shrubs  and  flowers  were  in  the  press,  and  I had
several  drawings  finished,  some  of  which  you  have  seen,  and  of  which  I
hope  you  will  ere  long  see  the  remainder.  Large  jars  were  filling  apace
with  the  bodies  of  rare  birds,  fishes,  quadrupeds,  and  reptiles,  as  well  as
molluscous  animals.  We  had  several  pets  too,  Gulls,  Cormorants,  Guille-
mots, Puffins,  Hawks,  and  a Raven.  In  some  of  the  harbours,  curious
fishes  were  hooked  in  our  sight,  so  clear  was  the  water.

We  found  that  camping  out  at  night  was  extremely  uncomfortable,
on  account  of  the  annoyance  caused  by  flies  and  musquitoes,  which  at-
tacked the  hunters  in  swarms  at  all  times,  but  more  especially  when  they
lay  down,  unless  they  enveloped  themselves  in  thick  smoke,  which  is  not
much  more  pleasant.  Once  when  camping,  the  weather  became  very  bad^
and  the  party  was  twenty  miles  distant  from  Whapatiguan  as  night
threw  her  mantle  over  the  earth.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents,  the  north-east
wind  blew  furiously,  and  the  air  was  extremely  cold.  The  oars  of  the
boats  were  fixed  so  as  to  support  some  blankets,  and  a small  fire  was  with
difficulty  kindled,  on  the  embers  of  which  a scanty  meal  was  cooked.  How
different  from  a camp  on  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi,  where  wood  is
abundant,  and  the  air  generally  not  lacking  heat,  where  musquitoes,  al-
though plentiful  enough,  are  not  accompanied  by  carraboo  flies,  and
where  the  barkings  of  a joyful  squirrel,  or  the  notes  of  the  Barred  Owl,
that  grave  buffoon  of  our  western  woods,  never  fail  to  gladden  the  camper
as  he  cuts  to  the  right  and  left  such  branches  and  canes  as  most  easily


LABRADOR.


587


supply  materials  for  forming  a lodging  for  the  night ! On  the  coast  of
Labrador  there  are  no  such  things ; granite  and  green  moss  are  spread
around,  silence  like  that  of  the  grave  envelopes  all,  and  when  night  has
closed  the  dreary  scene  from  your  sight,  the  wolves,  attracted  by  the
scent  of  the  remains  of  your  scanty  repast,  gather  around  you.  Cowards
as  they  are,  they  dare  not  venture  on  a charge ; but  their  bowlings  ef-
fectually banish  sleep.  You  must  almost  roast  your  feet  to  keep  them
warm,  while  your  head  and  shoulders  are  chilled  by  the  blast.  When
morning  comes,  she  smiles  not  on  you  with  rosy  cheeks,  but  appears
muffled  in  a grey  mantle  of  cold  mist,  which  shews  you  that  there  is  no
prospect  of  a fine  day.  The  object  of  the  expedition,  which  was  to  pro-
cure some  Owls  that  had  been  observed  there  by  day,  was  entirely  frus-
trated. At  early  dawn,  the  party  rose  stiffened  and  dispirited,  and  glad
were  they  to  betake  themselves  to  their  boats,  and  return  to  their  floating
hopie.

Before  we  left  Labrador,  several  of  my  young  friends  began  to  feel
the  want  of  suitable  clothing.  The  sailors’  ever-tailoring  system  was,  be-
lieve me,  fairly  put  to  the  test.  Patches  of  various  colours  ornamented
knees  and  elbows ; our  boots  were  worn  out ; our  greasy  garments  and
battered  hats  were  in  harmony  with  our  tanned  and  weather-beaten  faces ;
and,  had  you  met  with  us,  you  might  have  taken  us  for  a squad  of  wretch  -
ed  vagrants  ; but  we  were  joyous  in  the  expectation  of  a speedy  return,
and  exulted  afthe  thoughts  of  our  success.

As  the  chill  blast  that  precedes  the  winter’s  tempest  thickened  the  fogs
on  the  hills  and  ruffled  the  dark  waters,  each  successive  day  saw  us  more
anxious  to  leave  the  dreary  wilderness  of  grim  rocks  and  desolate  moss-
clad  valleys.  Unfavourable  winds  prevented  us  for  a while  from  spread-
ing our  white  sails ; but  at  last  one  fair  morning  smiled  on  the  wintry
world,  the  Ripley  was  towed  from  the  harbour,  her  tackle  trimmed,  and
as  we  bounded  over  the  billows,  we  turned  our  eyes  toward  the  wilds  of
Labrador,  and  heartily  bade  them  farewell  for  ever  ! .


( 588  )


THE  HERRING  GULL.

LaRUS  ARGENTATUS,'Q\lVti-S.

PLATE  CCXCI.  Male.

On  the  22d  of  May  18S3  I was  kindly  received  with  my  party  on
board  the  United  States’  revenue-cutter  the  Swiftsure,  commanded  by
Captain  Cooledge,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  next  day  was  landed  on
White  Head  Island,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  This  island
is  the  property  of  a worthy  Englishman  of  the  name  of  Frankland,  who
received  us  with  great  hospitality,  gave  us  leave  to  ransack  his  domains,
and  invited  us  to  remain  as  long  as  we  pleased.  The  Herring  Gulls,  he
said,  were  breeding  in  great  numbers,  and  we  might  expect  good  sport.
We  immediately  set  out  in  search  of  them,  directing  our  course  toward
the  pine  woods,  in  which  we  were  informed  we  should  find  them,  and  in
approaching  which  we  passed  over  an  elevated  marsh  of  great  extent.  As
we  came  up  to  the  place  I observed  that  many  of  the  Gulls  had  alighted
on  the  fir-trees,  while  a vast  number  were  sailing  around,  and  when  we
advanced  nearer,  the  former  took  to  wing,  abandoning  their  nests,  and  all
flew  about  uttering  incessant  cries.

I was  greatly  surprised  to  see  the  nests  placed  on  the  branches,  some
near  the  top,  others  about  the  middle  or  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  trees,
while  at  the  same  time  there  were  many  on  the  ground.  It  is  true  I had
been  informed  of  this  by  our  captain,  but  I had  almost  believed  that,  on
arriving  at  the  spot,  I should  find  the  birds  not  to  be  gulls.  My  doubts,
however,  were  now  dispelled,  and  I was  delighted  to  see  how  strangely
Nature  had  provided  them  with  the  means  of  securing  their  eggs  and
young  from  their  arch-enemy  man.  My  delight  was  greatly  increased  on
being  afterwards  informed  by  Mr  Frankland  that  the  strange  habit  in
question  had  been  acquired  by  these  gulls  within  his  recollection,  for,  said
he,  “ when  I first  came  here,  many  years  ago,  they  all  built  their  nests
on  the  moss  and  in  open  ground  ; but  as  my  sons  and  the  fishermen  col-
lected most  of  their  eggs  for  winter  use,  and  sadly  annoyed  the  poor
things,  the  old  ones  gradually  began  to  put  their  nests  on  the  trees  in  the
thickest  parts  of  the  woods.  The  youngest  birds,  however,  still  have
some  on  the  ground,  and  the  whole  are  becoming  less  wild  since  I have


HERRING  GULL.


589


forbidden  strangers  to  rob  their  nests  ; for,  gentlemen,  you  are  the  only
persons  out  of  my  family  that  have  fired  a gun  on  White  Head  Island
for  several  years  past,  and  I daresay  you  will  not  commit  any  greater  ha-
vock  among  them  than  is  necessary,  and  to  that  you  are  welcome.”

I was  much  pleased  with  the  humanity  of  our  host,  and  requested  him
to  let  me  know  when  all  the  Gulls,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  would
abandon  the  trees  and  resume  their  former  mode  of  breeding  on  the  ground,
which  he  promised  to  do.  But  I afterwards  found  that  this  was  not  like-
ly to  happen,  because  on  some  other  islands  not  far  distant,  to  which  the
fishermen  and  eggers  have  free  access,  these  Gulls  breed  altogether  on  the
trees,  even  when  their  eggs  and  young  are  regularly  removed  every  year,
so  that  their  original  habits  have  been  entirely  given  up.  My  opinion
that,  after  being  thus  molested  for  some  time  longer,  they  may  resort  to
the  inaccessible  shelves  of  the  high  rocks  of  these  islands,  was  strengthen-
ed by  Mr  Frankland’s  informing  me  that  many  pairs  had  already  taken
refuge  in  such  places,  where  they  bred  in  perfect  security.  The  most  re-
markable effect  produced  by  these  changes  of  locality  is,  that  the  young
which  are  hatched  on  the  trees  or  high  rocks,  do  not  leave  their  nests  un-
til they  are  able  to  fly,  while  those  on  the  ground  run  about  in  less  than
a week,  and  hide  themselves  at  the  sight  of  man  among  the  moss  and
plants,  which  frequently  saves  them  from  being  carried  away.  The  young
on  the  trees  are  shaken  out  of  their  nests,  or  knocked  down  with  poles,
their  flesh  being  considered  as  very  good  by  the  fishermen  and  eggers,  who
collect  and  salt  them  for  winter  provision.

Some  of  the  nests  which  I saw  were  placed  at  a height  of  more  than
forty  feet  on  the  trees,  others,  seen  in  the  thickest  parts  of  the  woods,  were
eight  or  ten  feet  from  the  ground,  and  were  placed  close  to  the  main  stem,
so  as  to  be  with  difficulty  observed.  It  was  truly  curious  to  see  the  broad-
winged birds  make  their  way  to  and  from  them  in  these  secluded  retreats.
The  nests  placed  on  the  ground  were  several  yards  apart,  and  measured
from  fifteen  to  eighteen  inches  in  diameter,  their  cavity  being  from  four
to  six.  The  lower  stratum  consisted  of  grass,  plants  of  various  kinds,
moss,  and  grey  lichens,  and  the  whole  was  lined  with  fine  bent,  but  with-
out any  feathers.  Those  on  the  trees  measured  from  twenty-four  to
twenty-six  inches  in  diameter  externally,  and  were  composed  of  the  same
materials,  but  in  greater  quantity,  the  object  of  which  I thought  might
be  to  allow  more  space  to  the  young  while  growing,  as  they  could  not  en-
joy the  pleasure  of  running  about  like  those  hatched  on  the  ground.  Per-


590


HERRING  GULL.


haps,  however,  the  smaller  size  of  the  nests  placed  there  may  be  owing  to
their  belonging  to  the  younger  Gulls,  as  I have  often  observed  that  the
older  tlie  individual  the  larger  is  its  nest.  Mr  Frankland  informed  me
that  they  frequently  repair  the  old  nests  at  the  commencement  of  the
breeding  season,  and  I found  the  assertion  proved  by  my  own  observation.
The  eggs,  which  are  three,  measure  three  inches  in  length,  by  two  in
breadth,  have  an  oval  somewhat  pyriform  shape,  are  rough  though  not
granulated,  and  are  of  a dull  yellowish  earthy  colour,  irregularly  blotched
and  spotted  with  dark  umber.  They  are  nearly  as  large  as  those  of  the
Great  Black-backed  Gull ; but  they  differ  considerably  in  size  as  well  as
in  colour,  some  being  more  or  less  rounded  or  elongated.  The  yolk  is
bright  orange,  the  albumen  bluish-white ; and  they  are  excellent  eating.

About  the  beginning  of  May  the  Herring  Gulls  collect  into  great
flocks  for  the  purpose  of  reproducing,  and  betake  themselves  to  large
sand-bars  or  mud-flats  at  low  water,  where  their  cacklings  may  be  heard
at  a great  distance.  With  the  aid  of  a glass  you  may  see  them  going
through  their  courtships  ; the  males  swell  their  throats,  walk  about  proud-
ly, throw  their  heads  upwards,  and  emit  their  love  notes.  These  general
meetings  take  place  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  according  to  the  state  of  the
tide,  and  continue  for  about  a fortnight,  when  they  all  depart  and  betake
themselves  to  the  islands  on  which  they  breed.  Several  of  these  are
situated  near  the  one  mentioned,  and  there  is  one  near  Cape  Sable,  a few
miles  from  the  most  southern  point  of  Nova  Scotia,  on  which  we  saw  thou-
sands alighted  on  the  trees  as  we  were  sailing  along  that  coast  on  our  way
to  Labrador.  Some  individuals  begin  to  lay  about  the  19th  of  May  or  a
few  days  earlier,  while  others  have  not  finished  the  process  until  the  mid-
dle of  June.  During  this  period  they  resort  at  certain  hours  to  bare  rocky
islets,  on  which  they  copulate.  At  White  Head  Island,  while  we  were
seated  on  the  edge  of  a beautiful  sand-bar  eating  our  dinner,  we  saw,  on
one  of  these  rocks,  a vast  number  forming  as  it  were  a dense  mass,  which
covered  about  half  an  acre.  At  twelve  o’clock,  we  observed  that  all  those
which  were  not  sitting  on  their  eggs,  flew  over  us  and  alighted  on  the  sea,
about  half  a mile  from  the  shore,  where  they  remained  upwards  of  an  hour,
swimming  gracefully  but  in  silence  all  the  while.  A seal  happening  to
raise  its  head  above  the  water  frightened  them,  and  all  raised  their  wings
as  if  about  to  fly.  Soon  after  they  rose  all  at  once,  separated,  and  went
off*  in  search  of  food,  but  retuimed  in  less  than  an  hour  to  the  island,  fly-
ing high  and  cackling  loudly.  A little  before  sunset  all  those  unoccupied


HERRING  GULL.


591


with  incubation  went  off  to  the  same  rocky  islands  to  roost,  flying  in  silence,
and  mostly  in  files.  It  was  curious  to  observe  that,  whenever  a large  flock
made  towards  the  sea  cackling,  all  the  ducks  about  immediately  flew  off
to  a considerable  distance,  as  if  afraid  of  them ; and  we  saw  that  these
Gulls,  although  timorous  in  the  pre.sence  of  man,  shew  great  courage  in
attacking  predatory  birds,  such  as  Jays,  Ci’ows,  Ravens,  and  even  Hawks,
which  they  pursued  and  forced  into  the  deep  woods,  or  drove  away  from
the  vicinity  of  their  nests.

Shy  and  wary  nearly  in  as  great  a degree  as  the  Black-backed  Gull,
they  were  with  difficulty  obtained,  unless  we  approached  them  under
cover.  The  least  noise  made  them  instantly  leave  their  perch,  and  al-
though there  were  six  of  us,  each  furnished  with  a good  gun,  and  some
sufficiently  expert,  not  more  than  a dozen  were  killed  that  day,  and  all
of  them  while  flying.  The  moment  one  started,  it  would  sound  an  alarm,
on  which  hundreds  would  rise  and  sail  over  us,  at  such  a height  that  it
was  useless  to  shoot  at  them.  Now  and  then,  one  accidentally  passing
low  over  the  woods,  was  brought  down.  While  returning  in  the  evening
we  shot  one  at  a great  height,  having  merely  broken  the  tip  of  its  wing.
Having  caught  it,  we  placed  it  on  the  narrow  path,  on  which  it  ran  be-
fore us  nearly  to  tbe  house  of  the  Governor,  as  Captain  Frankland  is
called.  It  offered  no  resistance,  but  bit  severely,  and  now  and  then  lay
down  to  rest  for  a few  moments.  It  ran  fast  enough  to  keep  several  yards
before  us,  cackling  all  the  while,  and  once  suddenly  made  off  from  the  path
at  a rapid  rate.

Their  flight  is  as  strong  as  that  of  the  Great  Black-backed  Gull,  but
more  buoyant  as  well  as  graceful.  During  the  love  season  their  aerial
evolutions  are  extremely  beautiful ; they  pass  through  the  air  in  wide  cir-
clings,  at  a great  height,  and  then  come  down  in  curious  zigzags  until
near  the  tops  of  the  trees,  or  the  surface  of  the  sea.  While  in  pursuit  of
fish,  they  dart  in  curved  lines  with  great  rapidity,  frequently  wheeling
suddenly  when  over  their  prey,  and  falling  towards  it.  When  travelling,
they  pass  indifferently  over  the  land  or  the  water,  but  generally  at  a con-
siderable height.  Their  food  consists  principally  of  herrings,  of  which
they  destroy  great  numbers,  following  the  shoals.  They  also  feed  on
other  fishes  of  small  size,  shrimps,  crabs,  and  shell-fish,  as  well  as  on  young
birds  and  small  quadrupeds,  and  suck  all  the  eggs  they  can  find.  The
rocky  shores  of  the  islands  on  which  I found  them  breeding  are  covered
with  multitudes  of  sea-urchins,  having  short  greenish  spines,  which  give


592


HERRING  GULL.


them  the  semblance  of  a ball  of  moss.  At  low  water  the  Herring  Gulls
frequently  devour  these  animals,  thrusting  their  bill  through  the  shell,
and  sucking  its  contents.  They  also  take  up  shells  in  the  air,  and
drop  them  on  the  rocks  to  break  them.  We  saw  one  that  had  met  with
a very  hard  mussel,  take  it  up  and  drop  it  three  times  in  succession,  be-
fore it  succeeded  in  breaking  it,  and  I was  much  pleased  to  see  the  bird
let  it  fall  each  succeeding  time  from  a greater  height  than  before.  They
seem  to  go  out  to  sea  in  search  of  food  at  particular  periods,  setting  out
at  the  first  ebb  and  returning  to  the  shore  as  the  tide  rises.

The  young  are  at  first  fed  chiefly  with  shrimps  and  other  small  Crus-
tacea, which  are  picked  up  from  the  mud-bars  or  along  the  shores.  They
are  then  of  a deep  rusty  colour  all  over,  and  when  fully  feathered  they
retain  a good  deal  of  that  hue,  but  the  feathers  are  edged  with  light  grey
or  brown ; the  feet  and  legs  are  of  a greenish-blue  colour,  inclining  to
purple;  the  bill  dusky  or  nearly  black.  In  spring  they  acquire  their  full
size,  but  still  retain  the  grey  and  rusty  plumage.  The  next  year  they
shew  much  light  ash-grey  and  white  about  the  head,  neck,  and  lower
parts,  the  orange  spot  appears  on  the  bill,  the  feet  and  legs  are  flesh-
coloured,  the  tail  still  partially  banded  towards  the  extremity.  At  this
age,  however,  I believe  they  breed,  as  I observed  some  coloured  in  the
manner  described,  mated  with  older  birds.  The  third  spring  they  acquire
the  colouring  represented  in  the  plate.

I found  no  other  species  breeding  on  the  same  islands.  Old  and  young
associate  together  all  the  year  round,  excepting  during  the  breeding  sea-
son, when  the  latter  separate  and  pursue  their  avocations  together.  The
cry  or  cackling  of  this  species,  which  is  heard  at  a considerable  dis-
tance, may  be  imitated  by  pronouncing  the  syllables  hac,  hac,  hac,  cah,
call,  cah.

The  Herring  Gull  has  a greater  range  of  migration  along  our  coast
and  in  the  interior  than  any  other  American  species.  I have  found  it  on
our  great  lakes,  and  on  the  Ohio,  Missouri  and  Mississippi,  down  to  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  during  the  autumnal  months,  and  in  winter  along  the
shores  of  the  latter,  and  all  our  eastern  coasts.  It  may  be  said  to  be  resident
in  the  United  States,  as  it  breeds  from  off  Boston  to  Eastport  in  Maine ;
but  the  greater  number  go  farther  north.  We  found  the  nests  of  some
on  the  bare  rocks  of  the  Seal  Islands  off  Labrador,  but  not  on  the  coast
itself.  They  were  composed  of  dry  plants  and  moss  brought  from  the
mainland.  The  birds  kept  by  themselves,  and  appeared  to  be  completely


HERRING  GULL.


593


mastered  by  the  Great  Black-backed  Gulls.  On  our  return  we  saw  old
and  young  on  the  northern  coast  of  Newfoundland,  and  on  the  different
bays  over  which  we  passed.

I have  represented  an  adult  male,  but  not  one  of  the  largest,  and  a
young  bird  shot  in  winter,  which  I have  placed  on  a bunch  of  Racoon
oysters,  where  it  was  standing  when  shot.

Larvs  aegentatus,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  part  ii.  p.  TG4.

LiAEus  aegentatus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  360.

Laeus  argentatoides.  Ibidem.

Adult  Male  in  spring.  Plate  CCXCI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  robust,  compressed,  higher  near  the  end
than  at  the  base.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  nearly  straight  at
the  base,  declinate  and  arched  towards  the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides
slightly  convex,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  arcuato-declinate  towards  the
end,  the  tip  rather  obtuse.  Nasal  groove  rather  long  and  narrow ; nostril
in  its  fore  part,  lateral,  longitudinal,  linear-oblong,  wider  anteriorly,  per-
vious. Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  narrow,  the  outline  of
the  crura  curved,  the  dorsal  line  beyond  the  prominence  slightly  concave,
the  sides  erect  and  nearly  flat,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  rather  large,  oblong,  narrowed  anteriorly.  Neck  of  moderate
length,  strong.  Body  full.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  rather  slender;
tibia  bare  below ; tarsus  somewhat  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with
numerous  scutella,  laterally  with  angular  scales,  behind  with  numerous
small  rectangular  scales ; hind  toe  very  small  and  elevated,  the  fore  toes
of  moderate  length,  rather  slender,  the  fourth  longer  than  the  second,  the
third  longest,  all  scutellate  above,  and  connected  by  reticulated  entire
membranes,  the  lateral  toes  margined  externally  with  a thick  narrow  mem-
brane. Claws  small,  slightly  arched,  depressed,  rounded,  that  of  the
middle  toe  with  an  expanded  thin  inner  margin.

The  plumage  in  general  is  close,  full,  elastic,  very  soft  and  blended,
on  the  back  rather  compact.  Wings  very  long,  broad,  acute,  the  first
and  second  quills  nearly  equal,  the  rest  of  the  primaries  rather  rapidly
graduated ; secondaries  broad  and  rounded,  the  inner  narrower.  . Tail  of
moderate  length,  even,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  gamboge-yellow,  with  a large  orange-red  patch  inclining  to  car-
mine towards  the  end  of  the  lower  mandible.  Edges  of  eyelids  gamboge;
iris  silvery  white.  Feet  flesh-coloured ; claws  brownish-black.  The  head,
neck,  lower  parts,  rump  and  tail,  are  pure  white ; the  back  and  wings


VOL.  III.


rp


594


HERRING  GULL.


pearl-grey  or  light  bluish-grey,  very  slightly  tinged  with  purple ; the
edges  of  the  wing  and  the  extremities  of  all  the  quills,  are  white.  The
first  six  quills  are  brownish-black  towards  the  end,  that  colour  including
the  outer  webs  and  the  greater  part  of  the  inner  of  the  two  first,  and  on
the  rest  gradually  diminishing,  so  as  on  the  sixth  merely  to  form  a bar ;
first  quill  with  a patch  of  white  about  an  inch  and  a half  long  on  both  webs
near  the  end ; second  with  a circular  white  patch  on  the  inner  web,  the
tips  of  aU  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  23  inches,  to  end  of  wings  24^,  to  end  of  claws
21^ ; extent  of  wings  53  ; wing  from  flexure  18;  tail  ; bill  along  the
ridge  2^,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  3 ; its  depth  at  the  angle  | ;
tarsus  2| ; middle  toe  2j,  its  claw  Weight  1 lb.  10  oz.

The:  Female  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  somewhat  less.

Young  in  November’.  Plate  CCXCI.  Fig.  2.

Bill  brownish-black,  paler  at  the  base  of  the  lower  mandible.  Edges
of  eyelids  greenish-grey  ; iris  hazeL  Feet  purplish  flesh-colour ; claws
brownish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  whole  plumage  is  light  pur-
plish-grey, the  upper  part  of  the  head  darker,  the  lower  parts  minutely
mottled  with  pale  yellowish-grey ; the  feathers  of  the  upper  parts,  and
the  upper  tail-coverts,  irregularly  edged  and  barred  with  greyish-white.
Primary  quills  greyish-broVn,  their  inner  webs  paler,  their  tips  whitish  ;
tail  of  the  same  colour,  its  base  and  outer  webs  of  lateral  feathers  irregu-
larly mottled  with  whitish,  the  tips  brownish-white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  18|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  20 ; extent  of  wings
51 ; wing  from  flexure  16 ; tail  6 ; bill  along  the  ridge  2,  along  the  edge
of  lower  mandible  2^;  tarsus  2|^;  middle  toe  2,  its  claw  Weight  22  oz.

From  the  examination  of  individuals  of  this  species,  it  would  appear
that  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  markings  of  the  quills  as  afford-
ing a specific  character.  Four  undoubted  specimens  of  Larus  argentatus
now  before  me,  have  a white  spot,  varying  in  length  from  one  to  two
inches,  and  including  both  webs,  near  the  end  of  the  Jirst  quill.  One  has
no  spot  on  the  second  quill;  another  has  a spot  on  both  webs  of  the  second
quill  of  one  wing,  and  a smaller  spot  on  part  of  the  inner  web  of  the  same
quill  of  the  other  wing ; the  thii'd  has  a very  small  spot  on  part  of  the
inner  web  of  the  same  quill  of  both  wings  ; the  fourth  has  a large  circular
spot  on  the  inner  web  of  that  quill  also  in  both  wings.


( 595  )


THE  CRESTED  GREBE.

PODICEPS  CRISTATUS,  LatH.

PLATE  CCXCII.  Male  and  Female.

This  beautiful  species  returns  from  its  northern  places  of  residence,
•and  passes  over  the  Western  Country,  about  the  beginning  of  September.
A few  remain  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  Ohio,  on  the  Mississippi,  and  the
lakes  in  their  neighbourhood,  but  the  greater  number  proceed  towards
the  Mexican  territories.  They  pass  swiftly  through  the  air,  at  a height
of  about  a hundred  yards,  in  flocks  of  from  seven  or  eight  to  fifty  or  more,
proceeding  in  a loose  body,  and  propelling  themselves  by  continued  flap-
pings, their  necks  and  feet  stretched  out  to  their  full  length.  I have  ob-
served them  thus  passing  in  autumn,  for  several  years  in  succession,  over
different  parts  of  the  Ohio,  at  all  hours  of  the  day.  On  such  occasions  I
could  readily  distinguish  the  old  from  the  young,  the  former  being  in
many  instances  still  adorned  with  their  summer  head-dress.  I never  saw
this  species  near  the  sea-coast,  where,  on  the  contrary,  I have  met  with
the  Red-necked  Grebe.

When  about  to  alight  on  the  water,  these  birds  glide  swiftly  down-
ward, with  their  wings  half-closed,  and  produce  a sound  not  unlike  that
of  a hawk  stooping  towards  its  prey.  Their  velocity  is  so  great  at  this
moment,  that  on  alighting,  they  glide  on  the  surface  of  the  water  for
twenty  or  thirty  yards,  leaving  a furrow  in  their  wake.  In  a few  mo-
ments they  are  all  engaged  in  washing  and  cleaning  themselves,  after
which  they  dive  in  pursuit  of  the  fishes  on  which  they  feed,  and  which
they  secure  by  following  them  in  the  manner  of  Divers  and  Cormorants.
They  are  exceedingly  quick-sighted,  and  frequently  elude  by  diving  the
shot  intended  for  their  destruction,  seldom  after  being  chased  raising
more  than  their  bill  above  the  water,  but  rarely  making  for  the  shore  un-
less when  nearly  exhausted.

When  in  ponds,  they  may  easily  be  caught  with  fishing  hooks  placed
on  lines  near  the  bottom ; but  if  the  lines  are  not  closely  attended  to,  or
held  from  a place  of  concealment,  where  you  may  feel  that  they  are  hooked,
and  at  once  haul  them  out,  the  birds  drown  in  a very  short  time.  On
catching  two  or  three  in  this  manner,  I found  the  pond  deserted  the  fol-

p p 2


596


CRESTED  GREBE.


lowing  morning  and  for  several  days  after.  They  very  rarely  fly  in  your
presence,  and  they  leave  the  ponds  at  night.  If  forced  to  rise  on  wing,
they  run  paddling  on  the  water  for  several  yards  before  they  rise,  and
fly  several  times  round  a pond  of  thirty  or  forty  yards  before  they  attain
the  level  of  the  tree-tops,  for  they  never  fly  through  the  woods.  When
once  high  in  the  air,  they  move  in  a direct  course  and  with  speed,  towards
some  other  pond  or  the  nearest  river.  I do  not  remember  to  have  ever
met  with  a bird  of  this  species  on  a narrow  creek  or  bayou,  or  on  muddy
waters ; and  on  the  Ohio’s  rising  I have  observed  that  they  abandon  the
river  and  betake  themselves  to  the  clear  ponds  of  the  interior.

By  the  1st  of  October,  scarcely  any  difference  can  be  perceived  be-
tween the  young  and  the  old  birds  with  respect  to  plumage,  only  the  lat-
ter have  the  under  surface  of  the  wings  still  dashed  with  the  reddish  co-
lour of  the  summer  dress.  I am  not  able  to  say  from  observation  how
long  the  young  are  in  attaining  maturity ; but  European  writers  assert
that  they  take  three  or  four  years.  When  these  birds  leave  the  southern
waters  about  the  beginning  of  April,  the  old  already  shew  their  summer
head-dress,  but  seldom  have  it  so  perfect  as  is  represented  in  the  plate.

The  food  of  this  species  consists  of  fishes,  aquatic  insects,  and  small
reptiles,  together  with  the  seeds  of  water  plants.  Dr  Richardson  states
that  these  birds  are  abundant  in  all  the  secluded  lakes  of  the  mountainous
districts  of  the  fur  countries,  and  adds  that  their  nests  are  formed  of  a
large  quantity  of  grass,  placed  among  reeds  and  carices,  and  rise  and  fall
with  the  water.  Mr  Yarrell  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  specimens
of  the  eggs,  which  are  generally  four,  measure  two  inches  and  a quarter
in  length  by  one  inch  and  a half,  have  an  oval  form,  and  a smooth  sur-
face, of  a uniform  yellowish- white  colour.


PoDiCEPS  CHisTATUS,  Lath.  Ind.  Omitli.  vol.  ii.  p.  780 Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of

Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  417.

Chested  Grebe,  or  Gaunt,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  250.

Adult  Male  in  spring.  Plate  CCXCII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  compressed,  tapering.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  slightly  declinate  towards
the  tip,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected,
the  tip  rather  sharp.  Nasal  groove  rather  wide,  extending  to  nearly  half
the  length  of  the  mandible  ; nostrils  linear-elliptical,  basal,  rather  small,
pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  extremely  narrow ;


CRESTED  GREBE.


597


dorsal  line  beyond  it  ascending  and  straight,  sides  erect,  slightly  convex,
tip  acuminate,  edges  sharp.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  long,  slender.
Body  long  and  depressed.  Feet  short,  large,  placed  close  to  the  extremity
of  the  body ; tibia  feathered  to  the  joint ; tarsus  extremely  compressed  ;
its  anterior  edge  with  a row  of  small  scutella,  the  sides  with  broad  scutella,
behind  which  are  some  irregular  scales,  the  posterior  ridge  with  a double
line  of  small  prominent  scales ; first  toe  very  small  with  a posterior  mem-
brane, fourth  longest ; the  toes  scutellate  above,  connected  at  the  base  by
a membrane,  and  having  on  both  sides  an  expanded  web-like  margin
marked  with  oblique  lines,  and  having  a crenated  edge.  Claws  flat,  that
of  third  toe  broadest.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended,  on  the  lower  parts  silky,  on  the  back
glossy  and  rather  compact.  Two  tufts  of  elongated  feathers  on  the  occi-
put, and  a large  frill  on  the  sides  and  anterior  portion  of  the  neck  at  its
upper  part.  Wings  small,  acute ; primaries  much  curved,  second  longest,
first  almost  equal,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated  ; secondaries  short,  rounded.
Tad  a slight  tuft  of  loose  feathers.

Bill  blackish-brown  tinged  with  carmine ; bare  loral  space  dusky  green,
as  is  the  edge  of  the  eyelids.  Iris  bright  carmine.  Feet  greenish-black,
tlie  webs  greyish-blue.  Upper  part  of  the  head  and  tufts  greyish-black
tinged  with  green,  as  is  the  hind  part  of  the  ruff,  its  anterior  part  being
brownish-red  ; sides  of  the  head  and  the  throat  white ; fore  neck  white
tinged  with  brown  ; breast  silvery  white,  sides  reddish-brown  with  dusky
streaks  •,  the  upper  parts  are  brownish-black,  the  feathers  edged  with
lighter,  the  sides  of  the  neck  tinged  with  reddish,  as  is  the  rump.  Wing-
coverts  greyish-brown,  primary  quills  brownish-black,  tips  of  the  inner
white,  the  middle  secondaries  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  24  inches,  to  end  of  wings  21,  to  end  of  claws
29 ; extent  of  wings  S3  ; wing  from  flexure  7^ ; bill  along  the  ridge  2,
along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  9.^-^  ; tarsus  2J  ; third  toe  f , its  claw
Weight  2 lb.  9 oz.

Adult  Female  in  spring.  Plate  CCXCII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  has  the  occipital  feathers  a little  elongated,  but  wants  the
ruff  on  the  neck.  Bill  dusky  green  ; bare  loral  space,  edges  of  eyelids,
and  iris,  as  in  the  male.  Upper  part  of  head  and  hind  neck  blackish-grey ;
back  and  wings  as  in  the  male,  but  more  tinged  with  grey  ; lower  parts
silvery  white,  the  sides  under  the  wings  dusky.


598


CRESTED  GREBE.


Length  to  end  of  tail  19|,  to  end  of  claws  ; extent  of  wings  30  ;
bill  along  the  back  21,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2| ; tarsus  21 ;
third  toe  2J,  its  claw  1-  Weight  1 lb.  6|  oz.

The  following  account  of  the  digestive  organs  of  this  species  was  taken
from  an  adult  male.

The  oesophagus  is  nine  and  a half  inches  long ; at  its  commencement,
and  for  an  inch  and  a half,  it  has  a diameter  of  half  an  inch,  for  the  next
two  inches  only  two-twelfths,  towards  the  lower  extremity  four-twelfths  ;
this,  however,  in  the  contracted  state,  the  specimen  having  been  kept  in
spirits.  The  mucous  coat  is  raised  into  numerous  longitudinal  folds.

The  walls  of  the  proventriculus  are  extremely  thick,  the  glands  cylin-
drical, generally  about  a quarter  of  an  inch  long,  and  one-twelfth  in  dia-
meter. The  stomach  is  roundish,  compressed,  the  muscular  coat  very
thick,  being  that  of  a true  gizzard,  the  tendons  nearly  half  an  inch  in  diame-
ter ; the  inner  coat  thick,  the  cuticular  lining  very  thick  and  rugous.

Between  the  orifice  of  the  oesophagus  and  the  pylorus  is  a rounded
lobe,  from  the  lower  part  of  which  the  intestine  comes  off.  The  pylorus
has  no  valve,  but  a thick  marginal  rim.  The  intestine,  immediately  after
its  commencement,  dilates  to  the  diameter  of  half  an  inch,  and  continues
of  that  size  for  twelve  inches,  then  gradually  contracts  for  about  six  inches,
when  its  diameter  is  four-twelfths,  and  again  within  six  inches  of  the  coeca
becomes  enlarged.  The  coeca  come  off  at  the  distance  of  two  inches  from
the  anus,  and  are  an  inch  and  a half  in  length,  a little  enlarged  towards
their  extremity,  and  rounded.  The  rectum  is  half  an  inch  in  diameter,
the  cloaca  one  inch.  The  entire  length  of  the  intestine  is  forty-two  inches.

The  heart  is  conical,  rather  pointed,  and  slightly  curved.  The  trachea
is  fiattened,  of  uniform  diameter,  the  rings  complete,  167  in  number,  its
transverse  diameter  two  inches  and  half  a twelfth,  contracted  at  the  bifur-
cation to  two-twelfths.

The  tail  of  the  Grebes  is  usually  described  as  a small  tuft  of  feathers ;
but  on  carefully  removing  the  coverts  and  downy  parts,  the  tail  may  be
satisfactorily  traced.  In  this  species  there  are  14  feathers,  on  each  side
7 arranged  in  a semicircular  manner.  The  two  middle  feathers  are  sepa-
rated to  the  distance  of  about  /j,  and  the  two  outer  or  lateral  approach
each  other  below,  leaving  an  interval  of  about  the  same  space.  When  the
feathers  are  broken  across  near  their  bases,  which  they  frequently  are,
there  is  thus  produced  the  appearance  of  a small  circular  tuft.  When
perfect,  they  are  about  inches  long,  arched,  with_  loose  barbs,  downy
at  their  extremities.


( 599  )


THE  LARGE-BILLED  PUFFIN.

Mormon  GLAciAziSi  Leach.

PLATE  CCXCIII.  Male.

Although  my  learned  friend  Prince  Charles  Bonaparte  says  in
his  Synopsis  of  the  Birds  of  the  United  States,  that  this  species  is  not  un-
common in  winter  on  our  coast,  I have  only  once  met  with  it,  and  even
then  I rather  supposed  than  was  actually  certain  that  the  birds  observed
were  Large-billed  Puffins.  They  occurred  on  the  outer  side  of  the  Island
of  Grand  Manan,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  None  were  seen
by  myself  or  my  companions  on  our  way  to  Labrador,  or  in  that  country,
so  that  I am  unable  to  say  any  thing  respecting  the  habits  of  this  re-
markable bird.  The  specimens  from  which  my  figures  were  taken  were
kindly  lent  to  me  by  Mr  Gould  of  London,  whose  name  must  be  fami-
liar to  you  as  a successful  cultivator  of  Ornithology.


Mormon  glacialis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  430.

Large-billed  Puffin,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  541.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXCIII.  Fig.  1.

Bin  about  the  length  of  the  head,  nearly  as  high  as  long,  exceedingly
compressed,  at  the  base  higher  than  the  head,  obliquely  furrowed  on  the
sides.  Upper  mandible  with  a horny  rim  along  the  incurved  basal  mar-
gin, its  dorsal  line  irregularly  curved  from  the  base,  the  ridge  very  narrow
but  rounded,  the  sides  rapidly  sloping,  and  marked  with  three  curved
oblique  grooves,  the  edges  strong,  rather  sharp,  their  outline  nearly  straight,
the  tip  deflected,  very  narrow,  but  obtuse.  Between  the  basal  rim  and
the  first  groove  is  a triangular  flat  space,  in  the  lower  part  of  which,  close
to  the  edge  of  the  mandible,  is  the  linear  direct  nostril.  Lower  mandi-
ble with  the  angle  narrow,  and  so  placed  that  the  base  is  inflected  mucli
beyond  the  perpendicular,  the  dorsal  line  irregularly  curved,  towards  the
end  ascending  and  nearly  straight,  the  ridge  narrow,  broader  about  the
middle,  the  sides  nearly  flat  and  grooved,  the  edges  strong,  the  tip  very
narrow.  The  gape  extends  downwai'ds  a little  beyond  the  base  of  the
bill,  and  is  furnished  with  a soft  corrugated  extensible  membrane.

Head  large,  oblong,  anteriorly  compressed.  Eyes  of  moderate  size.


600


LARGE-BILLED  PUFFIN.


with  bare  orbits ; over  the  upper  eyelid  an  oblong,  tapering  horny  body
directed  upwards  and  backwards,  on  the  lower  a linear  body  of  a simi-
lar nature  over  its  whole  length.  Neck  short  and  thick.  Body  full  and
rounded.  Feet  short,  rather  stout ; tibia  bare  for  a short  space  above  the
joint.  Tarsus  very  short,  little  compressed,  anteriorly  for  three- fourths
of  its  length  with  a series  of  small  scutella,  the  rest  with  reticular  angular
scales.  Hind  toe  wanting,  toes  rather  long,  and  slender,  scutellate  above,
connected  by  reticulated  entire  membranes,  the  third  and  fourth  toes
about  equal,  the  second  considerably  shorter,  with  a narrow  marginal
web.  Claws  strong,  of  moderate  length,  compressed,  arched,  that  of  the
inner  toe  much  curved  and  acute.

Plumage  close,  blended,  soft,  very  short  on  the  head.  Wings  curved,
short,  narrow,  acute.  Primary  quills  tapering,  incurved,  the  first  longest,
the  second  a little  shorter,  the  rest  regularly  graduated  ; secondaries  very
short  and  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  much  rounded,  of  sixteen  rounded
feathers.

Bill  bright  orange-red,  soft  edges  of  mouth  gamboge.  Edges  of  eye-
lids orange- red  ; the  iris  and  horny  appendages  light  blue.  Feet  orange-
red,  with  the  webs  paler,  the  claw  yellowish-brown.  The  sides  of  the
head  and  the  lower  parts  in  general,  white  ; upper  part  of  the  head  light
brownish-grey  tinged  with  lilac ; a broad  collar  extending  to  the  lower
mandible,  of  a dark  greyish-brown  tint  below,  and  gradually  passing  into
the  colour  of  the  upper  parts,  which  is  brownish-black,  glossed  with  blue ;
primary  quiUs  and  their  coverts  blackish-brown,  very  slightly  margined
with  paler.

Length  to  end  of  tail  13  inches,  to  end  of  claws  14  ; to  end  of  wings
12^  ; extent  of  wings  24| ; bill  along  the  ridge  ; along  the  edge  of
lower  mandible  If;  depth  of  bill  at  the  base  its  greatest  diameter
tarsus  If  ; middle  toe  1|,  its  claw  f.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXCIII.  Fig.  2.

The  Female  is  precisely  similar  to  the  Male.


( 601  )


THE  PECTORAL  SANDPIPER.

Tringa  pectoralis,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXCIV.  Male  and  Female.

This  Sandpiper  is  not  uncommon  along  the  shores  of  our  Eastern
States  in  autumn  and  winter.  It  has  also  lately  been  found  in  England,
and  I have  seen  a specimen  of  it  in  the  possession  of  William  Yaiuiell,
Esq.  of  London,  who  received  it  from  a person  who  had  shot  it  not  far
from  the  metropolis.  I first  met  with  this  species  in  the  immediate  vici-
nity of  Dennisville,  in  the  State  of  Maine,  feeding  on  the  rocky  bars  of
the  river  at  low  water.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Boston  it  is  more  abun-
dant than  elsewhere.  Mr  Nuttall  states,  that  “ they  are  killed  in  abun-
dance on  the  shores  of  Cohasset,  and  other  parts  of  Massachussetts  Bay,
and  are  brought  in  numbers  to  the  market  of  Boston,  being  very  fat  and
well-flavoured.”  “ They  arrive,”  he  adds,  “ in  flocks  about  the  close  of
August,  and  continue  there,  as  well  as  in  New  Jersey,  till  the  month  of
September.  In  some  instances  solitary  individuals  have  been  killed  in
the  marshes  of  Charles  River,  in  Cambridge,  about  the  22d  of  July;
these  were  in  company  with  flocks  of  small  Sandpipers  {T.  Wilsonii),
but  whether  pairs  may  perhaps  breed  in  the  neighbouring  marshes  or  not,
we  have  not  had  the  means  of  ascertaining.  While  here,  they  feed  on
small  coleoptera,  larvae,  and  the  common  green  Ulva  latissima,  as  well  as
some  species  of  fucus  or  sea- weed,  on  which  they  become  fat.  They  utter
a low  plaintive  whistle  when  started,  very  similar  to  that  of  other  species.
Like  the  Snipe  they  seem  fond  of  damp  meadows  and  marshes,  and  soli-
tary individuals  are  often  surprised  by  the  sportsman  in  the  manner  of
that  bird.”

I have  observed  that  the  flight  of  the  Pectoral  Sandpiper  resembles
that  of  the  Knot,  and  is  firm,  rapid,  and  well  sustained.  It  skims  rather
low  over  the  surface  of  the  water  or  the  land,  and  at  times  shoots  high
up  into  the  air,  propelling  itself  with  double  rapidity  and  in  perfect  si-
lence. It  runs  with  great  agibty,  and  probes  the  sand  or  wet  earth,  im-
mersing its  bill  up  to  the  base.  I never  saw  this  species  in  any  part  of
the  interior.  Its  places  of  resort  during  the  breeding  season,  and  the
changes  of  plumage  which  it  undergoes,  are  unknown.


602


PECTORAL  SANDPIPER.


Tringa  pectoralis,  Pectoral  Sandpiper,  Ch  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of
the  United  States,  p.  318.

Pectoral  Sandpiper,  Tringa  pectoralis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv-
pp.  43.  pi.  23.  fig.  2 — Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  111.

Adult  Male  in  Summer.  Plate  CCXCIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  longer  than  the  head,  slender,  subcylindrical,  straight,
flexible,  compressed  at  the  base,  the  point  rather  depressed  and  obtuse.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,  slightly  decurved  towards
the  end,  the  ridge  convex,  towards  the  end  a little  flattened,  at  the  point
convex,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  rather  blunt  and  soft.  Nasal  groove
extending  to  near  the  tip ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  pervious.  Lower  man-
dible with  the  angle  long  and  very  narrow,  the  dorsal  line  straight,  the
sides  nearly  erect,  with  a long  narrow  groove,  the  tip  a little  broader  but
tapering.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Eyes  rather  large.  Neck
of  moderate  length.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  slen-
der ; tibia  bare  for  a considerable  length  ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly
and  posteriorly  with  numerous  small  scutella ; hind  toe  very  small ; the
rest  rather  long,  slender,  the  fourth  slightly  longer  than  the  second,  the
third  longest,  all  free,  scutellate  above,  flat  beneath,  slightly  marginate  ;
claws  rather  small,  slightly  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  third  toe
much  larger,  with  the  inner  edge  dilated.

Plumage  very  soft,  blended  beneath,  slightly  distinct  above.  Wings
long  and  pointed  ; primaries  tapering,  obtuse,  the  first  longest,  the  second
considerably  shorter,  the  rest  regularly  graduated ; outer  secondaries  short,
obliquely  rounded,  the  inner  elongated  and  tapering.  Tail  of  twelve
feathers,  rather  short,  nearly  even,  but  with  the  middle  feathers  much
longer  and  pointed,  the  rest  rounded.

Bill  dull  olive-green,  dusky  towards  the  point.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  dull
yellowish-green ; claws  dusky.  Upper  part  of  the  head  reddish-brown,
the  central  part  of  each  feather  brownish-black  ; a faint  whitish  line  from
the  bill  to  a little  beyond  the  eye ; lores  dusky  ; sides  of  the  head  and  an-
terior and  lateral  parts  of  the  neck,  with  a portion  of  the  breast,  light
brownish-grey,  marked  with  dark  brown  lines ; chin  and  the  rest  of  the
lower  parts  white.  The  feathers  on  the  upper  parts  are  brownisli-black,
edged  with  reddish-brown,  those  on  the  wings  lighter,  primary  ijuills
dusky  ; the  outer  secondaries  tinged  with  grey,  the  inner  like  the  feathers


PECTORAL  SANDPIPER.


603


of  the  back.  Tail-feathers  hght  brownish -grey,  slightly  margined  and
tipped  with  white,  the  two  central  dark  like  the  back.

Length  to  end  of  tail  9j  inches,  to  end  of  wings  9| ; to  end  of
claws  104  ; extent  of  wings  18;  wing  from  flexure  5i§;  tail  ; bill
along  the  ridge  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; bare  part  of
tibia  tarsus  1 middle  toe  I,  its  claw  Weight  6 oz.

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  CCXCIV.  Fig.  2.

The  Female,  which  is  a little  larger,  is  similar  to  the  male.


( 604  )


THE  MANKS  SHEARWATER.

PUFFINUS  ANGLORUM,  RaY.

PLATE  CCXCV.  Adult.

Although  I have  procured  this  species  to  the  westward  of  the  banks
of  Newfoundland,  or  between  their  soundings  and  the  American  coast,  I
am  unable  to  say  any  thing  of  importance  respecting  its  habits  as  observed
by  myself.  This  species  formerly  inhabited  a small  islet  close  to  the  Isle
of  Man,  but  appears  to  have  now  entirely  deserted  it.  In  the  Orkneys,
however,  it  is  still  abundant,  and  the  eggs  and  young  are  in  much  request
there.  It  arrives  in  March,  and,  when  the  young  are  able  to  fly,  betakes
itself  to  the  open  sea,  disappearing  towards  the  approach  of  winter.  The
British  writers  who  have  described  it  inform  us,  that  it  stands  nearly  erect,
flies  with  great  rapidity,  feeds  on  marine  animal  substances  of  all  kinds,
and,  when  taken,  squirts  out  an  oily  fluid  from  its  nostrils  in  the  manner
of  the  Petrels.  It  is  said  to  breed  in  burrows,  and  to  lay  only  a single
egg,  of  a white  colour,  and  elliptical  form,  about  the  size  of  that  of  a do-
mestic fowl.


Procellaria  PuFFiNUS,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  213 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.

p.  824.

PuFFiNus  Akglorum,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  371.

Shearwater  Petrel,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  336.

Adult.  Plate  CCXCV.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  rather  slender,  a little  compressed,
straightish,  the  tips  curved.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  convex^,
and  sloping  at  the  base,  afterwards  slightly  concave,  on  the  unguis  curved,
the  ridge  broadly  convex,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  the  sides  convex,
the  edges  sharp  and  slightly  inflected ; the  unguis  stout,  curved,  rather
acute.  Nostrils  tubular,  approximated,  dorsal ; the  narrow  nasal  groove
extending  to  the  unguis.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  very  long  and
narrow,  the  short  dorsal  line  beyond  it  decurved,  the  sides  convex  and
sloping  inwards,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  of  moderate  size,  ovate,  narrowed  before.  Neck  of  moderate


MANKS  SHEARWATER.


605


length.  Body  elongated.  Feet  of  moderate  size ; tibia  feathered  to  near
the  joint ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  and  posteriorly  sharp,  covered
all  over  with  diversiform  scales,  of  which  a series  on  the  inner  side  is  scu-
telliform.  Toes  rather  long,  slender,  excepting  the  first,  which  is  a mere
conical  knob  principally  composed  of  the  claw ; anterior  toes  connected  by
striated  webs  of  which  the  margin  is  concave,  scutellate  above,  the  third
and  fourth  longest  and  about  equal.  Claws  small,  compressed,  slightly
arched,  obtuse,  that  of  third  toe  with  the  inner  edge  a little  dilated.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended,  on  the  upper  parts  rather  compact.
Feathers  of  the  fore  part  of  the  head  very  short.  Wings  long,  sharp ;
primaries  tapering,  rounded  ; first  longest,  the  rest  regularly  graduated ;
secondaries  rather  short,  rounded.  Tail  rounded,  of  twelve  feathers.

Bill  deep  greenish-black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Inner  and  middle  of
outer  side  of  tibia  dingy  orange,  the  rest  greenish-black,  as  is  the  fourth
toe  and  outer  side  of  the  third,  the  inner  side  of  the  latter  and  the  whole
of  the  second  dingy  orange ; the  webs  much  paler ; claws  brownish-black.
All  the  upper  parts  are  brownish-black,  the  lower  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  15  inches,  to  end  of  wings  15^,  to  end  of  claws
lb  ; extent  of  wings  32  ; wing  from  flexure  9| ; tail  3^  ; bill  along  the
back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1 ; tarsus  1 j J ; middle  toe

1t§,  its  claw  Weight  15  oz.

The  Female  is  similar  to  the  male.


( 606  )


GREAT  EGG  HARBOUR.

Some  years  ago,  after  having  spent  the  spring  in  observing  the  habits
of  the  migratory  warblers  and  other  land  birds,  which  arrived  in  vast
numbers  in  the  vicinity  of  Camden  in  New  Jersey,  I prepared. to  visit
the  sea  shores  of  that  State,  for  the  purpose  of  making  myself  acquainted
with  their  feathered  inhabitants.  June  had  commenced,  the  weather  was
pleasant,  and  the  country  seemed  to  smile  in  the  prospect  of  bright  'days
and  gentle  gales.  Fishermen  gunners  passed  daily  between  Philadelphia
and  the  various  small  sea-ports,  with  Jersey  wagons,  laden  with  fish,
fowls  and  other  provisions,  or  with  such  articles  as  were  required  by  the
families  of  those  hardy  boatmen  ; and  I bargained  with  one  of  them  to
take  myself  and  my  baggage  to  Great  Egg  Harbour.

One  afternoon,  about  sunset,  the  vehicle  halted  at  my  lodgings,  and
the  conductor  intimated  that  he  was  anxious  to  proceed  as  quickly  as
possible.  A trunk,  a couple  of  guns,  and  such  other  articles  as  are  found
necessary  by  persons  whose  pursuits  are  similar  to  mine,  were  imme-
diately thrust  into  the  wagon,  and  were  followed  by  their  owner.  The
conductor  whistled  to  his  steeds  and  off  we  went  at  a round  pace  over  the
loose  and  deep  sand  that  in  almost  every  part  of  this  State  forms  the  basis
of  the  roads.  After  a while  we  overtook  a whole  caravan  of  similar  ve-
hicles moving  in  the  same  direction,  and  when  we  got  near  them  our
horses  slackened  their  pace  to  a regular  walk,  the  driver  leaped  from  his
seat,  I followed  his  example,  and  we  presently  found  ourselves  in  the
midst  of  a group  of  merry  wagoners,  relating  their  adventures  of  the
week,  it  being  now  Saturday  night.  One  gave  intimation  of  the  number  of
“ Sheep-heads”  he  had  taken  to  town,  another  spoke  of  the  Curlews  which
yet  remained  on  the  sands,  and  a third  boasted  of  having  gathered  so
many  dozens  of  Marsh  Hen’s  eggs.  I inquired  if  the  Fish  Hawks  were
plentiful  near  Great  Egg  Harbour,  and  was  answered  by  an  elderly  man,
who  with  a laugh  asked  if  I had  ever  seen  the  “ Weak  fish”  along  the  coast
without  the  bird  in  question.  Not  knowing  the  animal  he  had  named,  I
confessed  my  ignorance,  when  the  whole  party  burst  into  a loud  laugh,
in  which,  there  being  nothing  better  for  it,  I joined.

About  midnight  the  caravan  reached  a half-way  house,  where  we
rested  a while.  Several  roads  diverged  from  this  spot,  and  the  wagons


GREAT  EGG  HARBOUR.


607


separated,  one  only  keeping  us  company.  The  night  was  dark  and
gloomy,  but  the  sand  of  the  road  indicated  our  course  very  distinctly.
Suddenly  the  gallopping  of  horses  struck  my  ear,  and  on  looking  back
we  perceived  that  our  wagon  must  in  an  instant  be  in  imminent  danger.
The  driver  leaped  off,  and  drew  his  steeds  aside,  barely  in  time  to  allow
the  runaways  to  pass  without  injuring  us.  Off  they  went  at  full  speed,
and  not  long  after  their  owner  came  up  panting,  and  informed  us  that  they
had  suddenly  taken  fright  at  some  noise  proceeding  from  the  woods,  but
hoped  they  would  soon  stop.  Immediately  after  we  heard  a crash  ; then
for  a few  moments  all  was  silent ; but  the  neighing  of  the  horses  presently
assured  us  that  they  had  broken  loose.  On  reaching  the  spot,  we  found
the  wagon  upset,  and  a few  yards  farther  on  were  the  horses  quietly
browsing  by  the  road  side.

The  first  dawn  of  morn  in  the  Jerseys  in  the  month  of  June,  is  worthy
of  a better  description  than  I can  furnish,  and  therefore  I shall  only  say
that  the  moment  the  sunbeams  blazed  over  the  horizon,  the  loud  and
mellow  notes  of  the  Meadow  Lark  saluted  our  ears.  On  each  side  of  the
road  were  open  woods,  on  the  tallest  trees  of  which  I observed  at  inter-
vals the  nest  of  a Fish  Hawk,  far  above  which  the  white-breasted  bird
slowly  winged  its  way,  as  it  commenced  its  early  journey  to  the  sea,  the
odour  of  which  filled  me  with  delight.  In  half  an  hour  more,  we  were
in  the  centre  of  Great  Egg  Harbour.

There  I had  the  good  fortune  to  be  received  into  the  house  of  a
thorough  bred  fisherman-gunner,  who  besides  owning  a comfortable  cot
only  a few  hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  had  an  excellent  woman  for  a
wife,  and  a little-  daughter  as  playful  as  a kitten,  though  as  wild  as  a sea-
gull. In  less  than  half  an  hour,  I was  quite  at  home,  and  the  rest  of  the
day  was  spent  in  devotion.

Oysters,  though  reckoned  out  of  season  at  this  period,  are  as  good  as
ever  when  fresh  from  their  beds,  and  my  first  meal  was  of  some  as  large
and  white  as  any  I have  eaten.  The  sight  of  them  placed  before  me  on
a clean  table,  with  an  honest  and  industrious  family  in  my  company,
never  failed  to  afford  more  pleasure  than  the  most  sumptuous  fare  under
different  circumstances ; and  our  conversation  being  simple  and  harmless,
gaiety  shone  in  every  face.  As  we  became  better  acquainted,  I had  to
answer  several  questions  relative  to  the  object  of  my  visit.  The  good-
man  rubbed  his  hands  with  joy  as  I spoke  of  shooting  and  fishing,  and
of  long  excursions  through  the  swamps  and  marshes  around.


608


GREAT  EGG  HARBOUR.


My  host  was  then,  and  I hope  still  is,  a tall  strong-boned  muscular
man,  of  dark  complexion,  with  eyes  as  keen  as  those  of  the  Sea^agle.
He  was  a tough  walker,  laughed  at  difficulties,  and  could  pull  an  oar  with
any  man.  As  to  shooting,  I have  often  doubted  whether  he  or  Mr
Egan,  the  worthy  pilot  of  Indian  Isle,  was  best ; and  rarely  indeed  have
I seen  either  of  them  miss  a shot.

At  day-break  on  Monday,  I shouldered  my  double-barrelled  gun,
and  my  host  carried  with  him  a long  fowling-piece,  a pair  of  oars,  and
a pair  of  oyster-tongs,  while  the  wife  and  daughter  brought  along  a seine.
The  boat  was  good,  the  breeze  gentle,  and  along  the  inlets  we  sailed  for
parts  well  known  to  my  companions.  To  such  naturalists  as  are  qualified
to  observe  many  different  objects  at  the  same  time.  Great  Egg  Harbour
would  probably  afford  as  ample  a field  as  any  part  of  our  coast,  except-
ing the  Florida  Keys.  Birds  of  many  kinds  are  abundant,  as  are  fishes
and  testaceous  animals.  The  forests  shelter  many  beautiful  plants,  and
even  on  the  dryest  sand-bar  you  may  see  insects  of  the  most  brilliant
tints.  Our  principal  object,  however,  was  to  procure  certain  birds  known
there  by  the  name  of  Lawyers,  and  to  accomplish  this  we  entered  and
followed  for  several  miles  a winding  inlet  or  bayou,  which  led  us  to  the
interior  of  a vast  marsh,  where  after  some  search  we  found  the  birds  and
their  nests.  Our  seine  had  been  placed  across  the  channel,  and  when  we
returned  to  it  the  tide  had  run  out  and  left  in  it  a number  of  fine  fishes,
some  of  which  we  cooked  and  ate  on  the  spot.  One,  which  I considered
as  a curiosity,  was  saved  and  transmitted  to  Baron  Cuvier.  Our  repast
ended,  the  seine  was  spread  out  to  dry,  and  we  again  betook  ourselves  to
the  marshes,  to  pursue  our  researches  until  the  return  of  the  tide.  Having
collected  enough  to  satisfy  us,  we  took  up  our  oars,  and  returned  to  the
shore  in  front  of  the  fisherman’s  house,  where  we  dragged  the  seine  seve-
ral times  with  success.

In  this  manner  I passed  several  weeks  along  those  delightful  and
healthy  shores,  one  day  going  to  the  woods  to  search  the  swamps  in  which
the  Herons  bred,  passing  another  amid  the  joyous  cries  of  the  Marsh  Hens,
and  on  a third  carrying  slaughter  among  the  White-breasted  Sea  GuUs,  by
way  of  amusement  sometimes  hauling  the  fish  called  the  Sheep- head  from
an  eddy  along  the  shore,  or  watching  the  gay  Terns  as  they  danced  in  the
air,  or  plunged  into  the  waters  to  seize  the  tiny  fry.  Many  a drawing  I
made  at  Great  Egg  Harbour,  many  a pleasant  day  I spent  along  its  shores;
and  much  pleasure  would  it  give  me  once  more  to  visit  the  good  and
happy  family  in  whose  house  I resided  there.


( 609  )


THE  BARNACLE  GOOSE

Anser  leucopsis,  Bechst.

PLATE  CCXCVI.  Male  and  Female.

Several  old  gunners  on  the  coast  of  Massachusetts  and  Maine,  who
were  Englishmen  by  birth,  assured  me  that  they  had  killed  Barnacles
there,  and  that  these  birds  brought  a higher  price  in  the  markets  than  the
Common  Brent  Geese.  The  Prince  of  Musignano  states  in  his  Synopsis
that  they  are  very  rare  and  accidental  in  the  U nited  States,  and  Mr  Nut-
tall  says  that  they  are  “ mere  stragglers”  there.  For  my  part,  I ac-
knowledge that  I never  met  with  one  of  them,  either  along  the  coast  or
in  the  interior,  although  I have  seen  beautiful  mounted  specimens  in  va-
rious parts.  Being  neither  anxious  to  add  to  our  Fauna,  nor  willing  un-
necessarily to  detract  from  it,  I have  figured  a pair  of  these  birds,  with
the  hope  that  ere  long,  the  assertions  of  the  gunners,  and  those  of  the
authors  above  mentioned,  may  be  abundantly  verified  by  the  slaughter  of
many  geese.  In  the  mean  time  I must  further  confess  my  ignorance  of
the  habits  of  the  Barnacle.

Mr  Selby  thus  speaks  of  it  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Illustrations:- —
“ The  Bernicle  is  amongst  the  number  of  our  winter  visitants,  annually
resorting  in  vast  numbers,  upon  the  approach  of  autumn,  to  the  western
shores  of  Britain,  and  to  the  north  of  Ireland.  Upon  the  Lancashire
coast,  the  Solway  Frith,  &c.  it  is  very  abundant ; frequenting  the  marshy
grounds  that  are  occasionally  covered  by  the  spring-tides,  and  such  sands
as  produce  the  sea-grasses  and  plants  upon  which  it  feeds.  Upon  the
eastern  and  southern  shores  of  Britain  it  is  of  rare  occurrence,  its  place  be-
ing supplied  by  its  nearly  allied  congener,  the  Brent  Goose  {Anser  Brentd)  ;
which  again  is  as  rarely  seen  upon  the  opposite  coast  of  the  island.  Like
the  rest  of  the  genus,  the  Bernicle  is  a very  wary  bird,  and  can  only  be
approached  by  the  most  cautious  manoeuvres.  It  is  sometimes  shot  by
moonlight,  when  it  comes  on  the  sands  to  feed,  by  persons  couched  on  the
ground,  or  from  behind  any  occasional  shelter  in  such  places  as  the  flocks
are  known  to  frequent.  Its  flesh  is  sweet  and  tender,  and  highly  esteemed
for  the  table.  Upon  the  approach  of  spring  it  leaves  our  shores  for  more
northern  countries,  and  by  the  middle  of  March  the  whole  have  retired.”

Q q


VOL.  III.


610


BARNACLE  GOOSE.


It  is  known  to  breed  in  Iceland,  Spitzbergen,  Greenland,  &c.  as  well  as  in
Lapland,  the  northern  parts  of  Russia,  and  northern  Asia.  It  also  in-
habits Hudson’s  Bay  and  other  polar  districts  of  the  American  continent.
During  its  equatorial  or  winter  migration,  it  is  abundant  in  Holland,  -
France,  and  parts  of  Gei'inany.

The  eggs,  which  I describe  from  specimens  deposited  in  the  rich  mu-
seum of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  measure  two  inches  and  seven-
eighths  by  one  inch  and  seven-eighths,  and  are  of  a uniform  yellowish-
cream  colour.

I have  represented  an  adult  male  in  spring,  and  a female  of  the  pre-
ceding year.


Anas  erythropus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  L p.  197 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  843.

Anser  leucopsis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  377-

Barnacle  Goose,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  355.

Adult  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCXCVI.  Fig.  1.

BiU  much  shorter  than  the  head,  higher  than  broad  at  the  base,  some-
what conical,  slightly  depressed  towards  the  end,  narrowed  and  rounded
at  the  tip.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  sloping,  the  ridge  broad
and  flattened,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  soft  and  obtuse,  the  oblique
marginal  lamellse  short,  transverse,  about  thirty  on  each  side,  besides  mi-
nute anterior  ones ; the  unguis  roundish,  convex,  striato-denticulate  on
the  inner  edge.  Nasal  groove  elliptical,  commencing  at  the  base  and  ex-
tending to  the  middle  of  the  bill,  parallel  to  the  ridge,  filled  by  the  soft
membrane  of  the  bill ; nostrils  lateral,  submedial,  longitudinal,  narrow-
elliptical,  open,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  straight,  with  the  angle  very
long,  rather  wide,  and  rounded,  the  sides  sloping  rapidly  upwards,  the
edges  soft  and  obtuse,  with  about  thirty-eight  distinct  lamellae  on  an  in-
flected plane.

Head  small,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  rather  long  and  slender.  Body
full,  slightly  depressed.  Feet  short,  stout,  placed  a little  behind  the  cen-
tre of  the  body ; legs  bare  a little  above  the  tibio-tarsal  joint.  Tarsus
short,  a little  compressed,  covered  all  round  with  angular  reticulated  scales,
which  are  smaller  behind.  Hind  toe  extremely  small,  with  a very  narrow
membrane  ; third  toe  longest,  fourth  a little  shorter,  but  longer  than  se-
cond ; all  the  toes  reticulated  above  at  the  base,  but  with  narrow'  trans-
verse scutella  towards  the  end  ; the  three  anterior  connected  by  a reticu-


BARNACLE  GOOSE.


61]


lated  membrane,  the  outer  with  a thick  margin,  the  inner  with  the  margin
extended  into  a two-lobed  web.  Claws  small,  arched,  rather  compressed,
except  that  of  the  middle  toe,  which  is  bent  obliquely  outwards,  depressed,
with  a curved  edge.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  with  an  obtuse  protu
berance  at  the  flexure.

Plumage  close,  rather  short,  compact  above,  blended  on  the  head,
neck,  and  lower  parts  of  the  body.  The  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck
very  narrow,  of  the  back  very  broad  and  abrupt,  of  the  breast  and  belly
broadly  rounded.  Wings  when  closed  extending  about  an  inch  and  a
quarter  beyond  the  tail,  acute ; primaries  very  strong,  curved,  the  second
longest;  secondaries  long,  broad,  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  rounded,  of
sixteen  stiff  rounded  and  acuminate  feathers.

Bill,  feet,  and  claws  black.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Anterior  part  of  the
head,  including  a broad  space  above  the  eye,  the  sides  of  the  head,  and  the
throat,  white  ; the  feathers  margining  the  bill,  and  a line  from  the  bill  to'
the  eye,  curving  below  the  lower  eyelid,  and  running  along  the  upper,
brownish-black.  Neck  aU  round  glossy  black,  of  which  colour  are  the
anterior  or  dorsal  feathers,  the  scapulars,  and  the  wing-coverts,  towards
their  extremities,  while  their  bases  are  ash-grey,  and  their  terminal  mar-
gins white.  The  shorter  feathers  on  the  middle  of  the  back  are  similar ;
those  on  the  rump  and  the  tail-feathers  deep  black.  The  quills  are  greyish-
black,  darker  towards  the  tips,  the  outer  webs  more  or  less  tinged  with
ash-grey.  The  breast,  sides,  and  abdomen  greyish-white,  the  upper  fea-
thers of  the  sides  with  more  grey ; the  upper  and  lower  tail-coverts,  and
the  sides  of  the  rump,  pure  white.

Length  27  inches,  extent  of  wings  4 feet  8 inches ; bill  along  the
ridge  1^,  in  depth  at  the  base  f§,  in  breadth  ; tarsus  middle  toe
and  claw  2x§  ; wing  from  flexure  17 ; tail  6 ; the  feet  extend  beyond  the
tail  SI  inches.  Weight  4 lb.  1 oz.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXCVI.  Fig.  2.

The  Female,  which  is  much  smaller,  has  the  same  colours,  the  black
parts  being  tinged  with  brown,  and  the  tints  generally  duller.

Length  23j  inches,  extent  of  wings  4 feet  4 inches  ; the  feet  extend
beyond  the  tail  2^  inches.  Weight  2 lb.  9 oz.


( 612  )


THE  HARLEQUIN  DUCK,

Fuligula  histrionica,  Bonap.

PLATE  CCXCVII.  Male  and  Female.

I HAVK  the  pleasure  of  presenting  you  with  three  figures  of  the  Har-
lequin Duck,  one  a male  in  all  the  perfection  of  its  spring  plumage,  the
bird  having  attained  complete  maturity,  another  male  two  years  old,  and
an  adult  female  shot  in  the  pairing  season.  No  figures  of  the  adult  male
or  of  the  female  have,  I believe,  hitherto  been  published.

To  the  south  of  the  Bay  of  Boston  the  “ Lord  and  Lady  Duck”  is
rarely  seen  on  our  coast ; but  from  that  neighbourhood  it  becomes  more
plentiful  as  you  proceed  eastward  ; and,  on  reaching  Maine  and  the  en-
trance of  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  you  may  see  it  at  any  period  of  the  year
among  the  rocky  islands  there.  It  breeds  on  the  Seal,  White  Head,  and
Grand  Manan  Islands,  and  along  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  Cape  Breton,
Newfoundland,  and  Labrador.  Many,  however,  proceed  much  farther
north,  for  specimens  were  obtained  by  Captain  James  Clark  Ross  in
the  highest  latitudes  visited  by  him.  It  is  extremely  attached  to  certain
localities,  from  which  it  rarely  wanders  unless  greatly  molested,  and  it
thus  remains  about  the  islands,  or  the  parts  of  the  coast  on  which  it  breeds,
unless  it  be  forced  off  by  very  severe  weather  in  winter.  Few  persons
shoot  it  for  its  flesh ; not  that  it  is  inferior  as  food  to  other  deep-diving
ducks,  but  because  it  is  comparatively  small,  and  difficult  to  be  obtained.
Not  only  is  it  at  all  seasons  remarkably  shy  and  vigilant,  but  even  if  ap-
proached when  on  rocks,  it  plunges  into  the  water  the  moment  its  keen
eye  catches  a glance  of  you,  dives  with  all  the  agility  of  the  Black  Guille-
mot, and  seldom  rises  within  shot.  If  you  shoot  at  it  when  passing  on
wing,  even  should  it  be  beyond  reach,  it  plunges  into  the  water  the
moment  it  perceives  the  flash, — a habit  which  is  also  occasionally  ob-
served in  the  Black  Guillemot.  It  being  usually  found  in  flocks  of  one
or  two  families,  or  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  individuals,  some  one  always
acts  as  a watchful  sentinel,  whose  single  note  of  alarm  is  sufficient  to
induce  the  whole  to  move  off  without  hesitation.  Notwithstanding  all
this  vigilance,  however,  my  party  procured  a good  number  of  them  at
different  times,  by  lying  in  wait  for  them  under  cover  of  some  rocks,  in


HARLEQUIN  DUCK.


613


the  neighbourhood  of  which  they  were  known  to  alight  at  certain  hours
of  the  day,  to  bask  in  the  sun  and  dress  their  plumage.  On  these  occa-
sions a shot  seldom  failed  to  kill  several,  for  they  fly  compactly  and  alight
close  together.

On  the  31st  of  May  1833,  I found  them  breeding  on  White  Head
Island,  and  other  much  smaller  places  of  a similar  nature,  in  the  same
part  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  There  they  place  their  nests  under  the  bushes
or  amid  the  grass,  at  the  distance  of  twenty  or  thirty  yards  from  the
water.  Farther  north,  in  Newfoundland  and  Labrador,  for  example,  they
remove  from  the  sea,  and  betake  themselves  to  small  lakes  a mile  or  so  in
the  interior,  on  the  margins  of  which  they  form  their  nests  beneath  the
bushes  next  to  the  water.

The  nest  is  composed  of  dry  plants  of  various  kinds,  arranged  in  a
circular  manner  to  the  height  of  tw'o  or  three  inches,  and  lined  with  finer
grasses.  The  eggs  are  five  or  six,  rarely  more,  measure  two  inches  and
one-sixteenth  by  one  inch  and  four-and-a-half  eighths,  and  are  of  a plain
greenish-yellow  colour.  These  measurements  differ  a little  from  those  of
an  egg  sent  to  me  by  my  friend  Mr  Hewitson  of  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
and  which  had  been  found  in  Ireland  by  Mr  Atkinson.  After  the  eggs
are  laid,  the  female  plucks  the  down  from  the  lower  parts  of  her  body,
and  places  it  beneath  and  around  them,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Eider
Duck  and  other  species  of  this  tribe.  The  male  leaves  her  to  perform  the
arduous,  but  no  doubt  to  her  pleasant,  task  of  hatching  and  rearing  the
brood,  and,  joining  his  idle  companions,  returns  to  the  sea-shore,  where  he
moults  in  July  and  August.  The  little  ones  leave  the  nest  a few  hours
after  they  burst  the  shell,  and  follow  their  mother  to  the  water,  where  she
leads  them  about  with  the  greatest  care  and  anxiety.  When  about  a week
old  she  walks  with  them  to  the  sea,  where  they  continue,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  the  Eiders.  When  discovered  in  one  of  these  small  inland  lakes,
the  mother  emits  a lisping  note  of  admonition,  on  which  she  and  the
young  dive  at  once,  and  the  latter  make  for  the  shores,  where  they  con-
ceal themselves,  while  the  former  rises  at  a good  distance,  and  imme-
diately taking  to  wing,  leaves  the  place  for  a while.  On  searching  along
the  shores  for  the  young,  we  observed  that,  on  being  approached,  they
ran  to  the  water  and  dived  towards  the  opposite  side,  continuing  their  en-
deavours thus  to  escape,  until  so  fatigued  that  we  caught  four  out  of  six.
When  at  sea^  they  are  as  difficult  to  be  caught  as  the  young  Eiders.

The  fliglit  of  the  Harlequin  Duck  is  rapid  and  generally  straight.  At


614


HARLEQUIN  DUCK.


sea  it  flies  at  a small  height,  but  when  flying  over  the  land,  or  even  when
approaching  it,  should  there  be  any  suspicion  of  danger,  it  rises  to  a con-
siderable height.  Its  food  consists  of  shrimps,  small  fishes,  roe,  aquatic  in-
sects, and  mollusca,  which  it  procures  by  diving.  The  flesh  is  dark,  and
generally  tastes  of  fish,  but  that  of  the  female  is  good  during  the  period
of  her  sojourn  on  the  fresh-water  ponds.

The  male  takes  three  years  to  acquire  his  full  plumage,  although  many
individuals  breed  in  the  second  year.  The  female  is  perfect  in  the
second  spring.  Dr  Richardson,  in  the  Fauna  Boreali-Americana,  de-
scribes a male  killed  on  the  eastern  declivity  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,
whence  it  appears  that  at  times  it  goes  far  inland ; and  it  is  very  probable
that  its  habits  differ  greatly  in  difierent  localities.  •


Anas  histrionica,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  204 — Lath.  Iiid.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  849.

Harlequin  Duck,  Anas  histrionica,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  viii.  p.  139.  pi.  72,
fig.  4.

Fuligula  histrionica,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  394.

Clangula  histrionica,  Harlequin  Duck,  Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna.  Bor.
Amer.  part  ii.  p.  459.

Harlequin  Duck,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  448.

Adult  Male  in  summer.  Plate  CCXCVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  much  shorter  than  the  head,  comparatively  narrow,  deeper  than
broad  at  the  base,  slightly  depressed  towards  the  end,  which  is  rounded.
Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight  and  sloping  to  the  middle,
then  nearly  straight,  towards  the  tip  decurved,  the  ridge  broad  and  flat  at
the  base,  convex  towards  the  end,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  soft,  with
about  thirty-five  oblique  internal  lamellae,  the  unguis  large  and  elliptical.
Nostrils  subbasal,  elliptical,  very  large,  pervious,  nearer  the  ridge  than
the  edge.  Lower  mandible  flat,  with  the  angle  long,  rather  narrow,
rounded,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  convex,  the  edges  with  about  forty  la-
mellae, the  unguis  elliptical.

Head  rather  large,  compressed.  Eyes  of  moderate  size.  Neck  of
ordinary  length,  thick.  Body  large,  depressed.  Wings  rather  small.
Feet  very  short,  placed  rather  far  behind  ; tarsus  very  short,  compressed,
having  anteriorly  in  its  whole  length  a series  of  small  scutella,  and  above
the  outer  toe  a few  broad  scales,  the  rest  covered  with  reticular  angular
scales.  Hind  toe  very  small,  with  a free  membrane  beneath  ; anterior
toes  longer  than  the  tarsus,  connected  by  reticulated  membranes,  having


HARLEQUIN  DUCK.


615


a sinus  on  their  free  margins,  the  inner  with  a narrow  lobed  marginal
membrane,  the  outer  with  a thickened  edge,  the  third  and  fourth  about
equal  and  longest,  all  covered  above  with  narrow  scutella.  Claws  small,
arched,  obtuse,  that  of  first  toe  very  small,  of  third  largest,  and  with  an
inner  thin  edge.

Plumage  dense,  soft,  blended.  Feathers  on  the  fore  part  of  the  head
very  small  and  rounded,  on  the  upper  part  of  the  head  slightly  elongated,  on
the  neck  narrow,  on  the  other  parts  broad  and  rounded.  Wings  rather
short,  narrow,  pointed  ; primary  quills  curved,  strong,  tapering,  and  point-
ed, the  first  and  second  about  equal,  and  longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduat-
ed ; secondary  short,  broad  and  rounded.  Tail  very  short,  cuneate,  of
sixteen  strong  tapering  feathers.

Bill  light  yellowish-olive,  the  tips  of  the  unguis  lighter.  Iris  reddish-
brown.  Feet  light  blue,  the  webs  greyish-black,  the  claws  whitish.  A
broad  band  from  the  base  of  the  bill  to  the  occiput  bluish-black,  margined
behind  with  light  yellowish-red,  before  with  white,  that  colour  forming  a
broad  triangular  spot  on  the  cheek  anterior  to  the  eye.  Sides  of  the  head,
and  neck  all  round,  purplish-blue ; a spot  of  white  behind  the  ear,  a cur-
ved line  on  the  side  of  the  neck,  a complete  ring  of  white  below  the  middle
of  the  neck,  with  a curved  band  of  the  same  colour  anterior  to  the  wing.
All  these  white  markings  broadly  edged  with  deep  black.  The  fore  part
of  the  back  light  purplish-blue,  the  hind  part  gradually  deepening  in  tint,
so  as  to  become  almost  black,  of  which  colour  is  the  rump  all  round.
Scapulars  chiefly  white ; wing-coverts  purplish-blue,  as  are  the  alula  and
primary  coverts,  the  quills  dark  greyish-brown,  the  tail  greyish-black,  a
small  white  spot  near  the  flexure  of  the  wing  ; a band  of  white  across  the
wing,  formed  by  the  tips  of  the  secondaries,  of  which  the  inner  have  their
outer  webs  principally  of  the  same  colour.  Fore  part  of  the  breast  pur-
plish-blue, hind  part  and  abdomen  greyish-brown,  sides  light  red  ; a late-
ral spot  of  white  near  the  root  of  the  tail.

Length  to  end  of  tail  17j  inches,  to  end  of  wings  14^,  to  end  of  claws

; extent  of  wings  26^  ; wing  from  flexure  7| ; tail  3^  ; bill  along  the
back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  1^  ; tarsus  1 y\  ; middle  toe  2,
its  claw  y\.  Weight  lb.

Male  in  the  second  year.

The  young  male,  after  the  first  moult,  is  greyish-brown  on  the  back
and  wings,  light  brownish-grey  beneath.  The  head  and  neck  arc  of  a


616


HARLEQUIN  DUCK.


dull  leaden  blue,  the  upper  part  of  the  head  darker.  The  white  spot  be-
fore the  eye  is  mottled  with  grey,  the  line  extending  over  the  eye  obscure,
and  the  edging  of  the  occiput  faint  reddish-brown.  The  two  white  marks
exist  on  the  sides  of  the  neck,  but  are  merely  edged  with  darker  blue ;
there  are  slight  indications  of  the  white  coUar,  and  the  band  before  the
wing  is  marked,  but  much  smaller  than  in  the  adult.  The  quills  are  dark
brown,  but  the  secondaries  are  not  tipped  with  white,  of  which  there  are
but  slight  indications  on  the  scapulars.  The  upper  tail-coverts  are  black-
ish, the  tail  bluish-grey,  lighter  at  the  end.  The  bill  is  dusky,  the  feet
of  a leaden  tint.

Male  in  the  third  year.  Plate  CCXCVII.  Fig.  2.

After  the  second  moult,  the  male  has  greatly  improved  in  colouring,
although  the  tints  are  not  nearly  so  pure  as  in  the  old  bird.  The  hind
part  of  the  back  is  still  brown,  as  are  the  wing-coverts ; the  sides  are  dark
brownish-grey,  with  undulated  yellowish-red  bars.  The  white  collar  is
not  yet  complete,  but  all  the  white  markings  on  the  neck  are  edged  with
black ; the  fore  part  of  the  breast  is  dull  grey,  the  middle  yellowish-grey,
spotted  with  bluish-grey.  The  white  bar  on  the  wing  is  stiU  wanting ;
the  rump  is  glossy  bluish-black,  the  tail  nearly  of  the  same  tint.

Adult  Female.  Plate  CCXCVII.  Fig.  3.

The  principal  colour  of  the  female  is  greyish-brown,  deeper  on  the
head  and  rump,  lighter  on  the  fore  neck,  and  mottled  with  greyish-white
on  the  breast.  The  quills  are  dark  brown  edged  with  lighter,  the  tail
blackish-grey.  There  is  a large  whitish  spot  mottled  with  grey  before  the
eye,  and  another  of  a purer  white  behind  the  ear.  BiU  and  feet  dull
bluish-grey.  Iris  brown.

Length  to  end  of  tail  16  inches,  to  end  of  wings  13|,  to  end  of  claws
15^  ; extent  of  wings  24;^ ; wing  from  flexure  8^ ; tail  85  ; bill  along  the
back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; tarsus  1|^;  middle  toe  2,
its  claw  /j.  Weight  lb.


( 617  )


THE  RED-NECKED  GREBE.

PODICEPS  RUBRICOLLIS,  LaTH.

PLATE  CCXCVIII.  Male  and  Young.

I HAVE  found  this  species  along  the  coast  from  New  York  to  Maine,
in  the  winter  season,  when  old  and  young  were  generally  in  about  equal
number.  At  Boston  I procured  several  specimens.  On  the  Bay  of  Fundy,
and  among  the  islands  at  its  entrance,  I saw  these  Grebes  already  in  their
spring  plumage,  it  being  then  the  beginning  of  May.  On  one  occasion
our  boat  w'as  rowed  over  an  eddy  in  which  a pair  had  dived  in  search  of
food.  On  emerging  they  were  only  a few  yards  distant ; but,  although
several  guns  were  fired  at  them,  they  escaped  unhurt,  for  they  instantly
dived  again,  passed  under  the  boat  at  the  depth  of  about  a yard,  and  did
not  rise  until  at  a safe  distance.  None  of  us  could  conceive  how  they  had
managed  to  elude  us,  for  as  they  were  so  near,  the  shot  threw  up  the  water
in  its  course,  and  I had  expected  to  find  them  completely  mangled.

Although  I have  seen  this  species  far  up  our  salt-water  bays,  I never  ob-
served it  on  any  of  the  southern  fresh- water  ponds  or  rivers.  Dr  Richard-
son states,  in  the  Fauna  Boreali- Americana,  that  it  “ is  very  common  in
the  fur  countries,  frequenting  every  lake  with  grassy  borders.”  M.  Tem-
MINCK  says  “ that  they  inhabit  rivers,  lakes,  and  the  borders  of  the  sea,  but
in  greater  number  on  fresh-waters ; are  tolerably  common  in  different
parts  of  Europe  ; feed  on  small  fish,  fry,  amphibious  reptiles,  insects,  and
vegetables ; form  their  nests  of  the  same  materials,  and  place  it  in  the
same  situations  as  the  Crested  Grebe,  and  lay  three  or  four  eggs.”  An
egg  lent  me  by  my  esteemed  friend  Mr  Yarrell,  measured  two  inches  in
length  by  one  inch  and  a quarter  in  breadth,  and  was  of  a uniform  pale
greenish-white.

PoDiCEPs  RUBRICOLLIS,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  783. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis
of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  417 — Swains,  and  Richards.  Fauna  Bor.  Amer.
part  ii.  p.  411.

Red-necked  Grebe,  Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  253.

Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXCVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  rather  slender,  compressed.


618


RED-NECKED  GREBE.


acute.  Upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  straight  and  slightly  sloping
to  the  middle,  then  slightly  convex,  the  ridge  convex,  the  sides  sloping,
towards  the  end  erect  and  convex,  the  edges  acute  and  inflected.  Nasal
groove  extending  to  the  middle  of  the  mandible  ; nostrils  subbasal,  linear-
elliptical,  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with  the  angle  long  and  extremely
narrow,  the  dorsal  line  ascending  and  straight,  the  sides  erect,  slightly
convex,  the  edges  sharp,  inflected,  the  tip  narrow,  very  acute.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  compressed.  Neck  long  and  slender.
Body  depressed.  Feet  large,  placed  very  far  behind  ; tibia  feathered  al-
most to  the  joint ; tarsus  short,  extremely  compressed,  anteriorly  with  a
narrow  scutellate  ridge,  laterally  with  very  broad  scutella,  posteriorly  with
a narrow  ridge  having  a double  row  of  small  prominent  scales.  Hind  toe
very  small,  with  an  inferior  small  membrane;  fore  toes  long,  the  outer
longest,  scutellate  above,  united  at  the  base  by  short  webs,  externally
margined  with  narrowish,  internally  with  broad,  lobe-shaped  expansions,
which  are  marked  with  parallel  oblique  lines,  and  crenate  on  the  edges.
Claws  flattened,  that  of  the  middle  toe  broadest,  with  an  extremely  thin
broad  terminal  edge.

Plumage  of  the  head  and  neck  very  soft  and  downy,  of  the  breast  and
sides  silky  and  highly  glossed,  of  the  abdomen  and  rump  downy,  of  the
upper  parts  imbricated,  but  with  loose  edges.  Wings  small ; primaries
much  curved,  the  first  longest,  the  second  almost  equal,  the  inner  secon-
daries extending  beyond  the  first  primary  when  the  wing  is  closed.  Tail
a small  tuft  of  loose  feathers.  On  the  head  is  a tuft  of  elongated  feathers
on  each  side  behind  the  eye,  and  those  of  the  posterior  part  of  the  cheek
are  also  elongated.

Bill  brownish-black,  bright  yellow  at  the  base.  Iris  carmine.  Tarsi
and  toes  greenish-black  externally,  yellow  on  the  inner  side,  the  edges  of
the  lobes  dusky.  Upper  part  of  the  head  greyish-black,  lower  part  ash-
grey,  with  a white  line  from  the  base  of  the  lower  mandible  to  beyond  the
eye.  Hind  part  of  the  neck,  and  upper  parts  generally,  greyish-black  ;
the  feathers  edged  with  pale  brown  ; the  edge  of  the  wing  and  the  outer
secondaries  white.  The  fore  part  and  sides  of  the  neck  rich  brownish-red ;
the  breast  and  sides  are  of  a silvery  white,  faintly  marked  with  grey.

Length  to  end  of  rump-feathers  18|  inches,  to  end  of  wings  16|,  to
end  of  claws  24  ; extent  of  wings  32  ; wing  from  flexure  ; bill  along
the  back  1 1*2,  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  2f  ; tarsus  2 ; outer  toe
2|,  its  claw  j.  W eight  23  oz.


RED-NECKED  GREBE.


619


Young  after  first  moult.  Plate  CCXCVIII.  Fig.  2.

' Bill  bright  yellow,  the  ridge  of  the  upper  mandible  dusky.  Iris  pale
yellow.  Feet  as  in  the  adult.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  blackish-grey,
the  hind  neck,  and  the  upper  parts  generally,  of  the  same  colour,  but  darker
towards  the  rump ; the  edge  of  the  wing  and  the  outer  secondaries  grey-
ish-white, the  latter  grey  towards  the  end.  The  lower  parts  greyish-
white.


( 620  )


THE  DUSKY  PETREL

PUFFINUS  OBSCURUS,  Cuv,
PLATE  CCXCIX.  Male.


On  the  26th  of  June  1826,  while  becalmed  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,
off  the  western  shores  of  Florida,  I observed  that  the  birds  of  this  species,
of  which  some  had  been  seen  daily  since  we  left  the  mouth  of  the  Missis-
sippi, had  become  very  numerous.  The  mate  of  the  vessel  killed  four  at
one  shot,  and,  at  my  request,  brought  them  on  board.  From  one  of  them
I drew  the  figure  which  has  been  engraved.  The  notes  made  at  the  time
are  now  before  me,  and  afford  me  the  means  of  presenting  you  with  a short
account  of  the  habits  of  this  bird.

They  skim  very  low  over  the  sea  in  search  of  the  floating  bunches  of
marine  plants,  usually  called  the  Gulf  Weed,  so  abundant  here  as  some-
times to  occupy  a space  of  half  an  acre  or  more.  In  proceeding,  they
flap  their  wings  six  or  seven  times  in  succession,  and  then  sail  for  three  or
four  seconds  with  great  ease,  having  their  tail  much  spread,  and  their
long  wings  extended  at  right  angles  with  the  body.  On  approaching  a
mass  of  weeds,  they  raise  their  wings  obliquely,  drop  their  legs  and  feet,
run  as  it  were  on  the  water,  and  at  length  alight  on  the  sea,  where  they
swim  with  as  much  ease  as  ducks,  and  dive  freely,  at  times  passing  seve-
ral feet  under  the  surface  in  pursuit  of  the  fishes,  which,  on  perceiving
their  enemy,  swim  off,  but  are  frequently  seized  with  great  agility.  Four
or  five,  sometimes  fifteen  or  twenty  of  these  birds,  will  thus  alight,  and,
during  their  stay  about  the  weeds,  dive,  flutter,  and  swim,  with  all  the
gaiety  of  a flock  of  ducks  newly  alighted  on  a pond.  Many  gulls  of  dif-
ferent kinds  hover  over  the  spot,  vociferating  their  anger  and  disappoint-
ment at  not  being  so  well  qualified  for  supplying  themselves  with  the  same
delicate  fare.  No  sooner  have  all  the  fishes  disappeared  than  the  Petrels
rise,  disperse,  and  extend  their  flight  in  search  of  more,  returning  perhaps
in  a while  to  the  same  spot.  I heard  no  sound  or  note  from  any  of  them,
although  many  came  within  twenty  yards  of  the  ship  and  alighted  there.
Whenever  an  individual  settled  in  a spot,  many  others  flew  up  directly
and  joined  it.  At  times,  as  if  by  way  of  resting  themselves,  they  alighted,


DUSKY  PETREL.


621


swam  lightly,  and  dipped  their  bills  frequently  in  the  water,  in  the  man-
ner of  Mergansers.

I preserved  the  skins  of  the  four  specimens  procured.  One  of  them
1 sent  to  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  by  Captain
John  R.  Butler,  of  the  ship  Thalia,  then  bound  from  Havannah  to
Minorca.  Two  others  were  presented  to  my  excellent  friend  Dr  Traill,
on  my  first  becoming  acquainted  with  him  at  Liverpool.

I found  the  wings  of  this  species  strong  and  muscular  for  its  size,  this
structure  being  essentially  requisite  for  birds  that  traverse  such  large  ex-
panses of  water,  and  are  liable  to  be  overtaken  by  heavy  squalls.  The
stomach  resembles  a leather  purse,  four  inches  in  length,  and  was  much
distended  with  fishes  of  various  kinds,  partially  digested  or  entire.  The
oesophagus  is  capable  of  being  greatly  expanded.  Some  of  the  fishes  were
two  and  a half  inches  in  length,  and  one  in  depth.  The  flesh  of  this  Pe-
trel was  fat,  but  tough,  with  a strong  smell,  and  unfit  for  food ; for,  on
tasting  it,  as  is  my  practice,  I found  it  to  resemble  that  of  the  porpoises.
No  difference  is  perceptible  in  the  sexes.

While  on  board  the  United  States’  Revenue  Cutter  the  Marion,  and
in  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  Stream  opposite  Cape  Florida,  I saw  a flock  of
these  birds,  which,  on  our  sailing  among  them,  would  scarcely  swim  off
from  our  bows,  they  being  apparently  gorged  with  food.  As  we  were
running  at  the  rate  of  about  ten  knots,  we  procured  none  of  them.  I
liave  also  seen  this  species  off  Sandy  Hook.


PROCELLAKIA  OBSCTJRA,  Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  828.

PuFFiNUs  OBSCUBus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  371-
Dusky  Petkel,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  416 Nuttall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  337.


Adult  Male.  Plate  CCXCIX.

Bill  about  the  length  of  the  head,  straight,  somewhat  cylindrical,  the
tips  curved.  Nostrils  tubular,  separate,  inclosed  in  a horny  sheath,  and
dorsal,  the  outline  straight,  curved  on  the  unguis,  the  sides  nearly  erect,
convex,  the  edges  sharp,  hard,  and  inflected,  the  tip  decurved,  strong.
Lower  mandible  straight,  the  angle  very  narrow  and  extending  nearly  to
the  tip,  the  dorsal  bne  beyond  it  decurved,  the  sides  convex  and  inclining
inwards,  the  edges  sharp  and  inflected.

Head  of  moderate  size.  Neck  of  ordinary  length  ; body  ovate.  Feet
stout ; tibia  bare  a short  way  above  the  joint ; tarsus  of  moderate  length.


622


DUSKY  PETREL.


rather  stout,  reticulate ; hind  toe  a very  slight  knob,  with  a small  conical
claw ; fore  toes  long,  slender,  connected  by  reticulated  webs  with  concave
margins,  the  outer  toe  slightly  longer  than  the  third.  Claws  small,  slightly
arched,  compressed  obtuse.

Plumage  soft,  full ; the  feathers  rounded,  those  of  the  back  and  wings
rather  compact.  Wings  long ; primaries  tapering,  rounded,  the  first
longest,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; secondaries  of  moderate  length,
rounded.  Tail  rather  short,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  feathers.

Bill  light  blue,  the  tips  black,  mouth  light  blue.  Edges  of  eyebds  light
blue,  iris  bluish-black.  Outside  of  tarsus  and  toes  indigo-black,  inside  and
webs  pale  yeUowish-flesh-colour ; claws  bluish-black.  The  upper  parts  are
sooty  black,  the  lower  pure  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  11  inches,  to  end  of  wings  10^,  to  end  of  claws
11:1^ ; extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  back  along  the  edge  of
lower  mandible  If  ; tarsus  I5 ; outer  toe  2,  its  claw


( 623  )


THE  GOLDEN  PLOVER.

ChARADRIUS  PLUVIALIS,  LiNN.

PLATE  CCC.  Adult  in  Spring  and  in  Winter,  and  variety.

The  Golden  Plover  spends  the  autumn,  winter,  and  part  of  the  spring,
in  various  portions  of  the  United  States,  appearing  in  considerable  num-
bers both  along  the  coast  and  in  the  interior,  and  not  unfrequently  on  our
highest  grounds.  A much  greater  number,  however,  proceed  in  severe  win-
ters beyond  the  limits  of  our  Southern  States,  and  the  partial  migrations  of
this  species  are  much  influenced  by  the  state  of  the  weather.  They  are
more  abundant  along  the  sea  shores  of  the  Middle  and  Eastern  Districts,
from  the  middle  of  April  to  the  beginning  of  May,  whereas  in  autumn
they  range  over  the  interior,  and  more  especially  the  western  prairies.  In
the  early  part  of  May  they  congregate  in  immense  flocks,  and  commence
their  journey  toward  more  northern  regions,  where  they  are  said  to  breed.

The  account  which  Wilson  gave  of  this  species  refers  in  part  to  the
“ Bull-headed  Plover,”  Charadrms  helveticus,  although  his  flgure  cannot  be
mistaken  for  that  of  the  latter,  even  in  its  first  autumnal  dress.  But  the
Editor  of  the  second  edition  of  Wilson’s  work  has  rejected  the  Golden
Plover  as  an  American  Bird,  although  he  might  have  frequently  seen  it
in  the  very  markets  of  Philadelphia.  The  Prince  of  Musignano  corrected
this  error,  in  his  valuable  “ Observations  on  the  Nomenclature  of 'Wil-
son’s Ornithology.”  Mr  Selby,  in  speaking  of  the  Golden  Plover,  gives
it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  bird  so  called  in  America,  differs  from  that  of
Europe.  This  opinion,  however,  I cannot  consider  as  correct,  as  I have
seen  and  examined  the  Golden  Plovers  of  both  countries,  and  have  found
their  manners,  tone  of  voice,  and  appearance,  precisely  similar.

This  bird  moves  on  the  ground  with  sprightliness.  When  observed,
it  often  runs  with  considerable  rapidity  to  some  distance,  suddenly  stops
short,  nods  once  or  twice,  vibrating  its  body  at  the  same  time,  and  if  it
should  imagine  itself  unnoticed,  it  often  lies  down  and  remains  crouched
until  the  danger  is  over.  At  the  time  of.  their  departure  from  the  north,
and  while  on  the  sands  or  mud-bars  on  the  sea  shore,  they  often  raise  their
wings  as  if  to  air  them  for  a few  moments.  While  searching  for  food,
they  move  in  a direct  manner,  often  look  sideM'ays  toward  the  ground,  and


624


GOLDEN  PLOVER.


pick  up  the  object  of  their  search  by  a peculiar  bending  movement  of  the
body.  They  are  frequently  observed  to  pat  the  moist  earth  with  their
feet,  to  force  worms  from  their  burrows.  In  autumn  they  betake  them-
selves to  the  higher  grounds,  where  berries  as  well  as  insects  are  to  be  met
with,  and  where  they  find  abundance  of  grasshoppers.

When  travelling  to  a considerable  distance,  the  Golden  Plover  flies  at
the  height  of  from  thirty  to  sixty  feet,  in  a regular  manner,  with  con-
siderable velocity,  the  flock,  when  large,  forming  an  extended  front,  and
moving  with  regular  flappings,  an  individual  now  and  then  uttering  a
mellow  note.  Before  alighting  they  often  perform  various  evolutions,
now  descending  and  flying  swiftly  over  the  ground,  then  curving  upwards
or  sidewise,  closing  and  extending  their  ranks,  until  the  sportsman  is  often
tired  of  watching  them,  and,  after  all,  the  flock,  just  when  he  expects  it
to  alight,  may  suddenly  shoot  off"  and  fly  to  a distance.  When  they  alight
within  shooting  distance,  the  moment  their  feet  touch  the  ground  is  the
critical  one,  for  they  are  generally  in  a compact  body,  and  almost  imme-
diately afterwards  they  disperse.  I have  often  observed  them  while  flying
from  one  place  to  another,  suddenly  check  their  course  for  a moment  or
two,  as  if  to  look  at  the  objects  below,  in  the  manner  of  Curlews.

While  at  New  Orleans,  on  the  16th  of  March  1821,  I was  invited  by
some  French  gunners  to  accompany  them  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake
St  John,  to  witness  the  passage  of  thousands  of  these  birds,  which  were
coming  from  the  north-east,  and  continuing  their  course.  At  the  first  ap-
pearance of  the  birds  early  in  the  morning,  the  gunners  had  assembled  in
parties  of  from  twenty  to  fifty  at  different  places,  where  they  knew  from
experience  that  the  Plovers  would  pass.  There  stationed,  at  nearly  equal
distances  from  each  other,  they  were  sitting  on  the  ground.  When  a
flock  approached,  every  individual  whistled  in  imitation  of  the  Plover’s
call-note,  on  which  the  birds  descended,  wheeled,  and  passing  within  forty
or  fifty  yards,  ran  the  gauntlet  as  it  were.  Every  gun  went  off  in  succes-
sion, and  with  such  effect  that  I several  times  saw  a flock  of  a hundred  or
more  reduced  to  a miserable  remnant  of  five  or  six  individuals.  The
game  was  brought  up  after  each  volley  by  the  dogs,  while  their  masters
were  charging  their  pieces  anew.  This  sport  was  continued  all  day,  and
at  sunset,  when  I left  one  of  these  lines  of  gunners,  they  seemed  as  intent
on  killing  more  as  they  were  when  I arrived.  A man  near  the  place  where
I was  seated  had  killed  sixty-three  dozens.  I calculated  the  number  in


GOLDEN  PLOVER.


625


the  field  at  two  hundred,  and  supposing  each  to  have  shot  twenty  dozen,
forty-eight  thousand  Golden  Plovers  would  have  fallen  that  day.

On  inquiring  if  these  passages  were  of  frequent  occurrence,  I was  told
that  six  years  before,  such  another  had  occurred  immediately  after  two
or  three  days  of  very  warm  weather,  when  they  came  up  with  a breeze
from  the  north-east.  Only  some  of  the  birds  were  fat,  the  greater  num-
ber of  those  which  I examined  being  very  lean ; scarcely  any  had  food  in
their  stomach,  and  the  eggs  in  the  ovaries  of  the  females  were  undeveloped.
The  next  morning  the  markets  were  amply  supplied  with  Plovers  at  a
very  low  price.

I have  again  applied  to  my  friend  Wjlliam  Macgillivbay  for  an
account  of  the  manners  of  this  species  during  the  breeding  season,  which
I now  lay  before  you.

“ The  Golden  Plover  is  in  many  parts  of  Scotland,  but  especially  in
the  Northern  Highlands,  and  in  the  Hebrides,  a very  common  bird.
When  the  weather  begins  to  improve  towards  the  end  of  spring,  these
birds  may  be  seen  flying  over  the  shores  or  fields  in  their  vicinity,  at  a
great  height,  in  loose  flocks,  wliich  now  extend  into  a wide  front,  now  form
irregular  angular  lines,  move  with  a quiet  and  regular  flight,  frequently
emitting  their  peculiar  soft  notes,  and  at  times  uttering  a singular  cry,
somewhat  resembling  the  syllables  courlie-wee.  These  flocks  are  leaving
their  winter  haunts  and  returning  to  the  inland  moors,  over  which  they
disperse  in  pairs.  In  the  beginning  of  May,  should  you  traverse  one  of
the  dreary  heaths,  you  will  often  hear  the  plaintive  cry  of  the  Plover,
mingling,  perhaps,  with  the  feeble  cheep  of  the  Dunlin,  or  the  loud
scream  of  the  Curlew.  Before  you  have  advanced  to  any  consider-
able distance,  there  may  come  up  and  alight  on  some  mossy  knoU  be-
side you,  a male,  clad  in  his  beautiful  summer  vesture  of  black  and
green.  You  may  approach  him  within  ten  paces  if  you  are  inclined,
and  in  some  districts  it  would  be  easy  for  one  to  shoot  many  dozens
of  them  in  a day  at  this  season.  After  incubation  has  commenced,
the  females  seldom  make  their  appearance  on  such  occasions.  Whether
the  males  assist  their  mates  at  that  time  or  not,  they  certainly  do  not  for-
sake them.  The  nest  is  a slight  hollow  in  a tuft  of  moss,  or  on  a dry
place  among  the  heath,  irregularly  strewed  with  fragments  of  withered
plants.  The  eggs,  of  which  the  full  number  is  four,  are  placed,  as  usual
in  this  genus,  with  their  small  ends  together.  They  are  much  larger  and

K r


VOL.  III.


626


GOLDEN  PLOVER.


more  pointed  than  those  of  the  Lapwing,  being  at  an  average  two  inches
and  one-twelfth  in  length,  and  an  inch  and  a-half  in  their  greatest  trans-
verse diameter.  The  shell  is  thin  and  smooth,  of  a light  greyish-yellow
or  cream-colour,  irregularly  spotted,  dotted  and  patched  with  dark  brown,
and  sometimes  having  a few  light  purple  spots  interspersed,  the  markings
larger  towards  the  broadest  part.  The  young  leave  the  nest  immediately
after  they  hurst  the  shell,  and  conceal  themselves  by  lying  flat  on  the
ground.  At  this  period,  the  female  evinces  the  greatest  anxiety  for  their
safety,  and  will  occasionally  feign  lameness  to  entice  the  intruder  to  pur-
sue her.  I have  several  times  seen  one  fly  oft*  to  a considerable  distance,
alight  in  a conspicuous  place,  and  tumble  about  as  if  in  the  agonies  of
death,  her  wings  flapping  as  if  they  had  been  fractured  or  dislocated.
The  eggs  are  delicious,  and  the  young  birds  w’hen  fledged  not  less  so.

“ W^hen  the  young  are  able  to  fly,  the  Plovers  collect  into  flocks,  but
remain  on  the  moors  until  the  commencement  of  winter,  when  they  ad-
vance towards  the  pasture  lands,  and  in  severe  weather  betake  themselves
to  the  low  grounds  near  the  shores.  During  continued  frosts,  they  feed
on  the  sands  and  rocky  shores  at  low  water,  and  in  general  during  the
winter  remain  at  no  great  distance  from  the  sea.

“ When  a flock  alights  at  this  season  on  a field,  the  individuals  dis-
perse, run  about  with  great  activity,  and  pick  up  their  food.  Sometimes
one  finds  them  so  tame  that  he  can  approach  within  fifteen  yards,  and  I
have  often  walked  round  a flock  several  times  in  order  to  force  them  to-
gether before  shooting.  In  windy  weather  they  often  rest  by  lying  flat
on  the  ground,  and  I have  reason  to  think  that  at  night  this  is  their  ge-
neral practice.  In  the  Hebrides  I have  often  gone  to  shoot  them  at  night
by  moonlight,  when  they  seemed  as  actively  engaged  as  by  day,  which
was  also  the  case  with  the  Snipes ; but  I seldom  succeeded  in  my  object,
it  being  extremely  difficult  to  estimate  distances  at  night.  The  numbers
that  at  this  season  frequent  the  sandy  pastures  and  shores  of  the  Outer
Hebrides  is  astonishing.

“ The  Golden  Plover,  although  occasionally  addicted  to  wading,  evi-
dently prefers  dry  ground,  in  which  respect  it  differs  essentially  in  habits
from  the  Totani  and  LimoscB.  It  frequently  probes  the  moist  sands,  and
in  summer  the  dry  cow  dung  on  the  moors  and  upland  pastures  is  seen
perforated  by  its  bill.  It  affords  delicious  eating,  and  in  my  opinion  is
scarcely  inferior  in  this  respect  to  the  Woodcock.”


GOLDEN  PLOVER.


627


Charadrius  PLUviALis,  Liwi.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  254. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornitli.  vol.  ii.
p.  740 Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  297-

Goldek  Plover,  Charadrius  pluvialis,.  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vii.  p.  71.
pi.  59.  fig.  5.,  Winter. — Nultall,  Manual,  vol.  ii.  p.  16.

Adiilt  Male  in  Spring.  Plate  CCC.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shorter  than  the  head,  straight,  subcylindrieal.  Upper  mandi-
ble with  the  dorsal  line  straight  and  slightly  sloping  for  two-thirds  of  its
length,  then  bulging  a little  and  curving  to  the  tip,  which  is  rather  acute,
the  sides  flat  and  sloping  at  the  base,  convex  towards  the  end,  where  the
edges  are  sharp  and  inclinate.  Nasal  groove  extended  along  two-thirds
of  the  mandible,  filled  with  a bare  membrane ; nostrils  basal,  linear,  in  the
lower  part  of  the  membrane,  open  and  pervious.  Lower  mandible  with
the  angle  long,  narrow,  but  rounded,  the  sides  at  the  base  sloping  out-
wards and  flat,  the  dorsal  line  ascending  and  slightly  convex,  the  edges
sharp  and  involute  towards  the  narrow  tip.

Head  of  moderate  size,  oblong,  rather  compressed,  the  forehead
rounded.  Eyes  large.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  ovate,  rather  full.
Wings  long.  Feet  rather  long,  slender ; tibia  bare  for  a considerable
space ; tarsus  rather  compressed,  covered  all  round  with  reticulated  hexa-
gonal scales ; toes  slender ; the  hind  toe  wanting ; third  or  middle  toe
longest,  fourth  considerably  longer  than  the  second,  all  scutellate  above
and  marginate,  the  outer  connected  with  the  middle  toe  by  a membrane
as  far  as  the  second  joint ; claws  small,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  slen-
der but  obtuse  at  the  end,  the  inner  edge  of  the  middle  claw  dilated.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  slightly  glossed,  the  feathers  rounded.  Wings
long  and  pointed ; primary  quills  tapering,  the  first  longest,  the  second  a
little  shorter,  the  rest  rapidly  graduated ; outer  secondaries  short,  broad,
obliquely  rounded,  inner  tapering  and  elongated.  Tail  rather  short,
rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  brown.  Feet  bluish-grey.  The  upper  part  of
the  head,  the  fore  part  of  the  back,  and  the  scapulars  are  beautifully  va-
riegated with  brownish-black  and  bright  yellow,  the  latter  in  spots  along
the  edges  of  the  feathers.  The  hind  part  of  the  back  greyish-brown,
variegated  v/ith  yellow  of  a duller  tint ; the  tail  brown,  barred  with  white.
The  wings  are  hair-brown,  the  smaller  coverts  spotted  with  yellowish-
white,  the  primary  coverts  and  secondaries  tipped  with  white.  The  in-

R r 2


628


GOLDEN  PLOVER.


ner  secondaries  like  the  scapulars.  Part  of  the  forehead,  the  loral  space,
a band  over  the  eye,  and  the  throat,  are  greyish-white ; the  sides  of  the
neck  and  body  variegated  with  brown,  dull  white  and  yellowish.  The
breast  and  a broad  band  down  the  fore-neck,  are  brownish-black,  the  lat-
ter margined  on  each  side  with  white.  Axillar  feathers,  and  lower  tail-
coverts  white.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10^  inches,  to  end  of  wings  lOj,  to  end  of
claws  llj  ; extent  of  wings  ; wing  from  flexure  7 ; tail  ; bill
along  the  back  along  the  edge  of  lower  mandible  ; bare  part  of
tibia  ; tarsus  IxV  ; middle  toe  Ix’^j,  its  claw  x\.  Weight  5^  oz.

Adult  in  winter.  Plate  CCC.  Fig.  2.

The  black  on  the  lower  parts  is  peculiar  to  the  breeding  season ; and
after  the  autumnal  moult,  they  become  of  a light  greyish  colour,  spotted
and  streaked  with  deep  grey.  In  other  respects  the  plumage  is  similar
to  that  described  above.

Length  to  end  of  tail  10|,  to  end  of  claws  11  g , extent  of  wings  22f.
Weight  4|  oz.

Light  coloured  variety.  Plate  CCC.  Fig.  3.

Bill  and  feet  greyish-blue.  Iris  deep  brown.  Upper  part  of  head
and  back  mottled  with  black  and  pale  yellow  ; wing-coverts  greyish,  with
white  and  dusky  spots,  as  are  the  sides  of  the  head  and  the  throat ; a
broad  band  of  white  over  the  eye ; fore  part  of  neck  pale  grey,  fading  in-
to pale  cream  colour  and  white  ; the  breast  and  fore-neck  with  large  spots
of  black.

This  individual  was  killed  in  the  breeding  season.


( 629  )


REMARKS  ON  THE  FORM  OF  THE  TOES  OF

BIRDS.

Although  naturalists  have  laboured,  more  especially  since  the  time
of  the  great  LiNNiEUs,  who  gave  an  impulse  to  the  study  of  natural  his-
tory unparalleled  in  that  of  any  other  science,  to  make  us  acquainted  with
animals  of  every  class ; and  although  much  has  been  done  by  them  in
ornithology  in  particular,  it  requires  little  knowledge  to  be  enabled  to  say
with  truth  that  a great  deal  more  remains  to  be  done.  To  take  an  appa-
rently trivial  example,  let  us  look  to  the  tips  of  the  toes  of  birds,  and  we
shall  no  doubt  find  much  that  is  curious,  and  much  that  has  been  entire-
ly overlooked.  The  examination  of  those  parts  was  suggested  to  me  by
the  following  occurrence.

On  the  21st  of  March  1816,  while  I was  residing  at  Henderson  in
Kentucky,  great  flocks  of  Golden  Plovers  happening  to  be  passing  from
their  winter  toward  their  summer  haunts,  I procured  a good  number  of
them.  While  engaged  in  drawing  a fine  specimen,  I observed  something
beneath  the  claws,  which  induced  me  to  look  more  particularly  to  that
part  of  the  toes,  when  I found  there  what  might  be  called  a second  but
smaller  claw,  equally  horny  with  the  part  properly  so  called.  I examin-
ed several  others,  and,  finding  them  all  alike  in  this  respect,  I mentioned
the  circumstance  to  a friend,  who  agreed  with  me  in  thinking  it  very  cu-
rious. Since  that  period  I have  generally,  on  procuring  a bird  of  any
kind,  looked  to  its  toes,  and  I have  found  many  species,  both  of  the  genus
Charadrius  and  of  other  Grallae,  similarly  supplied  with  double  claws.

Although  I use  this  term,  however,  let  it  not  be  supposed  that  I con-
sider the  parts  in  question  as  really  subsidiary  or  secondary  claws ; for
as  they  are  not  furnished  with  a central  bone,  or  process  either  from  the
last  phalanx  or  that  next  to  it,  they  cannot  be  truly  considered  as  such,
however  much  they  may  sometimes  resemble  them.

But,  in  order  to  explain  to  you  what  I mean,  let  us  take  a general
view  of  the  subject.  If  we  examine  the  foot  of  any  common  land  bird,  a
domestic  fowl  for  example,  we  observe  that  the  extremity  of  its  toes  under
the  nail  are  rounded,  and  covered  with  quincuncial  papillae,  generally
flattened.  The  extreme  degree  of  this  rounded  form  is  seen  in  the  Eagles
and  Hawks,  of  which  the  end  of  the  toe  pi'ojects  beneath  the  claw,  having


630


FORM  OF  THE  TOES  OF  BIRDS.


the  appearance  of  a large  round  knob  or  rather  pad.  It  is  not,  however,
my  intention  at  present  to  describe  the  structure  of  this  part  in  the  land
birds.  I may  however  remark,  that  in  them,  as  well  as  in  the  others,  the
examination  of  the  parts  in  question  will  materially  aid  in  limiting  the
number  of  merely  nominal  species,  by  disclosing  an  identity  of  form,  as
well  as  in  separating  species  that  have  been  confounded,  by  shewing  a di-
versity, as  I have  had  occasion  to  observe,  in  several  species  of  both  kinds.

In  the  aquatic  tribes  numerous  remarkable  modifications  are  observed.
Beginning  with  those  which  have  the  extremity  of  the  toe  largest  and
most  rounded,  we  find  that  the  Geese,  Ducks,  and  Gulls,  supply  good  ex-
amples. Thus  in  Larus  marinus,  the  protuberance  beneath  the  claw  is
rounded,  and  covered  with  small  rounded  and  flattened  papillae,  of  which
there  is  a semicircular  terminal  series  of  a larger  size,  as  is  represented
by  fig.  1.


Fig.  1.  Fig.  2.  Fig.  3.


The  Pelicans  and  Gannets  are  similar  in  this  respect  to  the  Gulls,  as
are  the  Cormorants,  which,  however,  have  the  terminal  pad  projecting
and  more  pointed.  In  the  Guillemots,  also,  it  is  rounded,  with  small  dis-
tinct rounded  scales.  In  the  Frigate  Bird,  in  which  the  webs  are  short,
and  do  not  modify  the  pads,  the  terminal  scales  are  similar  to  those  of
the  Gulls.  In  the  genus  Lestris,  they  are  smaller,  and  obscured  by  the
webs,  their  papillae  smaller  and  more  pointed.  In  the  Terns,  they  are
similar  to  those  of  the  Gulls,  but  narrower,  and  with  the  papillae  large.
In  Phaeton  tzthereus,  the  webs  appear  to  obliterate  the  terminal  papillae,
which  are  very  small.  In  all  these,  the  extremities  of  the  toes  are  more
or  less  rounded,  and  terminated  just  beneath  the  claw  by  a semicircular
series  of  scales  larger  than  those  immediately  behind.

In  the  Auks,  however,  there  is  a large  scale  or  plate,  on  the  inner
side  of  the  middle  toe,  and  then  a series  of  narrow  scales.  In  Mormon


FORM  OF  THE  TOES  OF  BIRDS.


631


^lacialis,  of  which  the  end  of  the  middle  toe  is  represented  by  fig.  2,
there  is  a single  much  recurved  narrow  horny  plate,  behind  which  is  a
narrow  series  of  oblong  scales.  In  the  genus  Pujffinus,  there  is  also  a
single  short  rounded  terminal  scale  or  plate.

The  Colymbi  or  Divers  have  the  end  of  the  toe  very  narrow  and  flat,
with  a single  small  rounded  terminal  plate,  and  numerous  small  scales
behind  it.  These  birds  have  the  claws  depressed,  a form  which  shews
its  extreme  development  in  the  Grebes.  Of  the  extremity  of  the  middle
toe  of  one  of  these,  Podiceps  cristatus,  fig.  3.  is  a representation.  Here
the  claw  is  almost  quite  flat,  and  the  end  of  the  toe  beneath  it  is  not  ele-
vated or  rounded  as  in  almost  all  the  other  genera,  but  perfectly  de-
pressed, and  having  its  outline  concave,  but  still,  as  usual,  with  a series
of  large  scales.  '

If  we  now  look  to  the  Grallce,  we  shall  find  similar  modifications.
Fig.  4>  represents  the  lower  surface,  and  the  lateral  aspect  of  the  extre-
mity of  the  middle  toe  of  Ardea  rrrfescens,  which  agrees,  in  a general
point  of  view,  with  that  of  the  other  species  of  the  genus,  as  well  as  with
that  of  the  Cranes,  The  pad  here  is  rounded,  and  terminated  by  a semi-
circle of  larger  scales.  In  the  genera  Numenius  and  Limosa,  the  arrange-
ment is  similar,  the  terminal  scales  being  much  smaller  in  the  latter  than
in  the  former,  and  two  of  the  lateral  scales  enlarged.  In  the  genera
Tringa,  Scolopax  and  Gallinula,  the  ari'angement  is  similar.  All  these
genera  exhibit  more  or  less  of  the  I'ounded  form,  terminated  by  a series  of
larger  scales.


In  Ibis  alba  the  extremity  is  narrowed  and  terminated  by  a small
rather  pointed  horny  plate,  divided  into  two  unequal  portions,  as  repre-
sented by  fig.  5.  The  Taniali  have  this  part  also  narrowed  at  the  end,
flattened,  and  terminated  by  a semicircular  slightly  projecting  plate  or
hooflet.  The  same  appearance  is  presented  in  Hetmalopns  pallialns,  in


632


FORM  OF  THE  TOES  OF  BIRDS.


which,  however,  the  exti’emity  is  more  rounded,  the  semicircular  plate
more  decurved,  and  concave  above,  as  represented  by  fig.  6.  In  RaUus


Fig.  9.


elegans,  fig.  7,  and  the  Rails  generally,  the  terminal  plate  is  similar,  but
narrow  and  rather  curved  upwards.  It  is  in  the  genera  Strepsilas,  Cha-
radrius  and  Totanus,  that  the  terminal  plate,  being  narrower,  more  elon-
gated and  more  pointed,  assumes  more  especially  the  semblance  of  a second
claw.  The  extremities  of  the  middle  toes  of  Totanus  semipahnatus  and
Charadrius  Pluvialis,  are  represented  by  figs  8.  and  9.

Having  now  reached  the  point  from  which  I started,  according  to  the
approved  method  of  reasoning  in  a circle,  or  if  not,  of  exhibiting  natural
objects  in  a circular  arrangement,  I take  my  leave,  hoping  that  when  I
again  request  your  indulgence,  I shall  be  enabled  to  present  you  with  some-
thing equally  curious,  and  perhaps  better  calculated  to  induce  you  to  extend
your  inquiries  into  the  neglected  parts  of  the  structure  of  those  objects,
whose  investigation  cannot  fail  to  raise  our  minds  towards  the  Being  who
framed  the  beautiful  and  harmonious  system  of  which  we  form  a part.


1 • ERRATA.  ;

Page  211,  line  4,  for  Traders  read  Waders  i ,

222,  ...  2,  ...  Sir  James  Ross,  read  Sir  John  Ross,

273,  ...  22,  ...  Orelans  read  Orleans

317,  ...  13  from  bottom, /or  even  read  not  only

325,  ...  22,  /or  Santie  read  Santee


( 633  )


SUBSCRIBERS  TO  “ THE  BIRDS  OF  AMERICA,”

OBTAINED  SINCE  THE  PUBLICATION  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.


James  Dickson,  Esq.  Philadelphia.

London  Institution,  per  Mr  Brayley,  Librarian.
Ogden  Haggerty,  Esq.  New  York.

W.  A.  Coleman,  Esq.  New  York.

R.  O.  Anderson,  Esq.  Georgetown,  South  Carolina.
James  Grimshaw,  Esq.  New  Orleans.


Persons  intending  to  subscribe  for  “ The  Birds  of  America,”  are  requested
to  apply  to  the  Author,  J.  J.  Audubon,  or  the  Engraver  Robert
Havell,  77.  Oxford  Street,  London ; Thomas  Sowler,  Bookseller,
Manchester ; Mrs  Robinson,  Bookseller,  Leeds ; Alexander  Hill,
Bookseller,  50.  Prince’s  Street,  Edinburgh  ; J.  H.  Beilby,  Book-
seller, Birmingham  ; E.  Charnley,  Bookseller,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne  ; George  Smith,  Bookseller,  Tythebarn  Street,  Liverpool  j
Adam  & Charles  Black,  Booksellers,  Edinburgh.


4 \ ■ Ml  .•  ^

-to  atMiTi  fi  iV  - GT  v'ffsaKii^^j?.

• "■  <'.'N  IliL  ■“  T ■ ni

■•  -i>v  ^f<  .,


ilS'/

-...>■,.<  -v.  .
>/  . TV.


l • ,►  .


^ <nDi4^''X  emm‘>


t-G*

. {


r-v%i*

tlUfilli  .TC<i»«#aw


/.(jj  •■■'

ii^»;»>u-  » ',\r  : .


,¥  t14  tsc  ^

....,■.  f ■’-‘^V »-f n v> ..

»“.»A  f

.ttffHviT  O »*5fT'>!4  ill  v*i  ;iK~Ml/'ix/i  .fl

. ..; ■ « ' ^

.«n)iahO  ..^

“'_  ■■-'■'  < ■ .•  ' ' ' \.  ' ' > K

'J’>-.-  '.’■  I-,  .K»v«  -it


’{fit-  :;i((.'*T  '4'.’.  V ^ '*  *1®  "


• f T*'»iU  T • TtlvA  .f,  .1.  ,f<  i{»fiA  ‘♦.J  o^tlG'po*  **  ^

.■x;iH  nx.iyrilrS.lf^  v«AivT i -H ; '

-jhxtf(  .rsjixl  .li  X } i • \

.>!  ,vjUJ«a4n'^  j oi«f;i»!faiill  .n%ftvi  . y , ^

. lGoqi57tJl  ,♦;  «X6<f»dl';,T  fl— Jf:iJiw»0  i?Miv,T  ‘ :.

jjgiTji^jfiS  ,n-ifi»':-oofi  ,^i  ’»  t'l.'ri ) A SA  lA


..>v4At


* (
'\

•)  ■ '•*

.'4  '■•

j ">


«T


• • r


iff


. A.  ^7


( 635  )


INDEX.


Page

Alca  Torda, 112

American  Coot, 291

Oyster-catcher, 181

Snipe, 322

Sun  Perch, 47

Woodcock, 474

Anas  acuta 214

Boschas, • 174

Crecca, 219

Sponsa, 52

Anser  albifrons, 598

canadensis, 1

Hutchinsii, 526

leucopsis, 609

Arctic  Jager, 470

Tern, 366

Ardea  candidissima, 317

exilis, 77

Herodias, 87

ludoviciana, 136

nycticorax, 275

occidentalis,. 542

rufescens, 411

Auk,  Razor-billed, 112

Barnacle  Goose,, 609

Bewick,  Thomas, 300

Bittern  Least, 77

Black  Guillemot, 148

Tern, 535

Black-backed  Gull, 305

Booby  Gannet, 63

Breaking  up  of  the  Ice, 408

Brown  Pelican, 376

Buff-breasted  Sandpiper, 452

Calm  at  Sea, 491,  520

Camp,  a Maple-sugar, 438

Canada  Goose, 1

Cayenne  Tern, 505

Charadrius  mclodus, 154


Page

Chai'adrius  pluvialis, 623

vociferus, 19I

Wilsonius, 73

Clapper  Rail, 33

Claws  of  Birds, 629

Colymbus  septentrionalis, 20

Common  American  Gull, 98

Cormorant,... 458

Gallinule, 33q

Coot  American, 291

Cormorant,  Double-crested, 420

Common, 458

Florida, 387

Crane,  Whooping, 202,  441

Cray-fish, 199

Crested  Grebe, 595

Curlew,  Esquimaux, 69

Hudsonian, 283

Long-billed, 240

Sandpiper, 444

Diver,  Red-throated, 20

Dob-chick,  Pied-billed, 359

Double-crested  Cormorant, 420

Duck,  Eider, 342

Harlequin, gl2

King, 523

Pintail, 214

Ring-necked, 259

Scaup, 226

Velvet,. 354

Wood, 52

Dusky  Petrel, g20

Eider  Duck, 342

Eggers  of  Labrador, §2

Egret,  Reddish, 4]]

Esquimaux  Curlew, Qg

Fishing  in  the  Ohio, 122

Florida,  Wreckers  of, 153


636


INDEX.


Florida  Cormorant,

Foolish  Guillemot,

Forked-tailed  Gull,

Petrel,

Fresh-water  Marsh-hen,

Fulica  americana,'

Fuligula  fusca,

histrionica,

Marila,

mollissima,

spectabilis,

— rufitorques,

Fulmar  Petrel,

Frigate  Pelican,...

Gallinula  Chloropus,

Gallinule,  Common,

Gannet  Booby,

Godwit,  Great  Marbled,

— Hudsonian,

Golden  Plover,'

Goose,  Barnacle,

Canada,

Hutchins’s,

White-fronted,

Great  Black-backed  Gull,

Blue  Heron,

- Egg  Harbour,

Marbled  Godwit,

White  Heron,

Grebe,  Crested,

Horned,

Red-necked,

Greenshank,

Green-winged  Teal,

Grus  Americana, 202,

Guillemot,  Black,

Foolish,

Large-billed,

Gull,  Common  American,

Forked-tailed,

Great  Black-backed,

Herring,

Ivory,

Kittiwake,

White-winged  Silvery


Page

Haematopus  palliatus, 181

Harlequin  Duck, 612

Heron,  Great  Blue, 87

Great  White, 542

Louisiana, 136

Night, 275

Snowy, 317

Herring  Gull, 588

Hooded  Merganser, 246

Horned  Grebe, 429

Horse,  a Wild, 270

Hudsonian  Curlew, 283

— Godwit, 426

Hutchins’s  Goose, 526

Hyperborean  Phalarope, 118

Ibis  alba,.. 173

Wood, 128

Ice,  Breaking  up  of  the, 408

Ivory  Gull, 571

Jager,  Arctic, 470

Pomarine, 396

Richardson’s, 503

Kildeer  Plover, 191

King  Duck, 523

Kittiwake  Gull, 186

Labrador, 584

Eggersof,, 82

Large-billed  Guillemot, 336

Puffin,  599

Larus  argentatus,

eburneus, 571

leucopterus 553

marinus, 305

Sabini, .561

tridactylus, 186

zonorhynchus, 98

Least  Bittern, 77

Lestris  parasiticus, 470

pomarinus 396

Richardsonii, .503

Limosa  Fedoa,  287

Hudsonica, 426

Long-billed  Curlew, 240


Page

387

142

561

434

27

. 291

354

612

226

342

523

259

446

495

330

330

63

287

426

623

609

1

526

568

305

87

606

287

542

595

429

617

483

219

441

148

142

336

98

561

305

588

571

186

553


INDEX.


637


Long  Calm  at  Sea,

Lost  Portfolio,

Louisiana  Heron,

Mangrove,

Mallard,

Marbled  Godwit,

Mank’s  Shearwater,,

Maple-sugar  Camp,

Marsh  Hen,  Salt-water,

Hen,  Fresh-water,...

Mergus  cucullatus,

Merganser,  Hooded,

Mormon  arcticus,

cirrhatus,

glacialis,

Natchez  in  1 820,

Night  Heron,

Noddy  Tern,

Numenius  borealis,

hudsonicus,

longirostris,

Ohio,  Fishing  in  the,.

Opossum,....

Oyster-catcher,  American,..

Pectoral  Sandpiper,

Pelecanus  fuscus,

Pelican,  Brown,

Frigate,

Perch,  Sun,

White,

Petrel,  Dusky,

Forked-tailed,

Fulmar

Wilson’s,

Phaeton  sethereus,

Phalacrocorax  Carbo,

dilophus,

fioridanus,....

Phalarope,  Hyperborean,...

Red,

Wilson’s,

Phalaropus  fulicarius,

hyperboreus, ...


Page


Phalaropus  Wilsonii, 400

Pied-billed  Dobchick, 359

Pintail  Duck, 214

Piping  Plover, 154

Pitting  of  Wolves, 338

Plover,  Golden, 623

Piping, 154

Edldeer, 191

Wilson’s, 73

Podiceps  carolinensis,.. 359

cornutus, 429

cristatus, 595

■ rubricollis, 617

Pomarine  Jager, 396

Portfolio,  the  Lost, 564

Procellaria  glacialis, 446

Puffin, 105

Large-billed, 599

Tufted, 364

Puffinus  Anglorum, 604

cinereus, 555

obscurus, 620

Purple  Sandpiper, 557

Racoon  Hunt  in  Kentucky, 235

Rail,  Clapper, 33

Great  Red-breasted, 27

Sora 251

Virginian, 41

Rallus  carolinus, 251

crepitans, 33

elegans 27

virginianus 41

Razor-billed  Auk, 112

Red-backed  Sandpiper, 580

Red-breasted  Rail, 27

Reddish  Egret 411

Red-necked  Grebe, 617

Red  Phalai’ope, 404

Red-throated  Diver, 20

Reminiscences  of  Bewick, 300

Richardson’s  Jager, 503

Ring-necked  Duck, 259

Roseate  Tern, 296

Salt-water  Marsh  Hen, 33

Sabine’s  Gull, 561


Page

491

564

136

386

164

287

604

438

33

27

246

246

105

364

539

275

516

69

283

240

122

454

181

601

376

376

495

47

197

620

434

446

486

442

458

420

387

118

404

400

404

118


638


INDEX.


Page

Sanderliiig, 231

Sandpiper,  Buff-breasted, 4.51

Curlew, 444

Pectoral, 601

Purple, 558

Red-backed, 580

Schinz’s, 529

Solitary, 576

Sandwich  Tern, 531

Scaup  Duck, 226

Schinz’s  Sandpiper, 529

Scolopax  minor, 474

Wilsonii, 322

Semipalmated  Snipe, 510

Shearwater  Manks, 604

Wandering, 555

Snipe,  American,.... — 322

Snowy  Heron,, 317

Solitary  Sandpiper, 576

Sooty  Tern, 263

Sora  Rail, 251

Sterna  arctica, 366

cantiaca, 531

Dougallii, 296

cayana, 505

fuliginosa, 263

nigra, 535

Stolida, 516

Still  Becalmed, 520

Sula  fusca, 63

Sun  Perch, 47

Tachypetes  Aquilus, 495

Tantalus  Loculator, 128

Tringa  alpina, 580

arenaria, 231

Teal,  Green-winged, 219

Tern,  Arctic, 366

Black 535

-Cayenne, ; 505

Noddy, 516

Roseate,.. 296

Sandwich, 531


Page


Tern,  Sooty,. 263

Thalassidroma  Leachii, 434

Wilsonii, 486

Thomas  Bewick, 300

Totanus  Glottis, 433

flavipes, 573

semipalmatus, 510

Tough  Walk  for  a Youth, 371

Tringa  maritima, 553

pectoralis, 6OI

rufescens, 451

— . Schinzii,.... 529

subarquata, 444

Tropic  Bird, 442

Tufted  Puffin, 364

Uria  Brunnichii,..., 336

Grylle, 148

Troile, 142

Velvet  Duck, 354

Virginian  Rail, 41

Walk,  a tough  one  for  a youth,..  371

Wandering  Shear-water, 555

Wreckers  of  Florida, 158

Whooping  Crane, 202,  441

White-fronted  Goose, 568

White  Heron,  Great, 542

Ibis, 173

— ^ Perch, 197

White-winged  Silvery  Gull, 553

Wild  Horse, 270

Willet, 510

Wilson’s  Petrel, 486

Phalarope, 400

Plover, 73

Wolves,  Pitting  of, 338

Wood  Duck, 52

Ibis, 128

Woodcock,  American, 474

Yellowshank, 573


rlilNTED  BY  NEILL  & CO.  OLD  FISHMAKKET,  EDINBUllOIl.
