Ornithological Biography, Vol. I
John James Audubon (1831)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The text companion to 'The Birds of America': Audubon's species accounts, field observations, and American frontier narratives, vol. I (1831). This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY


ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY,


OR  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HABITS  OF  THE

BIRDS  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA


ACCOMPANIED  BY  DESCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  OBJECTS  REPRESENTED
IN  THE  WORK  ENTITLED

THE  BIRDS  OF  AMERICA,

AND  INTERSPERSED  WITH  DELINEATIONS  OF  AMERICAN
SCENERY  AND  MANNERS.


BY  JOHN  JAMES  AUDUBON,  F.R.SS.L.  &E.

FELLOW  OF  THE  LINNEAN  AND  ZOOLOGICAL  SOCIETIES  OF  LONDON  ; MEMBER  OF  THE  LYCEUM
AND  LINNEAN  SOCIETY  OF  NEW  YORK,  OF  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  PARIS,  THE
WERNERIAN  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  EDINBURGH  ; HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE
SOCIETY  OF  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  MANCHESTER,  AND  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  ACADEMY  OF
PAINTING,  ARCHITECTURE,  AND  SCULPTURE,  &C.


EDINBURGH :

ADAM  BLACK,  35.  NORTH  BRIDGE,  EDINBURGH;

R.  HAVELL  JUN.,  ENGRAVER,  77-  OXFORD  STREET,  AND  LONGMAN,  REES,
BROWN,  & GREEN,  LONDON  ; GEORGE  SMITH,  TITHEBARR  STREET,
LIVERPOOL;  T.  SOWLER,  MANCHESTER;  MRS  ROBINSON,  LEEDS;
E.  CHARNLEY,  NEWCASTLE  ; POOL  & BOOTH,  CHESTER;  AND  BEILBY,
KNOTT,  & BEILBY,  BIRMINGHAM.


MDCCCXXXI.


NEILL  & CO.  PRINTERS,
Old  Fishinarket,  Edinburgh.


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


Kind  Readee, — Should  you  derive  from  the  perusal
of  the  following  pages,  which  I have  written  with  no  other  wish
than  that  of  procuring  one  favourable  thought  from  you,  a por-
tion of  the  pleasure  which  I have  felt  in  collecting  the  materials
for  their  composition,  my  gratification  will  he  ample,  and  the
compensation  for  all  my  labours  will  he  more  than,  perhaps,  I
have  a right  to  expect  from  an  individual  to  whom  I am  as  yet
unknown,  and  to  whom  I must  therefore,  in  the  very  outset,
present  some  account  of  my  life,  and  of  the  motives  which  have
influenced  me  in  thus  bringing  you  into  contact  with  an  Ame-
rican Woodsman,

I received  life  and  light  in  the  New  World.  When  I had
hardly  yet  learned  to  walk,  and  to  articulate  those  first  words
always  so  endearing  to  parents,  the  productions  of  Nature  that
lay  spread  all  around,  were  constantly  pointed  out  to  me.
They  soon  became  my  playmates ; and  before  my  ideas  were
sufficiently  formed  to  enable  me  to  estimate  the  difference  be-
tween the  azure  tints  of  the  sky,  and  the  emerald  hue  of  the


VI


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


bright  foliage,  I felt  that  an  intimacy  with  them,  not  consisting
of  friendship  merely,  but  bordering  on  phrenzy,  must  accompany
my  steps  through  life; — and  now,  more  than  ever,  am  I per-
suaded of  the  power  of  those  early  impressions.  They  laid  such
hold  upon  me,  that,  when  removed  from  the  woods,  the  prai-
ries, and  the  brooks,  or  shut  up  from  the  view  of  the  wide
Atlantic,  I experienced  none  of  those  pleasures  most  congenial
to  my  mind.  None  but  aerial  companions  suited  my  fancy.
No  roof  seemed  so  secure  to  me  as  that  formed  of  the  dense
foliage  under  which  the  feathered  tribes  were  seen  to  resort,
or  the  caves  and  fissures  of  the  massy  rocks  to  which  the  dark-
winged Cormorant  aiid  the  Curlew  retired  to  rest,  or  to  protect
themselves  from  the  fury  of  the  tempest.  My  father  generally
accompanied  my  steps,  procured  birds  and  flowers  for  me  with
great  eagerness, — pointed  out  the  elegant  movements  of  the
former,  the  beauty  and  softness  of  their  plumage,  the  manifes-
tations of  their  pleasure  or  sense  of  danger, — and  the  always
perfect  forms  and  splendid  attire  of  the  latter.  My  valued  pre-
ceptor would  then  speak  of  the  departure  and  return  of  birds
with  the  seasons,  would  describe  their  haunts,  and,  more  won-
derful than  all,  their  change  of  livery ; thus  exciting  me  to  study
them,  and  to  raise  my  mind  toward  their  great  Creator.

A vivid  pleasure  shone  upon  those  days  of  my  early  youth,
attended  with  a calmness  of  feeling,  that  seldom  failed  to  rivet
my  attention  for  hours,  whilst  I gazed  in  ecstacy  upon  the  pear-
ly and  shining  eggs,  as  they  lay  imbedded  in  the  softest  down,
or  among  dried  leaves  and  twigs,  or  were  exposed  upon  the
burning  sand  or  weather-beaten  rock  of  our  Atlantic  shores.  I
was  taught  to  look  upon  them  as  flowers  yet  in  the  bud.  I
watched  their  opening,  to  see  how  Nature  had  provided  each  dif-


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


vii


ferent  species  with  eyes,  either  open  at  birth,  or  closed  for  some
time  after ; to  trace  the  slow  progress  of  the  young  birds  toward
perfection,  or  admire  the  celerity  with  which  some  of  them,  while
yet  unfledged,  removed  themselves  from  danger  to  security.

I grew  up,  and  my  wishes  grew  with  my  form.  These
wishes,  kind  reader,  were  for  the  entire  possession  of  all  that  I
saw.  I was  fervently  desirous  of  becoming  acquainted  with
nature.  For  many  years,  however,  I was  sadly  disappointed,
and  for  ever,  doubtless,  must  I have  desires  that  cannot  he  gra-
tified. The  moment  a bird  was  dead,  however  beautiful  it  had
been  whenjn  life,  the  pleasure  arising  from  the  possession  of
it  became  blunted ; and  although  the  greatest  cares  were  be-
stowed on  endeavours  to  preserve  the  appearance  of  nature,  I
looked  upon  its  vesture  as  more  than  sullied,  as  requiring  con-
stant attention  and  repeated  mendings,  while,  after  all,  it  could
no  longer  be  said  to  be  fresh  from  the  hands  of  its  Maker.  I
wished  to  possess  all  the  productions  of  nature,  but  I wished
life  with  them.  This  was  impossible.  Then  what  was  to  be
done  ? I turned  to  my  father,  and  made  known  to  him  my  dis-
appointment and  anxiety.  He  produced  a book  of  lllustra-
tions.  A new  life  ran  in  my  veins.  I turned  over  the  leaves
with  avidity ; and  although  what  I saw  was  not  what  1 longed
for,  it  gave  me  a desire  to  copy  nature.  To  Nature  I went,  and
tried  to  imitate  her,  as  in  the  days  of  my  childhood  I had  tried
to  raise  myself  from  the  ground  and  stand  erect,  before  nature
had  imparted  the  vigour  necessary  for  the  success  of  such  an
undertaking.

How  sorely  disappointed  did  I feel  for  many  years,  when  I
saw  that  my  productions  were  worse  than  those  which  I ven-
tured (perhaps  in  silence)  to  regard  as  bad,  in  the  book  given


viii


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


me  by  my  father ! My  pencil  gave  birth  to  a family  of  cripples.
So  maimed  were  most  of  them,  that  they  resembled  the  man-
gled corpses  on  a field  of  battle,  compared  with  the  integrity  of
living  men.  These  difficulties  and  disappointments  irritated
me,  but  never  for  a moment  destroyed  the  desire  of  obtaining
perfect  representations  of  nature,  'j'he  worse  my  drawings  were,
the  more  beautiful  did  I see  the  originals.  To  have  been  torn
from  the  study  would  have  been  as  death  to  me.  My  time  was
entirely  occupied  with  it.  I produced  hundreds  of  these  rude
sketches  annually ; and  for  a long  time,  at  my  request,  they
made  bonfires  on  the  anniversaries  of  my  birth-day.

Patiently,  and  with  industry,  did  I apply  myself  to  study,
for,  although  I felt  the  impossibility  of  giving  life  to  my  pro-
ductions, I did  not  abandon  the  idea  of  representing  nature.
Many  plans  were  successively  adopted,  many  masters  guided
my  hand.  At  the  age  of  seventeen,  when  I returned  from
France,  whither  I had  gone  to  receive  the  rudiments  of  my
education,  my  drawings  had  assumed  a form.  David  had
guided  my  hand  in  tracing  objects  of  large  size.  Eyes  and
noses  belonging  to  giants,  and  heads  of  horses  represented  in
ancient  sculpture,  were  my  models.  These,  although  fit  sub-
jects for  men  intent  on  pursuing  the  higher  branches  of  the  art,
were  immediately  laid  aside  by  me.  I returned  to  the  woods  of
the  New  World  with  fresh  ardour,  and  commenced  a collection
of  drawings,  which  I henceforth  continued,  and  which  is  now
publishing,  under  the  title  of  “ The  Birds  of  America.”
To  these  Illustrations  I shall  often  refer  you,  good-natured
reader,  in  the  sequel,  that  you  may  judge  of  them  yourself.
Should  you  discover  any  merit  in  them,  happy  would  the  ex-
pression of  your  approbation  render  me,  for  I should  feel  that  I


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


IX


had  not  spent  my  life  in  vain.  You  can  best  ascertain  the
truth  of  these  delineations,  I am  persuaded  that  you  love  na-
ture— that  you  admire  and  study  her.  Every  individual,  pos-
sessed of  a sound  heart,  listens  with  delight  to  the  love-notes  of
the  woodland  warblers.  He  never  casts  a glance  upon  their
lovely  forms  without  proposing  to  himself  questions  respecting
them ; nor  does  he  look  on  the  trees  which  they  frequent,  or
the  flowers  over  which  they  glide,  without  admiring  their
grandeur,  or  delighting  in  their  sweet  odours  or  their  brilliant
tints.

In  Pennsylvania,  a beautiful  State,  almost  central  on  the
line  of  our  Atlantic  shores,  my  father,  in  his  desire  of  proving
my  friend  through  life,  gave  me  what  Americans  call  a beautiful
“ plantation,”  refreshed  during  the  summer  heats  by  the  waters
of  the  Schuylkil  River,  and  traversed  by  a creek  named  Per-
kioming.  Its  fine  woodlands,  its  extensive  fields,  its  hills
crowned  with  evergreens,  offered  many  subjects  to  my  pencil.
It  was  there  that  I commenced  my  simple  and  agreeable  stu-
dies, with  as  little  concern  about  the.  future  as  if  the  world  had
been  made  for  me.  My  rambles  invariably  commenced  at  break
of  day ; and  to  return  wet  with  dew,  and  bearing  a feathered
prize,  was,  and  ever  will  be,  the  highest  enjoyment  for  which  I
have  been  fitted.

Yet  think  not,  reader,  that  the  enthusiasm  which  I felt  for
my  favourite  pursuits  was  a barrier  opposed  to  the  admission  of
gentler  sentiments.  Nature,  which  had  turned  my  young  mind
toward  the  bird  and  the  flower,  soon  proved  her  influence  upon
my  heart.  Be  it  enough  to  say,  that  the  object  of  my  passion
bas  long  since  blessed  me  with  the  name  of  husband.  And


X


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


now  let  ns  return,  for  who  cares  to  listen  to  the  love-tale  of  a
naturalist,  whose  feelings  may  be  supposed  to  he  as  light  as  the
feathers  which  he  delineates  !

For  a period  of  nearly  twenty  years,  my  life  was  a succession
of  vicissitudes.  I tried  various  branches  of  commerce,  but  they
all  proved  unprofitable,  doubtless  because  my  whole  mind  was
ever  filled  with  my  passion  for  rambling  and  admiring  those  ob-
jects of  nature  from  which  alone  I received  the  purest  gratifica-
tion. I had  to  struggle  against  the  will  of  all  who  at  that  period
called  themselves  my  friends.  I must  here,  however,  except  my
wife  and  children.  The  remarks  of  my  other  friends  irritated  me
beyond  endiuance,  and,  breaking  through  all  bonds,  1 gave
myself  entirely  up  to  my  pursuits.  Any  one  unacquainted  with
the  extraordinary  desire  which  I then  felt  of  seeing  and  judg-
ing for  myself,  would  doubtless  have  pronounced  me  callous  to
every  sense  of  duty,  and  regardless  of  every  interest.  I under-
took long  and  tedious  journeys,  ransacked  the  woods,  the  lakes,
the  prairies,  and  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic.  Years  were  spent
away  from  my  family.  Yet,  reader,  will  you  believe  it,  I had
no  other  object  in  view,  than  simply  to  enjoy  the  sight  of  na-
ture. Never  for  a moment  did  I conceive  the  hope  of  becoming
in  any  degree  useful  to  my  kind,  until  I accidentally  formed  ac-
quaintance with  the  Prince  of  Musignano  at  Philadelphia,  to
which  place  I went,  with  the  view  of  proceeding  eastward  along
the  coast.

I reached  Philadelphia  on  the  5th  April  1824,  just  as  the
sun  was  sinking  beneath  the  horizon.  Excepting  the  good  Dr
Mease,  who  had  visited  me  in  my  younger  days,  I had  scarce-
ly a friend  in  the  city;  for  I was  then  unacquainted  with
Haiilan,Wetheiiell,  Macmuiitrie,Lesueur,  or  Sully.


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


XI


I called  on  him,  and ‘showed  him  some  of  my  drawings.  He  '
presented  me  to  the  celebrated  Charles  Lucian  Bona-
parte, who  in  his  turn  introduced  me  to  the  Natural  History
Society  of  Philadelphia.  But  the  patronage  which  I so  much
needed,  I soon  found  myself  compelled  to  seek  elsewhere.  I
left  Philadelphia,  and  visited  New  York,  where  I was  received
with  a kindness  well  suited  to  elevate  my  depressed  spirits ;
and  afterwards,  ascending  that  noble  stream  the  Hudson,  glid-
ed over  our  broad  lakes,  to  seek  the  wildest  solitudes  of  the
pathless  and  gloomy  forests.

It  was  in  these  forests  that,  for  the  first  time,  I communed
with  myself  as  to  the  possible  event  of  my  visiting  Europe
again ; and  I began  to  fancy  my  work  under  the  multiplying
efforts  of  the  graver.  Happy  days,  and  nights  of  pleasing
dreams ! I read  over  the  catalogue  of  my  collection,  and
thought  how  it  might  be  possible  for  an  unconnected  and  un-
aided individual  like  myself  to  accomplish  the  grand  scheme.
Chance,  and  chance  alone,  had  divided  my  drawings  into  three
different  classes,  depending  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  objects
which  they  represented ; and,  although  I did  not  at  that  time
possess  all  the  specimens  necessary,  I arranged  them  as  well  as
I could  into  parcels  of  five  plates,  each  of  which  now  forms  a
Number  of  my  Illustrations.  I improved  the  whole  as  much  as
was  in  my  power ; and  as  I daily  retired  farther  from  the  haunts
of  man,  determined  to  leave  nothing  undone,  which  my  labour,
my  time,  or  my  purse,  could  accomplish.

Eighteen  months  elapsed.  I returned  to  my  family,  then
in  Louisiana,  explored  every  portion  of  the  vast  woods  around,
and  at  last  sailed  towards  the  Old  World.  But  before  we  visit
the  shores  of  hospitable  England,  I have  the  wish,  good-natured


Xll


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


reader,  to  give  you  some  idea  of  my  mode  of  executing  the  ori-
ginal drawings,  from  which  the  Illustrations  have  been  taken ;
and  I sincerely  hope  that  the  perusal  of  these  lines  may  excite
in  you  a desire  minutely  to  examine  them.

Merely  to  say,  that  each  object  of  my  Illustrations  is  of  the
size  of  nature,  were  too  vague — for  to  many  it  might  only  con-
vey the  idea  that  they  are  so,  more  or  less,  according  as  the  eye
of  the  delineator  may  have  been  more  or  less  correct  in  mea-
surement simpl)^  obtained  through  that  medium  ; and  of  avoid-
ing error  in  this  respect  I am  particularly  desirous.  Not  only
is  every  object,  as  a whole,  of  the  natural  size,  but  also  every
portion  of  each  object.  The  compass  aided  me  in  its  delinea-
tion, regulated  and  corrected  each  part,  even  to  the  very  fore-
shortening which  now  and  then  may  he  seen  in  the  figures.
The  hill,  the  feet,  the  legs,  the  claws,  the  very  feathers  as  they
project  one  beyond  another,  have  been  accurately  measured.
The  birds,  almost  all  of  them,  were  killed  by  myself,  after  I had
examined  their  motions  and  habits,  as  much  as  the  case  admit-
ted, and  were  regularly  drawn  on  or  near  the  spot  where  I
procured  them.  The  positions  may,  perhaps,  in  some  instances,
appear  outre ; hut  such  supposed  exaggerations  can  afford  sub-
ject of  criticism  only  to  persons  unacquainted  with  the  feathered
tribes ; for,  believe  me,  nothing  can  he  more  transient  or  varied
than  the  attitudes  or  positions  of  birds.  The  Heron,  when
warming  itself  in  the  sun,  will  sometimes  drop  its  wings  several
inches,  as  if  they  were  dislocated ; the  Swan  may  often  he  seen
floating  with  one  foot  extended  from  the  body ; and  some  Pi-
geons, you  well  know,  tmn  quite  over,  when  playing  in  the  air.
The  flowers,  plants,  or  portions  of  trees  which  are  attached  to
the  principal  objects,  have  been  chosen  from  amongst  those  in


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


Xlll


the  vicinity  of  which  the  birds  were  found,  and  are  not,  as  some
persons  have  thought,  the  trees  or  plants  upon  which  they  al-
ways feed  or  perch.

An  accident  which  happened  to  two  hundred  of  my  original
drawings,  nearly  put  a stop  to  my  researches  in  ornithology.

I shall  relate  it,  merely  to  show  you  how  far  enthusiasm — ^for
by  no  other  name  can  I call  the  persevering  zeal  with  which  I
laboured — may  enable  the  observer  of  nature  to  surmount  the
most  disheartening  obstacles.  I left  the  village  of  Henderson,
in  Kentucky,  situated  on  the  bank  of  the  Ohio,  where  I resided
for  several  years,  to  proceed  to  Philadelphia  on  business.  I
looked  to  all  my  drawings  before  my  departure,  placed  them
carefully  in  a wooden  box,  and  gave  them  in  charge  to  a rela-
tive, with  injunctions  to  see  that  no  injury  should  happen  to
them.  My  absence  was  of  several  months;  and  when  I re-
turned, after  having  enjoyed  the  pleasures  of  home  for  a few
days,  I inquired  after  my  box,  and  what  I was  pleased  to  call
my  treasure.  The  box  was  produced,  and  opened ; — but^
reader,  feel  for  me — a pair  of  Norway  rats  had  taken  posses-
sion of  the  whole,  and  had  reared  a young  family  amongst  the
gnawed  bits  of  paper,  which,  but  a few  months  before,  repre-
sented nearly  a thousand  inhabitants  of  the  air  ! The  burning
heat  which  instantly  rushed  through  my  brain  was  too  great  to
be  endured,  without  affecting  the  whole  of  my  nervous  system.
I slept  not  for  several  nights,  and  the  days  passed  like  days  of
oblivion, — until  the  animal  powers  being  recalled  into  action,
through  the  strength  of  my  constitution,  I took  up  my  gun,
my  note-book,  and  my  pencils,  and  went  forth  to  the  woods  as
gaily  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  I felt  pleased  that  I might
now  make  much  better  drawings  than  before,  and,  ere  a period


XIV


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


not  exceeding  three  years  had  elapsed,  I had  my  portfolio  filled
again.

America  being  my  country,  and  the  principal  pleasures  of
my  life  having  been  obtained  there,  I prepared  to  leave  it  with
deep  sorrow,  after  in  vain  trying  to  publish  my  Illustrations  in
the  United  States.  In  Philadelphia,  Wilson’s  principal  en-
graver, amongst  others,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  to  my  friends,  that
my  drawings  could  never  he  engraved.  In  New  York,  other
difficulties  presented  themselves,  which  determined  me  to  carry
my  collections  to  Eiuope.

As  I approached  the  coast  of  England,  and  for  the  first
time  beheld  her  fertile  shores,  the  despondency  of  my  spirits
became  very  great.  I knew  not  an  individual  in  the  country ;
and,  although  1 was  the  bearer  of  letters  from  American  friends,
and  statesmen  of  great  eminence,  my  situation  appeared  preca-
rious in  the  extreme.  I imagined  that  every  individual  whom
I was  about  to  meet,  might  be  possessed  of  talents  superior  to
those  of  any  on  our  side  of  the  Atlantic  ! Indeed,  as  I for  the
first  time  walked  on  the  streets  of  Liverpool,  my  heart  nearly
failed  me,  for  not  a glance  of  sympathy  did  I meet  in  my  wan-
derings, for  two  days.  To  the  woods  I could  not  betake  myself,
for  there  were  none  near.

But  how  soon  did  all  around  me  assume  a different  aspect !
How  fresh  is  the  recollection  of  the  change ! The  very  first
letter  which  I tendered  procured  me  a world  of  friends.  The
Rathbones,  the  Roscoes,  the  Traills,  the  Chorleys,
the  Mellies,  and  others,  took  me  by  the  hand ; and  so  kind
and  beneficent,  nay,  so  generously  kind,  have  they  all  been  to-
wards me,  that  I can  never  cancel  the  obligation.  My  draw-
ings were  publicly  exhibited,  and  publicly  praised.  Joy  swelled


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


XV


my  heart.  The  first  difficulty  Avas  surmounted.  Honours,
which,  on  application  being  made  through  my  friends,  Phila-
delphia had  refused,  Liverpool  freely  accorded.

I left  that  emporium  of  commerce,  with  many  a passport,
bent  upon  visiting  fair  Edina,  for  I longed  to  see  the  men
and  the  scenes  immortalized  by  the  fervid  strains  of  Burns,
and  the  glowing  eloquence  of  Scott  and  Wilson.  I arrived
at  Manchester ; and  here,  too,  the  Greggs,  the  Lloyds,  the
Sergeants,  the  Holmes,  the  Blackwalls,  the  Bentleys,
and  many  others,  rendered  my  visit  as  pleasing  as  it  was  profit-
able to  me.  Friends  pressed  me  to  accompany  them  to  the
pretty  villages  of  Bakewell,  Mattlock,  and  Buxton.  It  was  a
jaunt  of  pure  enjoyment.  Nature  was  then  at  her  best,  at  least
such  was  the  feeling  of  our  whole  party ; the  summer  was  full
of  promise.

My  journey  to  Scotland  was  performed  along  the  north-
western shores  of  England.  I passed  in  view  of  Lancaster
Castle,  and  through  Carlisle.  I had  by  this  time  much  altered
my  ideas  of  this  Island  and  its  inhabitants.  I found  her
churches  all  hung  with  her  glories,  and  her  people  all  alive  to
the  kindest  hospitality.  I saw  Edinburgh,  and  was  struck  with
the  natural  pictorial  elegance  of  her  site ; and  I soon  found
that  her  inhabitants  were  as  urbane  as  those  whom  I had  left
behind  me.  The  principal  scientific  and  literary  characters  of
the  ancient  metropolis  of  Scotland  received  me  as  a brother.
It  is  impossible  for  me  to  mention  all  the  individuals  from
whom  I received  the  kindest  attention  ; but  gratitude  forbids
my  omitting  the  names  of  Professors  Jameson,  Graham,
Russel,  Wilson,  Brown,  and  Monro,  Sir  Walter
Scott,  Captain  Hall,  Dr  Brewster,  Dr  Greville,


XVI


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


Mr  James  Wilson,  Mr  Neill,  Mr  Hay,  Mr  Combe,  Mr
Hamilton,  the  Withams,  the  Lizarses,  the  Symes,  and
the  Nicholsons.  The  Royal  Society,  the  Wernerian  Natural
History  Society,  the  Society  of  Scottish  Antiquaries,  the  So-
ciety of  Useful  Arts,  and  the  Scottish  Academy  of  Painting,
Sculpture,  and  Architecture,  spontaneously  and  gratuitously
enrolled  me  among  their  members.

In  this  capital  commenced  the  publication  of  my  Illus-
trations, and  there  it  might  have  been  accomplished,  had
not  unexpected  difficulties  come  in  the  way.  My  engraver,
Mr  W.  H.  Lizars,  advised  me  to  seek  an  artist  in  London.
There,  after  many  fruitless  inquiries,  I became  acquainted  with
]NIr  Robert  Hayell  junior,  who  has  ever  since  continued  to
be  employed  by  me,  and  who,  I am  happy  in  saying,  has  given
general  satisfaction  to  my  patrons.

Four  years  have  passed.  One  volume  of  my  Illustrations,
containing  one  hundred  plates,  is  before  the  public.  You  may
easily  see,  good-natured  reader,  that  to  Britain  I owe  nearly  all
my  success.  She  has  furnished  the  artists  through  whom  my
labours  were  to  he  presented  to  the  world ; she  has  granted  me
the  highest  patronage  and  honours ; — in  a word,  she  has  thus
far  supported  the  prosecution  of  my  Illustrations.  To  Britain,
therefore,  I shall  ever  he  grateful.

Two  objections  have  been  made  to  the  mode  in  which  my
work  is  published  : the  great  size  of  the  paper  upon  which  the
representations  are  offered  to  you,  and  the  length  of  time  ne-
cessary for  their  completion.

As  to  the  size  of  the  paper,  which  has  been  complained  of
by  some,  it  could  not  be  avoided  without  giving  up  the  desire
of  presenting  to  the  world  those  my  favourite  objects  in  nature.


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


XVII


of  the  size  which  nature  has  given  to  them.  As  one  of  the  first
ornithologists  of  the  age,  who  kindly  reviewed  a few  numbers
of  the  Plates,  has  spoken  upon  this  subject  in  a manner  which
I cannot  here  use,  I refer  you  to  his  observations.  The  name
of  SwAiNSON  is,  doubtless,  well  known  to  you.  Permit  me
also  to  lead  you,  for  a defence  of  my  resolution  in  this  matter,
to  one,  who,  being  the  centre  of  zoological  science,  is  well  en-
titled to  your  deference  in  a question  relating  to  Ornithology.
You  will  readily  apprehend  that  I allude  to  the  great,  the  im-
mortal Cuvier.

Secondly,  As  to  the  time  necessary  for  finishing  my  Work,
I have  only  to  observe,  that  it  will  be  less  than  the  period  fre-
quently given  by  many  persons  to  the  maturation  of  certain
wines  placed  in  their  cellars,  several  years  previous  to  the  com-
mencement of  my  work,  and  which  will  not  be  considered  ca-
pable of  imparting  their  full  relish  until  many  years  after  the
conclusion  of  the  “ Birds  of  America.”

Since  I became  acquainted  with  Mr  Alexander  Wilson,
the  celebrated  author  of  the  well-known  and  duly  appreciated
work  on  American  Birds,  and  subsequently  with  my  excellent
friend  Charles  Lucian  Bonaparte,  I have  been  aware  of
the  keenness  with  which  every  student  of  Natural  History
presses  forward  to  describe  an  object  of  his  own  discovery,  or
that  may  have  occurred  to  travellers  in  distant  countries.  There
seems  to  he  a pride,  a glory  in  doing  this,  that  thrusts  aside
every  other  consideration ; and  I really  believe  that  the  ties  of
friendship  itself  would  not  prevent  some  naturalists  from  even
robbing  an  old  acquaintance  of  the  merit  of  first  describing  a
previously  unknown  object.  Although  I have  certainly  felt  very
great  pleasure,  when,  on  picking  up  a bird,  I discovered  it  to  be


XVlfl


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


new  to  me,  yet  I have  never  known  the  desire  above  alluded  to.
This  feeling'  I still  cherish ; and  in  spite  of  the  many  injunc»
tions  which  I have  received  from  naturalists  far  more  eminent
than  I can  ever  expect  to  be,  I have  kept,  and  still  keep,
unknown  to  others,  the  species,  which,  not  finding  portrayed
in  any  published  work,  I look  upon  as  new,  having  only  given
in  my  Illustrations  a number  of  them  proportionate  to  the
drawings  of  already  known  species  that  have  been  engraved.
Attached  to  the  descriptions  of  these,  you  will  find  the  place
and  date  of  their  discovery.  I do  not,  however,  intend  to  claim
any  merit  for  these  discoveries,  and  should  have  liked  as  well
that  the  objects  of  them  had  been  previously  known,  as  this
would  have  saved  some  unbelievers  the  trouble  of  searching  for
them  in  books,  and  the  disappointment  of  finding  them  actually
new.  I assure  you,  good  reader,  that,  even  at  this  moment,  I
should  have  less  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  scientific  world
a new  bird,  the  knowledge  of  whose  habits  I do  not  possess,
than  in  describing  the  peculiarities  of  one  long  since  discovered.

There  are  persons  whose  desire  of  obtaining  celebrity  in-
duces them  to  suppress  the  knowledge  of  the  assistance  which
they  have  received  in  the  composition  of  their  works.  In  many
cases,  in  fact,  the  real  author  of  the  drawings  or  the  descriptions
in  books  on  Natural  History  is  not  so  much  as  mentioned,
while  the  pretended  author  assumes  to  himself  all  the  merit
which  the  world  is  willing  to  allow  him.  This  want  of  can-
dour I never  could  endure.  On  the  contrary,  I feel  pleasure
in  here  acknowledging  the  assistance  which  I have  received  from
a friend,  Mr  William  Macgillivbay,  who  being  possessed
of  a liberal  education  and  a strong  taste  for  the  study  of  the
Natural  Sciences,  has  aided  me,  not  in  drawing  the  figures  of


INTRODUCTORY  ADDRESS.


XIX


my  Illustrations,  nor  in  writing  the  book  now  in  your  hand,  al-
though fully  competent  for  both  tasks,  hut  in  completing  the
scientific  details,  and  smoothing  down  the  asperities  of  my
Ornithological  Biographies.

1 do  not  present  to  you  the  objects  of  which  my  work  con-
sists in  the  order  adopted  by  systematic  writers.  Indeed,  I can
scarcely  believe  that  yourself,  good-natured  reader,  could  wish
that  I should  do  so ; for  although  you  and  I,  and  all  the  world  be-
sides, are  well  aware  that  a grand  connected  chain  does  exist  in
the  Creator’s  sublime  system,  the  subjects  of  it  have  been  left  at
liberty  to  disperse  in  quest  of  the  food  best  adapted  for  them,
or  the  comforts  that  have  been  so  abundantly  scattered  for  each
of  them  over  the  globe,  and  are  not  in  the  habit  of  following
each  other,  as  if  marching  in  regular  procession  to  a funeral  or
a merry-making.  He  who  would  write  a general  ornithology
of  the  world,  and  is  possessed  of  knowledge  adequate  to  such  a
task,  is  the  only  one  by  whom  the  ordination  of  birds  could  be
made  truly  useful.  When  this  work  is  completed,  and  when
the  results  of  my  observations  have  been  duly  weighed  and  ar-
ranged, I shall  reduce  the  whole  to  an  order  corresponding  with
the  improvements  recently  made  in  ornithological  science,  and
present  to  you  a Synopsis  of  the  Birds  of  the  United  States,
including  the  ordinal,  generic  and  specific  characters,  with  the
distinctive  habits  of  each  species,  and  references  to  the  descrip-
tions of  other  writers.

I shall  therefore  simply  offer  you  the  results  of  my  own  ob-
servation with  respect  to  each  of  the  species,  in  the  order  in
which  I have  published  the  representations  of  them.  Nor  do  I
intend  to  annoy  you  with  long  descriptions,  including  the  num-
ber and  shape  of  the  feathers,  particularly  in  cases  where  the


XX


INTRODUCTORY  ADORKSS.


species  are  weli  known.  Tables  of  synonyms  I have- also  judged
superfluous.  Indeed,  the  technical  descriptions  and  references
you  will  find  as  appendages  to  the  more  generally  interesting
descriptions  of  the  habits  of  each  species ; so  that  you  may  read
them  or  not,  just  as  you  please.  Y et,  should  you  be  inclined
to  enter  into  these  matters,  I trust  you  will  find  in  these  ap-
pendages descriptions  constructed  according  to  the  strictest  rules
of  science.

Should  you,  good-natured  reader,  be  a botanist,  I hope  you
will  find  pleasure  while  looking  at  the  flowers,  the  herbs,  the
shrubs,  and  the  trees,  which  1 have  represented ; the  more  so,
I imagine,  if  you  have  seen  them  in  their  native  woods.  Should
you  not,  the  sight  of  them  in  my  Illustrations  may,  for  aught
I know,  tempt  you  to  go  and  partake  of  the  hospitality  of  our
brethren  the  Aborigines  of  America.

Permit  me  now  to  address  a few  words  to  the  Critic,  who  I
fervently  hope  is  a good-natured  reader  too.  This  I do  with
much  deference.  He  has  seen  my  Illustrations,  and  has  judged
favourably  of  them  ; he  has  passed  his  keen  eye  over  this  page ;
he  knows  the  very  moderate  strength  of  my  talents;  and  I
have  only  to  add,  with  my  compliments,  that  ever  since  I have
known  that  such  a person  as  himself  exists,  I have  laboured
harder,  with  more  patience  and  with  more  care,  to  gain  his  good
will,  indulgence,  and  support.


JOHN  J.  AUDUBON.


Edinburgh,
?^Iarch  ]831.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


•

Page

The  Wild  Turkey,

Meleagris  Gallopavo^

1

The  Yellow-hilled  Cuckoo,  . . .

Coccyzus  Americanus^  .

18

The  Prothonotary  Warbler,  . . .

Sylvia  Protonotarius^

. 22

The  Purple  Finch,

Fringilla  purpurea^  . .

. 24

Bonaparte’s  Fly-catcher,  ....

Muscicapa  Bonapartii^  .

. 27

The  Ohio,

The  Wild  Turkey.  Female.  . . .

Meleagris  Gallopavo

. 33

The  Purple  Grakle,  or  Common  'k
Crow-Black-bird,  . . . . i

■ Quiscalus  versicolor ^ , .

. 3h

The  White -throated  Sparrow,  . .

Fringilla  pennsylvanica,

. 42

Selby’s  Flycatcher,

Muscicapa  Selbii,  . .

. 46

The  Brown  Titlark,

Anthus  Spinoletta,  . .

49

The  Great  Pine  Swamp,  . . .

The  Bird  of  Washington,  . . . .

Falco  Washingtonii,  .

. 58

The  Baltimore  Oriole,

Icterus  Baltimore^  . .

. 66

The  Snow  Bird,  .

Fringilla  hyemalis^  • .

. 72

The  Prairie  Warbler,  . . . . .

Sylvia  discolor^  ...  .

. 76

The  Blue  Yellow-backed  Warbler, .

Sylvia  americana^  . .

. 78

The  Prairie,

. 81

The  Great-footed  Hawk,  ....

Falco  peregrinus^  . . .

. 85

The  Carolina  Turtle  Dove,  . ' . .

Columha  carolinensis.

. 91

Bewick’s  Wren,

Troglodytes  Bewickii,

. 96

The  Louisiana  Water  Thrush,  . .

Turdus  ludovicianus,

. 99

The  Blue-winged  Yellow  Warbler,

Sylvia  solitaria,  . , .

. 102

The  Regulators,

XXll


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


The  Mocking  Bird,

Turdus  polyglottus,  . .

kage

108

The  Purple  Martin,  ......

Hirundo  purpurea^  .

115

Tlie  Yellow-breasted  Warbler,  or
Maryland  Yellow-throat,

Sylvia  Trichas,

.121

Roscoe^s  Yellow- throat,  . . . .

Sylvia  Roscoe,  ....

124

The  Song  Sparrow,

Fringilla  melodia,  . . .

126

Improvements  in  the  Navigation

OF  THE  Mississippi,  . . .

130

The  Carolina  Parrot,

Psittacus  carolinensis^

135

The  Red-headed  Woodpecker,  , .

Picus  erythrocephalus,  .

141

The  Solitary  Fly-catcher,  or  Vireo,

Vireo  solitarius^  ....

147

The  Towhe  Bunting,

Fringilla  erythrophthalma^  .

150

Vigors’s  Warbler,

Sylvia  Vigorsii,  ....

153

A Flood,

155

The  White-headed  Eagle,  ....

Falco  leucocephalus,  . . .

160

The  Black-billed  Cuckoo, ....

Coccyzus  erythrophthalmus.

170

The  American  Goldfinch,  ....

Fringilla  tristis^  ....

172

The  Worm-eating  Warbler,  . . .

Sylvia  vermivora^  ....

177

Children’s  Warbler,

Sylvia  Childrenii,  ....

180

Meadville,

182

The  Stanley  Hawk,

Falco  Stanleii^

186

The  Golden-winged  Woodpecker,  .

Picus  auratus, " . . . •

191

The  Kentucky  Warbler,  ....

Sylvia  formosa,  ....

196

The  Crested  Titmouse, . . . .

Parus  bicolor,

199

The  American  Redstart,  ....

Muscicapa  Ruticilla,  . .

202

The  Cougar,

205

The  Ruffed  Grouse,

Tetrao  Umbellus,  ....

211

The  Orchard  Oriole,

Icterus  spurius,  ....

221

The  Cedar  Bird,

Bomhycilla  carolinensis,  .

227

The  Summer  Red  Bird,  ....

Tanagra  cestiva,  ....

232

Traill’s  Fly-catcher,

Muscicapa  Traillii,  .

236

The  Earthquake,

239

The  Barred  Owl,

Strix  nehulosa,

242

The  Ruby-throated  Humming  Bird,

Trochilus  coluhris,  . . .

248

The  Azure  Warbler,

Sylvia  azurea,

255

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

XX  hi

The  Blue-green  Warbler,  ....

Sylvia  rara,  ....

Page

. 258

The  Black-and-yellow  Warbler,

Sylvia  maculosa^  . . .

. 260

The  Hurricane,

. 262

The  Red-tailed  Hawk,

Falco  borealis^  ....

. 265

ChuckwilPs  Widow,

Caprimulgus  carolinensis^

. 273

The  Painted  Finch,  ...  . . .

Fringilla  ciris,  ....

. 279

The  Rice  Bird,

Icterus  agripennis^

. 283

Cuvier’s  Regulus,

Regulus  Cuvierii,  . . .

. 288

Kentucky  Sports,

. 290

The  Red-shouldered  Hawk,  . . .

Falco  lineatus^  . . .

. 296

The  Loggerhead  Shrike,  ....

Lanius  ludovicianus,  . .

. 300

The  Hermit  Thrush,  . . ...

Turdus  minor ^ ....

. 303

The  Chestnut-sided  Warbler,  . .

Sylvia  icterocephala,  . .

. 306

The  Carbonated  Warbler,  ....

Sylvia  carhonata,  . . .

. 308

The  Traveller  and  the  Pole-cat.


. 310

The  Great  Horned  Owl,  . . . .

Strix  virginiana^  . . .

. 313

The  Passenger  Pigeon,  ....

Columba  migratcrria,  . .

. 319

The  White-eyed  Flycatcher,  or  Vireo,

Vireo  noveboracensis.

. 328

The  Swamp  Sparrow,

Fringilla  palustris,  . .

. 331

The  Rathbone  Warbler,  . . .

Sylvia  Rathbonia,  . . .

. 333

Deer  Hunting,  ......

The  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker,  . *

Ficus  principalis^  . . .

. 341

The  Red- winged  Starling,  or  Marsh  1
Blackbird, J

Icterus  phceniceus,  . . .

. 348

The  Republican,  or  Cliff  Swallow,

Hirundo  fulva,  . . .

. 333

The  Bay-breasted  Warbler,  . . .

Sylvia  castanea^  ...

. 358

Henslow’s  Bunting,  . . . . .

Emberiza  Henslowii^

. 360

Niagara

. 362

The  Winter  Hawk,

Falco  hyemalis^  . . .

. 364

The  Swallow-tailed  Hawk,  . . .

Falco  furcatus,  . . .

. 368

The  Wood  Thrush,

Turdus  mustelinus,  . .

. 372

The  Indigo  Bird,  ......

Fringilla  cyanea^  . . .

. 377

Le  Petit  Caporal,

Falco  temerarius,  . . .

. 381

Hospitality  in  the  Woods,  . .

xxiv  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Page

The  Virginian  Partridge,

. Perdix  virginiana,

. 388

The  Belted  Kingsfisher,  . . .

Alcedo  Alcyon^

. 394

The  Great  Carolina  Wren,  . .

Troglodytes  ludovicianus,

. 399

The  Tyrant  Fly-catcher,  . . ,

Muscicapa  tyrannus,

. 403

The  Prairie  Titlark,  ....

. Anthus  pipiens,

. 408

The  Original  Painter,  . .

The  Fish  Hawk  or  Osprey,  . .

. Falco  Haliaetus,  .

. 415

Whip-poor-will,

Caprimulgus  vociferus.

. 422

The  House  Wren,

Troglodytes  cedon^

. 427

The  Blue-grey  Fly-catcher,  .

Muscicapa  coerulea,  .

. 431

The  Yellow-throated  Warbler,  .

. Sylvia  pensilis,

. 434

Louisville  in  Kentucky,  . .

The  Black  Warrior,  ....

. Falco  Harlani,

. 441

The  Florida  Jay,

Corvus  floridanus.

. 444

The  Autumnal  Warbler,  .

. Sylvia  autumnalis,

. 447

The  Nashville  Warbler,  . . .

. Sylvia  ruhricapilla,  .

. 450

The  Black-and-white  Creeper,  .

. Certhia  varia,  . . .

. 452

The  Eccentric  Naturalist,  .

. 455

The  Broad- winged  Hawk,  . .

. Falco  pcnnsylvanicus^

. 461

The  Pigeon  Hawk,

. Falco  columharius.

. 466

The  Sea-side  Finch,  ....

. Fringilla  maritima^  .

. 470

The  Grass  Finch  or  Bay-winged  ]
Bunting, J

Fringilla  graminca^  .

. 473

The  Yellow-poll  Warbler,  . .

. Sylvia  cestiva^  . . .

. 476

SciPio  and  the  Bear,  . . .

The  Columbian  Jay,  ....

Corvus  Bullockiiy  . .

. 483

The  Little  Screech  Owl,  . . .

. Strix  Asio,  ....

. 486

The  White-bellied  Swallow,

. Hirundo  bicolor^  . .

. 491

The  Cow-pen  Bird,

. Icterus  pccoris,  . .

. 493

The  Marsh  Wren,

Troglodytes  palustris,

. 500

Colonel  Boon,

2


ORNITHOLOGICAL  BIOGRAPHY


THE  WILD  TURKEY.

Meleagris  Gallopavo,  Linn.

PLATE  I.  Male.

The  great  size  and  beauty  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  its  value  as  a delicate
and  highly  prized  article  of  food,  and  the  circumstance  of  its  being  the
origin  of  the  domestic  race  now  generally  dispersed  over  both  continents,
render  it  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  birds  indigenous  to  the  United
States  of  America.

The  unsettled  parts  of  the  States  of  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Illinois,  and
Indiana,  an  immense  extent  of  country  to  the  north-west  of  these  districts,
upon  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri,  and  the  vast  regions  drained  by  these
rivers  from  their  confluence  to  Louisiana,  including  the  wooded  parts  of
Arkansas,  Tennessee,  and  Alabama,  are  the  most  abundantly  supplied
with  this  magnificent  bird.  It  is  less  plentiful  in  Georgia  and  the
Carolinas,  becomes  still  scarcer  in  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania,  and  is  now
very  rarely  seen  to  the  eastward  of  the  last  mentioned  States.  In  the
course  of  my  rambles  through  Long  Island,  the  State  of  New  York,
and  the  country  around  the  Lakes,  I did  not  meet  with  a single  in-
dividual, although  I was  informed  that  some  exist  in  those  parts.  Tur-
keys are  still  to  be  found  along  the  whole  line  of  the  Alleghany  Moun-
tains, where  they  have  become  so  wary  as  to  be  approached  only  with
extreme  difficulty.  While,  in  the  Great  Pine  Forest,  in  1829?  I found
a single  feather  that  had  been  dropped  from  the  tail  of  a female,  but  saw
no  bird  of  the  kind.  Farther  eastward,  I do  not  think  they  are  now  to
be  found.  I shall  describe  the  manners  of  this  bird  as  observed  in  the
countries  where  it  is  most  abundant,  and  having  resided  for  many  years  in
Kentucky  and  Louisiana,  may  be  understood  as  referring  chiefly  to  them.


A


2


WILD  TURKEY.


The  Turkey  is  irregularly  migratory,  as  well  as  irregularly  gregari-
ous. With  reference  to  the  first  of  these  circumstances,  I have  to  state,
that  whenever  the  mast  ^ of  one  portion  of  the  country  happens  greatly
to  exceed  that  of  another,  the  Turkeys  are  insensibly  led  toward  that
spot,  by  gradually  meeting  in  their  haunts  with  more  fruit  the  nearer
they  advance  towards  the  place  where  it  is  most  plentiful.  In  this  man-
ner flock  follows  after  flock,  until  one  district  is  entirely  deserted,  while
another  is,  as  it  were,  overflowed  by  them.  But  as  these  migrations  are
irregular,  and  extend  over  a vast  expanse  of  country,  it  is  necessary  that
I should  describe  the  manner  in  which  they  take  place.

About  the  beginning  of  October,  when  scarcely  any  of  the  seeds  and
fruits  have  yet  fallen  from  the  trees,  these  birds  assemble  in  flocks,  and  gra-
dually move  towards  the  rich  bottom  lands  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi.
The  males,  or,  as  they  are  more  commonly  called,  the  gobblers,  associate  in
parties  of  from  ten  to  a hundred,  and  search  for  food  apart  from  the
females ; while  the  latter  are  seen  either  advancing  singly,  each  with  its
brood  of  young,  then  about  two-thirds  grown,  or  in  connexion  with  other
families,  forming  parties  often  amounting  to  seventy  or  eighty  indivi-
duals, all  intent  on  shunning  the  old  cocks,  which,  even  when  the  young
birds  have  attained  this  size,  will  fight  with,  and  often  destroy  them  by
repeated  blows  on  the  head.  Old  and  young,  however,  all  move  in  the
same  course,  and  on  foot,  unless  their  progress  be  interrupted  by  a river,
or  the  hunter*’s  dog  force  them  to  take  wing.  When  they  come  upon  a
river,  they  betake  themselves  to  the  highest  eminences,  and  there  often
remain  a whole  day,  or  sometimes  two,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  consul-
tation. During  this  time,  the  males  are  heard  gobbling,  calling,  and
making  much  ado,  and  are  seen  strutting  about,  as  if  to  raise  their
courage  to  a pitch  befitting  the  emergency.  Even  the  females  and
young  assume  something  of  the  same  pompous  demeanour,  spread  out
their  tails,  and  run  round  each  other,  purring  loudly,  and  performing
extravagant  leaps.  At  length,  when  the  weather  appears  settled,  and  all
around  is  quiet,  the  whole  party  mounts  to  the  tops  of  the  highest  trees,
whence,  at  a signal,  consisting  of  a single  cluclc,  given  by  a leader,  the
flock  takes  flight  for  the  opposite  shore.  The  old  and  fat  birds  easily
get  over,  even  should  the  river  be  a mile  in  breadth  ; but  the  younger
and  less  robust  frequently  fall  into  the  water, — not  to  be  drowned,  how-

* In  America,  the  term  mast  is  not  confined  to  the  fruit  of  the  beech,  but  is  used  as  a
general  name  for  all  kinds  of  forest  fruits,  including  even  grapes  and  berries.


WILD  TURKEY.


3


ever,  as  might  be  imagined.  They  bring  their  wings  close  to  their  body,
spread  out  their  tail  as  a support,  stretch  forward  their  neck,  and,  strik-
ing out  their  legs  with  great  vigour,  proceed  rapidly  towards  the  shore ;
on  approaching  which,  should  they  find  it  too  steep  for  landing,  they
cease  their  exertions  for  a few  moments,  float  down  the  stream  until  they
come  to  an  accessible  part,  and  by  a violent  effort  generally  extricate
themselves  from  the  water.  It  is  remarkable,  that  immediately  after
thus  crossing  a large  stream,  they  ramble  about  for  some  time,  as  if  be-
wildered. In  this  state,  they  fall  an  easy  prey  to  the  hunter.

When  the  Turkeys  arrive  in  parts  where  the  mast  is  abundant,  they
separate  into  smaller  flocks,  composed  of  birds  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes,
promiscuously  mingled,  and  devour  all  before  them.  This  happens
about  the  middle  of  November.  So  gentle  do  they  sometimes  become
after  these  long  journeys,  that  they  have  been  seen  to  approach  the  farm-
houses, associate  with  the  domestic  fowls,  and  enter  the  stables  and  corn-
cribs  in  quest  of  food.  In  this  way,  roaming  about  the  forests,  and  feed-
ing chiefly  on  mast,  they  pass  the  autumn  and  part  of  the  winter.

As  early  as  the  middle  of  February,  they  begin  to  experience  the  im-
pulse of  propagation.  The  females  separate,  and  fly  from  the  males.
The  latter  strenuously  pursue,  and  begin  to  gobble  or  to  utter  the
notes  of  exultation.  The  sexes  roost  apart,  but  at  no  great  distance
from  each  other.  When  a female  utters  a call-note,  all  the  gobblers
within  hearing  return  the  sound,  rolling  note  after  note  with  as  much
rapidity  as  if  they  intended  to  emit  the  last  and  the  first  together,  not
with  spread  tail,  as  when  fluttering  round  the  females  on  the  ground,
or  practising  on  the  branches  of  the  trees  on  which  they  have  roosted  for
the  night,  but  much  in  the  manner  of  the  domestic  turkey,  when  an  un-
usual or  unexpected  noise  elicits  its  singular  hubbub.  If  the  call  of  the
female  comes  from  the  ground,  all  the  males  immediately  fly  towards  the
spot,  and  the  moment  they  reach  it,  vfhether  the  hen  be  in  sight  or  not,
spread  out  and  erect  their  tail,  draw  the  head  back  on  the  shoulders,  de-
press their  wings  with  a quivering  motion,  and  strut  pompously  about,
emitting  at  the  same  time  a succession  of  puff’s  from  the  lungs,  and  stop-,
ping  now  and  then  to  listen  and  look.  But  whether  they  spy  the  female
or  not,  they  continue  to  puff  and  strut,  moving  with  as  much  celerity  as
their  ideas  of  ceremony  seem  to  admit.  While  thus  occupied,  the  males
often  encounter  each  other,  in  which  case  desperate  battles  take  place,

A 2


4


WILD  TURKEY.


ending  in  bloodshed,  and  often  in  the  loss  of  many  lives,  the  weaker  fall-
ing under  the  repeated  blows  inflicted  upon  their  head  by  the  stronger.

I have  often  been  much  diverted,  while  watching  two  males  in  fierce
conflict,  by  seeing  them  move  alternately  backwards  and  forwards,  as
either  had  obtained  a better  hold,  their  wings  drooping,  their  tails  partly
raised,  their  body-feathers  rufiled,  and  their  heads  covered  with  blood.
If,  as  they  thus  struggle,  and  gasp  for  breath,  one  of  them  should  lose
his  hold,  his  chance  is  over,  for  the  other,  still  holding  fast,  hits  him  vio-
lently with  spurs  and  wings,  and  in  a few  minutes  brings  him  to  the
ground.  The  moment  he  is  dead,  the  conqueror  treads  him  under  foot,
but,  what  is  strange,  not  with  hatred,  but  with  all  the  motions  which  he
employs  in  caressing  the  female.

When  the  male  has  discovered  and  made  up  to  the  female  (whether
such  a combat  has  previously  taken  place  or  not),  if  she  be  more  than
one  year  old,  she  also  struts  and  gobbles,  turns  round  him  as  he  con-
tinues strutting,  suddenly  opens  her  wings,  throws  herself  towards  him,
as  if  to  put  a stop  to  his  idle  delay,  lays  herself  down,  and  receives  his
dilatory  caresses.  If  the  cock  meet  a young  hen,  he  alters  his  mode  of
procedure.  He  struts  in  a different  manner,  less  pompously  and  more
energetically,  moves  with  rapidity,  sometimes  rises  from  the  ground,  tak-
ing a short  flight  around  the  hen,  as  is  the  manner  of  some  Pigeons,  the
Red-breasted  Thrush,  and  many  other  birds,  and  on  alighting,  runs  with
all  liis  might,  at  the  same  time  rubbing  his  tail  and  wings  along  the
ground,  for  the  space  of  perhaps  ten  yards.  He  then  draws  near  the
timorous  female,  allays  her  fears  by  purring,  and  when  she  at  length
assents,  caresses  her.

When  a male  and  a female  have  thus  come  together,  I believe  the  con-
nexion continues  for  that  season,  although  the  former  by  no  means  con-
fines his  attentions  to  one  female,  as  I have  seen  a cock  caress  several
bens,  when  he  happened  to  fall  in  with  them  in  the  same  place,  for  the
first  time.  After  this  the  hens  follow  their  favourite  cock,  roosting  in
his  immediate  neighbourhood,  if  not  on  the  same  tree,  until  they  begin
to  lay,  when  they  separate  themselves,  in  order  to  save  their  eggs  from
the  male,  who  would  break  them  all,  for  the  purpose  of  protracting  his
sexual  enjoyments.  The  females  then  carefully  avoid  him,  excepting
during  a short  period  each  day.  After  this  the  males  become  clumsy
and  slovenly,  if  one  may  say  so,  cease  to  fight  with  each  other,  give  up
gobbling  or  calling  so  frequently,  and  assume  so  careless  a habit,  that


WILD  TURKEY.


5


tiie  hens  are  obliged  to  make  all  the  advances  themselves.  They  yelp
loudly  and  almost  continually  for  the  cocks,  run  up  to  them,  caress  them,
and  employ  various  means  to  rekindle  their  expiring  ardour.

Turkey-cocks  when  at  roost  sometimes  strut  and  gobble,  but  I have
more  generally  seen  them  spread  out  and  raise  their  tail,  and  emit  the
pulmonic  puff,  lowering  their  tail  and  other  feathers  immediately  after.
During  clear  nights,  or  when  there  is  moonshine,  they  perform  This
action  at  intervals  of  a few  minutes,  for  hours  together,  without  moving
from  the  same  spot,  and  indeed  sometimes  without  rising  on  their  legs,
especially  towards  the  end  of  the  love- season.  The  males  now  become
greatly  emaciated,  and  cease  to  gobble,  their  breast-sponge  becoming  flat.
They  then  separate  from  the  hens,  and  one  might  suppose  that  they  had
entirely  deserted  their  neighbourhood.  At  such  seasons  I have  found
them  lying  by  the  side  of  a log,  in  some  retired  part  of  the  dense  woods
and  cane  thickets,  and  often  permitting  one  to  approach  within  a few
feet.  They  are  then  unable  to  fly,  but  run  swiftly,  and  to  a great  dis-
tance. A slow  turkey-hound  has  led  me  miles  before  I could  flush  the
same  bird.  Chases  of  this  kind  I did  not  undertake  for  the  purpose  of
killing  the  bird,  it  being  then  unfit  for  eating,  and  covered  with  ticks,
but  with  the  view  of  rendering  myself  acquainted  with  its  habits.  They
thus  retire  to  recover  flesh  and  strength,  by  purging  with  particular  spe-
cies of  grass,  and  using  less  exercise.  As  soon  as  their  condition  is  im-
proved, the  cocks  come  together  again,  and  recommence  their  rambles.
Let  us  now  return  to  the  females.

About  the  middle  of  April,  when  the  season  is  dry,  the  hens  begin  to
look  out  for  a place  in  which  to  deposit  their  eggs.  This  place  requires
to  be  as  much  as  possible  concealed  from  the  eye  of  the  Crow,  as  that  bird
often  watches  the  Turkey  when  going  to  her  nest,  and,  waiting  in  tlie
neighbourhood  until  she  has  left  it,  removes  and  eats  the  eggs.  The  nest,
which  consists  of  a few  withered  leaves,  is  placed  on  the  ground,  in  a hol-
low scooped  out,  by  the  side  of  a log,  or  in  the  fallen  top  of  a dry  leafy
tree,  under  a thicket  of  sumach  or  briars,  or  a few  feet  within  the  edge  of
a cane-brake,  but  always  in  a dry  place.  The  eggs,  which  are  of  a dull
cream  colour,  sprinkled  with  red  dots,  sometimes  amount  to  twenty,  al-
though the  more  usual  number  is  from  ten  to  fifteen.  When  depositing  her
eggs,  the  female  always  approaches  the  nest  with  extreme  caution,  scarcely
ever  taking  the  same  course  twice  ; and  when  about  to  leave  them,  covers
them  carefully  with  leaves,  so  that  it  is  ver  ^ difficult  for  a person  who


6


WILD  TURKEY.


may  have  seen  the  bird  to  discover  the  nest.  Indeed,  few  Turkeys’  nests
are  found,  unless  the  female  has  been  suddenly  started  from  them,  or  a
cunning  Lynx,  Fox,  or  Crow  has  sucked  the  eggs  and  left  their  shells  scat-
tered about,

Turkey  hens  not  unfrequently  prefer  islands  for  depositing  their  eggs
and  rearing  their  young,  probably  because  such  places  are  less  frequented
by  hunters,  and  because  the  great  masses  of  drifted  timber  which  usually
accumulate  at  their  heads,  may  protect  and  save  them  in  cases  of  great
emergency.  When  I have  found  these  birds  in  such  situations,  and  with
young,  I have  always  observed  that  a single  discharge  of  a gun  made
them  run  immediately  to  the  pile  of  drifted  wood,  and  conceal  themselves
in  it.  I have  often  walked  over  these  masses,  which  are  frequently  from
ten  to  twenty  feet  in  height,  in  search  of  the  game  which  I knew  to  be
concealed  in  them.

When  an  enemy  passes  within  sight  of  a female,  while  laying  or  sit-
ting, she  never  moves,  unless  she  knows  that  she  has  been  discovered,
but  crouches  lower  until  he  has  passed.  I have  frequently  approached
within  five  or  six  paces  of  a nest,  of  which  I was  previously  aware,  on
assuming  an  air  of  carelessness,  and  whistling  or  talking  to  myself,  the
female  remaining  undisturbed  ; whereas  if  I went  cautiously  towards  it,
she  would  never  suffer  me  to  approach  v/ithin  twenty  paces,  but  would  run
off,  with  her  tail  spread  on  one  side,  to  a distance  of  twenty  or  thirty
yards,  when  assuming  a stately  gait,  she  would  walk  about  deliberately,
uttering  every  now  and  then  a cluck.  They  seldom  abandon  their  nest,
when  it  has  been  discovered  by  men ; but,  I believe,  never  go  near  it
again,  when  a snake  or  other  animal  has  sucked  any  of  the  eggs.  If  the
eggs  have  been  destroyed  or  carried  off,  the  female  soon  yelps  again  for
a male ; but,  in  general,  she  rears  only  a single  brood  each  season.
Several  hens  sometimes  associate  together,  I believe  for  their  mutual
safety,  deposit  their  eggs  in  the  same  nest,  and  rear  their  broods  toge-
ther. I once  found  three  sitting  on  forty-two  eggs.  In  such  cases,  the
common  nest  is  always  watched  by  one  of  the  females,  so  that  no  Crow,
Raven,  or  perhaps  even  Pole-cat,  dares  approach  it.

The  mother  will  not  leave  her  eggs,  when  near  hatching,  under  any
circumstances,  v/hile  life  remains.  She  will  even  allow  an  enclosure  to
be  made  around  her,  and  thus  suffer  imprisonment,  rather  than  abandon
them.  I once  witnessed  tlie  hatching  of  a brood  of  Turkeys,  which  I
watched  for  the  purpose  of  securing  them  together  with  the  parent.  I


WILD  TURKEY.


7


concealed  myself  on  the  ground  within  a very  few  feet,  and  saw  her  raise
herself  half  the  length  of  her  legs,  look  anxiously  upon  the  eggs,  cluck
with  a sound  peculiar  to  the  mother  on  such  occasions,  carefully  remove
each  half-empty  shell,  and  with  her  bill  caress  and  dry  the  young  birds,
that  already  stood  tottering  and  attempting  to  make  their  way  out  of  the
nest.  Yes,  I have  seen  this,  and  have  left  mother  and  young  to  better
care  than  mine  could  have  proved, — to  the  care  of  their  Creator  and
mine.  I have  seen  them  all  emerge  from  the  shell,  and,  in  a few  moments
after,  tumble,  roll,  and  push  each  other  forward,  with  astonishing  arid
inscrutable  instinct.

Before  leaving  the  nest  with  her  young  brood,  the  mother  shakes  her-
self in  a violent  manner,  picks  and  adjusts  the  feathers  about  her  belly,
and  assumes  quite  a different  aspect.  She  alternately  inclines  her  eyes
obliquely  upwards  and  sideways,  stretching  out  her  neck,  to  discover
hawks  or  other  enemies,  spreads  her  wings  a little  as  she  walks,  and
softly  clucks  to  keep  her  innocent  offspring  close  to  her.  They  move
slowly  along,  and  as  the  hatching  generally  takes  place  in  the  afternoon,
they  frequently  return  to  the  nest  to  spend  the  first  night  there.  After
this,  they  remove  to  some  distance,  keeping  on  the  highest  undulated
grounds,  the  mother  dreading  rainy  weather,  which  is  extremely  danger-
ous to  the  young,  in  this  tender  state,  when  they  are  only  covered  by  a
kind  of  soft  hairy  down,  of  surprising  delicacy.  In  very  rainy  seasons,
Turkeys  are  scarce,  for  if  once  completely  wetted,  the  young  seldom
recover.  To  prevent  the  disastrous  effects  of  rainy  weather,  the  mother,
like  a skilful  physician,  plucks  the  buds  of  the  spice- wood  bush,  and  gives
them  to  her  young.

In  about  a fortnight,  the  young  birds,  which  had  previously  rested  on
the  ground,  leave  it  and  fly,  at  night,  to  some  very  large  low  branch,
where  they  place  themselves  under  the  deeply  curved  wirigs  of  their  kind
and  careful  parent,  dividing  themselves  for  that  purpose  into  two  nearly
equal  parties.  After  this,  they  leave  the  woods  during  the  day,  and  ap-
proach the  natural  glades  or  prairies,  in  search  of  strawberries,  and  sub-
sequently of  dewberries,  blackberries  and  grasshoppers,  thus  obtaining
abundant  food,  and  enjoying  the  beneficial  influence  of  the  sun’s  rays.
They  roll  themselves  in  deserted  ants’  nests,  to  clear  their  growing  fea-
thers of  the  loose  scales,  and  prevent  ticks  and  other  vermin  from  attack-
ing them,  these  insects  being  unable  to  bear  the  odour  of  the  earth  in
which  ants  have  been.


8


WILD  TURKEY.


The  young  Turkeys  now  advance  rapidly  in  growth,  and  in  the
month  of  August  are  able  to  secure  themselves  from  unexpected  attacks
of  Wolves,  Foxes,  Lynxes,  and  even  Cougars,  by  rising  quickly  from  the
ground,  by  the  help  of  their  powerful  legs,  and  reaching  with  ease  the
liighest  branches  of  the  tallest  trees.  The  young  cocks  shew  the  tuft  on
the  breast  about  this  time,  and  begin  to  gobble  and  strut,  while  the
young  hens  pur  and  leap,  in  the  manner  which  I have  already  de-
scribed.

The  old  cocks  have  also  assembled  by  this  time,  and  it  is  probable
that  all  the  Turkeys  now  leave  the  extreme  north-western  districts,  to
remove  to  the  Wabash,  Illinois,  Black  River,  and  the  neighbourhood  of
Lake  Erie.

Of  the  numerous  enemies  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  the  most  formidable,  ex-
cepting man,  are  the  Lynx,  the  Snowy  Owl,  and  the  Virginian  Owl.  The
Lynx  sucks  their  eggs,  and  is  extremely  expert  at  seizing  both  young
and  old,  which  he  effects  in  the  following  manner.  When  he  has  dis-
covered a 'flock  of  Turkeys,  he  follows  them,  at  a distance  for  some  time,
until  he  ascertains  the  direction  in  which  they  are  proceeding.  He  then
makes  a rapid  circular  movement,  gets  in  advance  of  the  flock,  and  lays
himself  down  in  ambush,  until  the  birds  come  up,  when  he  springs  upon
one  of  them  by  a single  bound,  and  secures  it.  While  once  sitting  in
the  woods,  on  the  banks  of  the  ^\^abash,  I observed  two  large  Turkey-
cocks  on  a log,  by  the  river,  pluming  and  picking  themselves.  I watch-
ed their  movements  for  a while,  when  of  a sudden  one  of  them  flew  across
the  river,  while  I perceived  the  other  struggling  under  the  grasp  of  a
lynx.  When  attacked  by  the  two  large  species  of  Owl  above  mention-
ed, they  often  effect  their  escape  in  a way  which  is  somewhat  remark-
able. As  Turkeys  usually  roost  in  flocks,  on  naked  branches  of  trees,
they  are  easily  discovered  by  their  enemies,  the  owls,  which,  on  silent
wing,  approach  and  hover  around  them,  for  the  purpose  of  reconnoitring.
This,  however,  is  rarely  done  without  being  discovered,  and  a single
cluclc  from  one  of  the  Turkeys  announces  to  the  whole  party  the  approach
of  the  murderer.  They  instantly  start  upon  their  legs,  and  watch  the
motions  of  the  Owl,  which,  selecting  one  as  its  victim,  comes  down  upon
it  like  an  arrow,  and  would  inevitably  secure  the  Turkey,  did  not  the
latter  at  that  moment  lower  its  head,  stoop,  and  spread  its  tail  in  an  in-
verted manner  over  its  back,  by  which  action  the  aggressor  is  met  by  a
smooth  inclined  plane,  along  which  it  glances  without  hurting  the  Tur-


WILD  TURKEY.


9


key ; immediately  after  which  the  latter  drops  to  the  ground,  and  thus
escapes,  merely  with  the  loss  of  a few  feathers.

The  Wild  Turkeys  cannot  be  said  to  confine  themselves  to  any  parti-
cular kind  of  food,  although  they  seem  to  prefer  the  pecan-nut  and  win-
ter-grape to  any  other,  and,  where  these  fruits  abound,  are  found  in  the
greatest  numbers.  They  eat  grass  and  herbs  of  various  kinds,  corn,
berries,  and  fruit  of  all  descriptions.  I have  even  found  beetles,  tad-
poles, and  small  lizards  in  their  crops.

Turkeys  are  now  generally  extremely  shy,  and  the  moment  they  ob-
serve a man,  whether  of  the  red  or  white  race,  instinctively  move  from
him.  Their  usual  mode  of  progression  is  what  is  termed  walking,  du-
ring which  they  frequently  open  each  wing  partially  and  successively,  re-
placing them  again  by  folding  them  over  each  other,  as  if  their  weight
were  too  great.  Then,  as  if  to  amuse  themselves,  they  will  run  a few
steps,  open  both  wings  and  fan  their  sides,  in  the  manner  of  the  common
fowl,  and  often  take  two  or  three  leaps  in  the  air  and  shake  themselves.
Whilst  searching  for  food  among  the  leaves  or  loose  soil,  they  keep  their
head  up,  and  are  unremittingly  on  the  lookout ; but  as  the  legs  and  feet
finish  the  operation,  they  are  immediately  seen  to  pick  up  the  food,  the
presence  of  which,  I suspect,  is  frequently  indicated  to  them  through  the
sense  of  touch  in  their  feet,  during  the  act  of  scratching.  This  habit  of
scratching  and  removing  the  dried  leaves  in  the  woods,  is  pernicious  to
their  safety,  as  the  spots  which  they  thus  clear,  being  about  two  feet  in
diameter,  are  seen  at  a distance,  and,  if  fresh,  shew  that  the  birds  are  in
the  vicinity.  During  the  summer  months  they  resort  to  the  paths  or
roads,  as  well  as  the  ploughed  fields,  for  the  purpose  of  rolling  them-
selves in  the  dust,  by  which  means  they  clear  their  bodies  of  the  ticks
which  at  that  season  infest  them,  as  well  as  free  themselves  of  the  mos-
chettoes,  which  greatly  annoy  them,  by  biting  their  heads.

When,  after  a heavy  fall  of  snow,  the  weather  becomes  frosty,  so  as  to
form  a hard  crust  on  the  surface,  the  Turkeys  remain  on  their  roosts  for
three  or  four  days,  sometimes  much  longer,  which  proves  their  capability
of  continued  abstinence.  When  near  farms,  however,  they  leave  the
roosts,  and  go  into  the  very  stables  and  about  the  stacks  of  corn,  to  pro-
cure food.  During  melting  snow-falls,  they  will  travel  to  an  extraordi-
nary distance,  and  are  then  followed  in  vain,  it  being  impossible  for
hunters  of  any  description  to  keep  up  with  them.  They  have  then  a
dangling  and  straggling  way  of  running,  which,  awkward  as  it  may  seem,


10


WILD  TURKEY.


enables  them  to  outstrip  any  other  animal.  I have  often,  when  on  a
good  horse,  been  obliged  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  put  them  up,  after
following  them  for  several  hours.  This  habit  of  continued  running,  in
rainy  or  very  damp  weather  of  any  kind,  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Wild
Turkey,  but  is  common  to  all  gallinaceous  birds.  In  America,  the  dif-
ferent species  of  Grouse  exhibit  the  same  tendency.

In  spring,  when  the  males  are  much  emaciated,  in  consequence  of  their
attentions  to  the  females,  it  sometimes  happens  that,  on  plain  and  open
ground,  they  may  be  overtaken  by  a swift  dog,  in  which  case  they  squat,
and  allow  themselves  to  be  seized,  either  by  the  dog,  or  the  hunter  who
has  followed  on  a good  horse.  I have  heard  of  such  occurrences,  but
never  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  an  instance  of  them.

Good  dogs  scent  the  Turkeys,  when  in  large  flocks,  at  extraordinary
distances, — I think  I may  venture  to  say  half  a mile.  Should  the  dog
be  well  trained  to  this  sport,  he  sets  off  at  full  speed,  and  in  silence,  un-
til he  sees  the  birds,  when  he  instantly  barks,  and  pushing  as  much  as
possible  into  the  centre  of  the  flock,  forces  the  whole  to  take  wing  in  dif-
ferent directions.  This  is  of  great  advantage  to  the  hunter,  for  should
the  Turkeys  all  go  one  way,  they  would  soon  leave  their  perches  and
run  again.  But  when  they  separate  in  this  manner,  and  the  weather  hap-
pens to  be  calm  and  lowering,  a person  accustomed  to  this  kind  of  sport
finds  the  birds  with  ease,  and  shoots  them  at  pleasure.

When  Turkeys  alight  on  a tree,  it  is  sometimes  very  difficult  to  see
them,  which  is  owing  to  their  standing  perfectly  motionless.  Should  you
discover  one,  when  it  is  down  on  its  legs  upon  the  branch,  you  may  ap-
proach it  with  less  care.  But  if  it  is  standing  erect,  the  greatest  precau-
tion is  necessary,  for  should  it  discover  you,  it  instantly  flies  off‘,  fre-
quently to  such  a distance  that  it  would  be  vain  to  follow.

When  a Turkey  is  merely  winged  by  a shot,  it  falls  quickly  to  the
ground  in  a slanting  direction.  Then,  instead  of  losing  time  by  tum-
bling and  rolling  over,  as  other  birds  often  do  when  wounded,  it  runs
off  at  such  a rate,  that  unless  the  hunter ’be  provided  with  a swift
dog,,  he  may  bid  farewell  to  it.  I recollect  coming  on  one  shot  in  this
manner, 'more  than  a mile  from  the  tree  where  it  had  been  perched,  my
dog  having  traced  it  to  this  distance,  through  one  of  those  thick  cane-
brakes  that  cover  many  portions  of  our  rich  alluvial  lands  near  the  banks
of  our  western  rivers.  Turkeys  are  easily  killed  if  shot  in' the  head,  the
neck,  or  the  upper  part  of  the  breast ; but  if  hit  in^the  hind  parts  only,


WILD  TURKEY.


11


they  often  fly  so  far  as  to  be  lost  to  the  hunter.  During  winter  many  of
our  real  hunters  shoot  them  by  moonlight,  on  the  roosts,  where  these  birds
wiU  frequently  stand  a repetition  of  the  reports  of  a rifle,  although  they
would  fly  from  the  attack  of  an  owl,  or  even  perhaps  from  his  presence.
Thus  sometimes  nearly  a whole  flock  is  secured  by  men  capable  of  using
these  guns  in  such  circumstances.  They  are  often  destroyed  in  great
numbers  when  most  worthless,  that  is,  early  in  the  fall  or  autumn,  when
many  are  killed  in  their  attempt  to  cross  the  rivers,  or  immediately  after
they  reach  the  shore.  ?

Whilst  speaking  of  the  shooting  of  Turkeys,  I feel  no  hesitation  in  re-
lating the  following  occurrence,  which  happened  to  myself.  While  in
search  of  game,  one  afternoon  late  in  autumn,  when  the  males  go  toge-
ther, and  the  females  are  by  themselves  also,  I heard  the  clucking  of  one
of  the  latter,  and  immediately  finding  her  perched  on  a rfence,  made  to-
wards her.  Advancing  slowly  and  cautiously,  I heard  the  yelping  notes
of  some  gobblers,  when  I stopped  and  listened  in  order  to  ascertain  the
direction  in  which  they  came.  I then,  ran  to  meet  the  birds,  hid  myself
by  the  side  of  a large  fallen  tree,  xocked  my  gun,  and  waited  with  im-
patience for  a good  opportunity.  The  gobblers  continued  yelping  in
answer  to  the  female,  which  all  this  while  remained  on  the  fence.  I
looked  over  the  log  and  saw  about  thirty  fine  cocks  advancing  rather
cautiously  towards  the  very  spot  where  I lay  concealed.  They  came  so
near  that  the  light  in  their  eyes  could  easily  be  perceived,  when  I fired  one
barrel,  and  killed  three.  The  rest,  instead  of  flying  off,  fell  a strutting
around  their  dead  companions,  and  had  I not  looked  on  shooting  again
as  murder  without  necessity,  I might  have  secured  at  least  another.  So
I shewed  myself,  and  marching  to  the  place  where  the  dead  birds  were,
drove  away  the  survivors.  I may  also  mention,  that  a friend  of  mine
' shot  a fine  hen,  from  his  horse,  with  a pistol,  as  the  poor  thing  was
probably  returning  to  her  nest  to  lay.

Should  you,  good-natured  reader,  be  a sportsman,  and  now  and  then
havebeenfortunate  in  the  exercise  of  your  craft,  the 'folio  wingriucident,
which  I shalUrelate  to  you  as  I had  it  from  the  mouth  of*  an'  honest
/farmer,  may  prove  interesting.  Turkeys  were  very  'abundant  in  his
neighbourhood,  and,  resorting  to  his  corn  fields,  at  the  period  when  the
maize  had  just  shot  up  from  the  ground,' destroyed,  great  quantities  of  it.
This  induced  him  to  swear  vengeance  against  the  species.  He  cut  a long
trench  in  a favourable  situation,  put  a great  quantity  ' of  corn ' in  it,  and


12


WILD  TURKEY,


having  heavily  loaded  a famous  duck  gun  of  his,  placed  it  so  as  that  he
could  pull  the  trigger  by  means  of  a string,  when  quite  concealed  from
the  birds.  The  Turkeys  soon  discovered  the  corn  in  the  trench,  and
quickly  disposed  of  it,  at  the  same  time  continuing  their  ravages  in  the
fields.  He  filled  the  trench  again,  and  one  day  seeing  it  quite  black  with
the  Turkeys,  whistled  loudly,  on  which  all  the  birds  raised  their  heads,
when  he  pulled  the  trigger  by  the  long  string  fastened  to  it.  The  ex-
plosion followed  of  course,  and  the  Turkeys  were  seen  scampering  off  in
all  directions,  in  utter  discomfiture  and  dismay.  On  running  to  the  trench,
he  found  nine  of  them  extended  in  it.  The  rest  did  not  consider  it  ex-
pedient to  visit  his  corn  again  for  that  season.

During  spring.  Turkeys  are  called^  as  it  is  termed,  by  drawing  the  air
in  a particular  way  through  one  of  the  second  joint  bones  of  a wing  of
that  bird,  which  produces  a sound  resembling  the  voice  of  the  female,  on
hearing  which  the  male  comes  up,  and  is  shot.  In  managing  this,  how-
ever, no  fault  must  be  committed,  for  Turkeys  are  quick  in  distinguish-
ing counterfeit  sounds,  and  when  half  civilized  are  very  wary  and  cun-
ning. I have  known  many  to  answer  to  this  kind  of  call,  without  mov-
ing a step,  and  thus  entirely  defeat  the  scheme  of  the  hunter,  who  dared
not  move  from  his  hiding-place,  lest  a single  glance  of  the  gobbler’s  eye
should  frustrate  all  further  attempts  to  decoy  him.  Many  are  shot  when
at  roost,  in  this  season,  by  answering  with  a rolling  gobble  to  a sound  in
imitation  of  the  cry  of  the  Barred  Owl.

But  the  most  common  method  of  procuring  Wild  Turkeys,  is  by  means
of  pens.  These  are  placed  in  parts  of  the  woods  where  Turkeys  have
been  frequently  observed  to  roost,  and  are  constructed  in  the  following
manner.  Young  trees  of  four  or  five  inches  diameter  are  cut  down,  and
divided  into  pieces  of  the  length  of  twelve  or  fourteen  feet.  Two  of  these
are  laid  on  the  ground  parallel  to  each  other,  at  a distance  of  ten  or
twelve  feet.  Two  other  pieces  are  laid  across  the  ends  of  these,  at  right
angles  to  them  ; and  in  this  manner  successive  layers  are  added,  until
the  fabric  is  raised  to  the  height  of  about  four  feet.  It  is  then  covered
with  similar  pieces  of  wood,  placed  three  or  four  inches  apart,  and  loaded
with  one  or  two  heavy  logs  to  render  the  whole  firm.  This  done,  a trench
about  eighteen  inches  in  depth  and  width  is  cut  under  one  side  of  the
cage,  into  which  it  opens  slantingly  and  rather  abruptly.  It  is  continued
on  its  outside  to  some  distance,  so  as  gradually  to  attain  the  level  of  the
surrounding  ground.  Over  the  part  of  this  trench  within  the  pen,  and


WILD  TURKEY.


13


close  to  the  wall,  some  sticks  are  placed  so  as  to  form  a kind  of  bridge
about  a foot  in  breadth.  The  trap  being  now  finished,  the  owner  places
a quantity  of  Indian  corn  in  its  centre,  as  well  as  in  the  trench,  and  as  he
walks  off  drops  here  and  there  a few  grains  in  the  woods,  sometimes  to
the  distance  of  a mile.  This  is  repeated  at  every  visit  to  the  trap,  after  the
Turkeys  have  found  it.  Sometimes  two  trenches  are  cut,  in  which  case
the  trenches  enter  on  opposite  sides  of  the  trap,  and  are  both  strewn  with
corn.  No  sooner  has  a Turkey  discovered  the  train  of  corn,  than  it  com-
municates the  circumstance  to  the  flock  by  a cluck,  when  all  of  them  come
up,  and  searching  for  the  grains  scattered  about,  at  length  come  upon  the
trench,  which  they  follow,  squeezing  themselves  one  after  another  through
the  passage  under  the  bridge.  In  this  manner  the  whole  flock  sometimes
enters,  but  more  commonly  six  or  seven  only,  as  they  are  alarmed  by  the
least  noise,  even  the  cracking  of  a tree  in  frosty  weather.  Those  within,
having  gorged  themselves,  raise  their  heads,  and  try  to  force  their  way
through  the  top  or  sides  of  the  pen,  passing  and  repassing  on  the  bridge,
but  never  for  a moment  looking  down,  or  attempting  to  escape  through
the  passage  by  which  they  entered.  Thus  they  remain  until  the  owner
of  the  trap  arriving,  closes  the  trench,  and  secures  his  captives.  I have
heard  of  eighteen  Turkeys  having  been  caught  in  this  manner  at  a single
visit  to  the  trap.  I have  had  many  of  these  pens  myself,  but  never  found
more  than  seven  in  them  at  a time.  One  winter  I kept  an  account  of
the  produce  of  a pen  which  I visited  daily,  and  found  that  seventy-six
had  been  caught  in  it,  in  about  two  months.  When  these  birds  are
abundant,  the  owners  of  the  pens  sometimes  become  satiated  with  their
flesh,  and  neglect  to  visit  the  pens  for  several  days,  in  some  cases  for  weeks.
The  poor  captives  thus  perish  for  want  of  food ; for,  strange  as  it  may
seem,  they  scarcely  ever  regain  their  liberty,  by  descending  into  the
trench,  and  retracing  their  steps.  I have,  more  than  once,  found  four
or  five,  and  even  ten,  dead  in  a pen,  through  inattention.  Where
Wolves  or  Lynxes  are  numerous,  they  are  apt  to  secure  the  prize  before
the  owner  of  the  trap  arrives.  One  morning,  I had  the  pleasure  of  se-
curing in  one  of  my  pens,  a fine  Black  Wolf,  which,  on  seeing  me,  squatted,
supposing  me  to  be  passing  in  another  direction.

Wild  Turkeys  often  approach  and  associate  with  tame  ones,  or  fight
with  them,  and  drive  them  off  from  their  food.  The  cocks  sometimes
pay  their  addresses  to  the  domesticated  females,  and  are  generally  re-
ceived by  them  with  great  pleasure,  as  well  as  by  their  owners,  who  are


14


WILD  TURKEY.


well  aware  of  the  advantages  resulting  from  such  intrusions,  the  half-
breed  being  much  more  hardy  than  the  tame,  and,  consequently,  more
easily  reared.

While  at  Henderson,  on  the  Ohio,  I had,  among  many  other  wild
birds,  a fine  male  Turkey,  which  had  been  reared  from  its  earliest  youth
under  my  care,  it  having  been  caught  by  me  when  probably  not  more  than
two  or  three  days  old.  It  became  so  tame  that  it  would  follow  any  person
who  called  it,  and  was  the  favourite  of  the  little  village.  Y et  it  would  never
roost  with  the  tame  Turkeys,  but  regularly  betook  itself  at  night  to  the  roof
of  the  house,  where  it  remained  until  dawn.  When  two  years  old,  it  be-
gan to  fly  to  the  woods,  where  it  remained  for  a considerable  part  of  the
day,  to  return  to  the  enclosure  as  night  approached.  It  continued  this
practice  until  the  following  spring,  when  I saw  it  several  times  fly  from
its  roosting  place  to  the  top  of  a high  cotton- tree,  on  the  bank  of  the
Ohio,  from  which,  after  resting  a little,  it  would  sail  to  the  opposite  shore,
the  river  being  there  nearly  half  a mile  wide,  and. return  towards  night.
One  morning  I saw  it  fly  off,  at  a very  early  hour,  to  the  woods,  in  ano-
ther direction,  and  took  no  particular  notice  of  the  circumstance.  Several
days  elapsed,  but  the  bird  did  not  return.  I was  going  towards  some
lakes  near  Green  River  to  shoot,  when,  having  walked  about  five  miles,
I saw  a fine  large  gobbler  cross  the  path  before  me,  moving  leisurely  along.
Turkeys  being  then  in  prime  condition  for  the  table,  I ordered  my  dog
to  chase  it,  and  put  it  up.  The  animal  went  off  with  great  rapidity,  and
as  it  approached  the  Turkey,  I saw,  with  great  surprise,  that  the  latter
paid  little  attention.  Juno  was  on  the  point  of  seizing  it,  when  she
suddenly  stopped,  and  turned  her  head  towards  me.  I hastened  to  them,
but  you  may  easily  conceive  my  surprise  when  I saw  my  own  favourite
bird,  and  discovered  that  it  had  recognised  the  dog,  and  would  not  fly
from  it ; although  the  sight  of  a strange  dog  would  have  caused  it  to  run
off  at  once.  A friend  of  mine  happening  to  be  in  search  of  a wounded
deer,  took  the  bird  son  his  saddle  before  him,  and  carried  it  home  for  me.
The  following  spring  it  was  accidentally  shot,  having  been  taken  for  a
wild  bird,  and  brought  to  me  on  being  recognised  by  the  red  ribbon
which  it  had  around  its  neck.  Pray,  reader,  by  what  word  will  you  de-
signate the  recognition  made  by  my  favourite  Turkey  of  a dog  which  had
been  long  associated  with  it  in  the  yard  and  grounds  ? AVas  it  the  re-
sult of  instinct,  or  of  reason, — an  unconsciously  revived  impression,  or
the  act  of  an  intelligent  mind  ?


1


WILD  TURKEY.


15


At  the  time  when  I removed  to  Kentucky,  rather  more  than  a fourth
of  a century  ago,  Turkeys  were  so  abundant,  that  the  price  of  one  in  the.
market  was  not  equal  to  that  of  a common  barn-fowl  now.  I have  seen
them  offered  for  the  sum  of  three  pence  each,  the  birds  weighing  from
ten  to  twelve  pounds.  A first-rate  Turkey,  weighing  from  twenty^five
to  thirty  pounds  avoirdupois,  was  considered  well  sold  when  it  .brought
a quarter  of  a dollar.

The  weight  of  Turkey  hens  generally  averages  about  nine  pounds
avoirdupois.  I have,  however,  shot  barren  hens  in  strawberry  season,,
that  weighed  thirteen  pounds,  and  have  seen  a few  so  fat  as  to  burst  open
on  falling  from  a tree  when  shot.  Male  Turkeys  differ  more  in  their  bulk
and  weight.  From  fifteen  to  eighteen  pounds  may  be  a fair  estimate  of
their  ordinary  weight.  I saw  one  offered  for  sale  in  the  Louisville  mar-
ket, that  weighed  thirty-six  pounds.  Its  pectoral  appendage  measured
upwards  of  a foot.

Some  closet  naturalists  suppose  the  hen  Turkey  to  be  destitute  of  the
appendage  on  the  breast,,  but  this  is  not  the  case  in  the  full-grown  bird.
The  young  males,  as  I have  said,  at  the  approach  of  the  first  winter,  have
merely  a kind  of  protuberance  in  the  flesh  at  this  part,  while  the  young
females  of  the  same  age  have  no  such  appearance.  The  second  year,  the
males  are  to  be  distinguished  by  the  hairy  tuft,  which  is  about  four
inches  long,  whereas  in  the  females  that  are  not  barren,  it  is  yet  hardly  ap-
parent. The  third  year,  the  male  Turkey  may  be  said  to  be  adult,'  al«
though  it  certainly  increases  in  weight  and  size  for  several  years  more.
The  females  at  the  age  of  four  are  in  full  beauty,  and  have  the  peetoral
appendage  four  or  five  inches  long,  but  thinner  than  in  the  male.  The
barren  hens  do  not  acquire  it  until  they  are  very  old.  T he  experienced
hunter  knows  them  at  once  in  the  flock,  and  shoots  them  by  preference.
The  great  number  of  young  hens  destitute  of  the  appendage  in  question,
has  doubtless  given  rise  to  the  idea  that  it  is  wanting  in  the  female
Turkey.

The  long  downy  double  feathers  * about  the  thighs  and  on  the  lower
parts  of  the  sides  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  are  often  used  for  making  tippets,

• The  peculiarities  in  the  structure  of  the  plumage  of  different  species  of  birds  might,
if  duly  attended  to,  prove  of  essential  service  to  the  systematic  ornithologist,  as  conducing,
along  with  other  circumstances,  to  the  elucidation  of  the  natural  affinities  of  birds.  On
this  subject,  I would  refer  the  system-makers  to  the  valuable  observations  of  Mr  Mac-
GiLXiVRAY  in  the  Edinburgh  New  Philosophical  Journal  for  1C28.J


16


WILD  TURKEY.


by  the  wives  of  our  squatters  and  farmers.  These  tippets,  when  properly
made,  are  extremely  beautiful  as  well  as  comfortable.

A long  account  of  the  habits  of  this  remarkable  bird  has  already  been
given  in  Bonaparte’s  American  Ornithology,  vol.  i.  As  that  account  was
in  a great  measure  derived  from  notes  furnished  by  myself,  you  need  not
be  surprised,  good  reader,  to  find  it  often  in  accordance  with  the  above.

Having  now  said  all  that  I have  thought  it  might  be  agreeable  to  you
to  know  of  the  history  and  habits  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  I proceed  to  the
technical  description  of  that  interesting  bird.

Meleagris  Gallopavo,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  268 — Lalli.  Iiul.  Ornith.  p.  618.
— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  122.

Wild  Turkey,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  76.  PI.  ix.  Male  and
Female.

American  Turkey,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  676.

Adult  Male.  Plate  I.

Bill  shortish,  robust,  slightly  arched,  rather  obtuse,  the  base  covered
by  a bare  membrane  ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  arched,
the  sides  convex,  the  edges  overlapping,  the  tip  a little  declinate ; under
mandible  somewhat  bulging  towards  the  tip,  the  sides  convex.  Nostrils
situated  in  the  basal  membrane,  oblique,  linear,  covered  above  by  a carti-
lage. Head  small,  flattened  above,  with  a conical  pendulous,  erectile
caruncle  on  the  forehead.  Neck  slender.  Body  robust.  Feet  longish
and  strong ; tarsus  covered  anteriorly  with  numerous  transverse  scutella,
scaly  on  the  sides,  scutellate  behind  ; toes  scutellate  above,  scabrous,
papillar  and  flat  beneath  ; hind  toe  elevated,  half  the  length  of  the  lateral
toes,  which  are  nearly  equal,  and  much  shorter  than  the  middle  toe ;
claws  slightly  arched,  strong,  convex  above,  obtuse,  flat  beneath.  A
conical,  rather  obtuse  spur  on  the  tarsus,  about  two-thirds  down.

Conical  papilla  of  the  forehead  rugose,  sparsely  covered  with  bristles.
Head  bare,  and  corrugated,  the  skin  irregularly  raised,  and  covered  with
a few  scattered  bristles.  External  ear  margined  with  short  and  slender
thin  feathers.  Neck  also  bare,  corrugated,  beset  anteriorly  and  below
with  a series  of  oblong,  irregular,  cavernous  caruncles,  interspersed  with
small  bristly  feathers.  Plumage  in  general  compact,  glossy,  with  metallic
reflections.  Feathers  double,  as  in  other  gallinaceous  birds,  generally
oblong  and  truncated.  A pendulous  tuft  of  long  bristles  from  the  upper


2


WILD  TURKEY.


17


part  of  the  breast.  Wings  shortish,  convex,  rounded,  the  fourth  and
fifth  quills  longest.  Tail  rather  long,  ample,  rounded,  consisting  of
eighteen  broad  rounded  feathers ; capable  of  being  erected  and  expanded
in  a permanent  manner,  when  the  bird  is  excited,  and  reaching  nearly
to  the  ground,  when  the  bird  stands  erect.

Bill  yellowish-brown.  Frontal  caruncle  blue  atid  red.  Rugose  and
carunculated  skin  of  the  head  and  neck  of  various  tints  of  blue  and
purple,  the  pendulous  anterior  caruncles  of  the  latter,  or  the  wattles^
bright  red,  changing  to  blue.  Iris  hazel.  Legs  and  toes  bright  purplish-
red  ; claws  brown.  Upper  part  of  the  back  and  wings  brownisli-yellow,
with  metallic  lustre,  changing  to  deep  purple,  the  truncated  tips  of  the
feathers  broadly  margined  with  velvet-black.  On  the  middle  and  lower
back,  the  black  terminal  bands  of  the  feathers  almost  conceal  the  bronze
colour.  . The  large  quill-coverts  are  of  the  same  colour  as  the  back,  but
more  bronzed,  with  purple  reflections.  Quills  brownish-black,  the  pri-
maries banded  with  greyish- white,  the  secondaries  with  brownish- white,
gradually  becoming  deeper  towards  the  proximal  feathers,  which  are
similar  to  the  coverts.  The  lower  part  of  the  back  and  the  tail-coverts
are  deep  chestnut,  banded  with  green  and  black.  The  tail-feathers  are
of  the  same  colour,  undulatingly  barred  and  minutely  sprinkled  with
black,  and  having  a broad  blackish  bar  towards  the  tip,  which  is  pale
brown  and  minutely  mottled.  The  under  parts  are  duller.  Breast  of
the  same  colours  as  the  back,  the  terminal  black  band  not  so  broad ;
sides  dark-coloured ; abdomen  and  thighs  brownish-grey ; under  tail-
coverts  blackish,  glossed  with  bronze,  and  at  the  tip  bright  reddish-
brown.

I.ength  4 feet  1 inch,  extent  of  wings  5 feet  8 inches ; beak  inches
along  the  ridge,  2 along  the  gap ; tarsus  7^  ; middle  toe  5,  hind  toe  2 ;
pectoral  appendage  1 foot.  Such  were  the  dimensions  of  the  individual
represented  in  the  plate,  which,  I need  not  say,  was  a fine  specimen.


15


( IB  )


THE  YELLOW-BILLED  CUCKOO.

COCCYZUS  AMERICANUS,  BoNAP.

PLATE  II.  Male  and  Female.

Were  I inclined,  like  many  persons  who  write  on  Natural  History,  to
criticise  the  figures  given  by  other  students,  I should  find  enough  to  be
censured  ; but  as  my  object  is  simply  to  communicate  the  result  of  studies
to  which  I have  devoted  the  greater  part  of  my  life,  I shall  content  myself
with  merely  recommending  to  those  intent  on  the  advancement  of  that
most  interesting  science,  to  bestow  a little  more  care  on  their  representa-
tions of  the  bills,  legs  and  feet  of  the  species  which  they  bring  into
notice,  and  let  it  be  seen  that  they  indeed  borrow  from  nature.

From  Nature  ? — How  often  are  these  words  used,  when  at  a glance  he
who  has  seen  the  perfect  and  beautiful  forms  of  birds,  quadrupeds  or
other  objects,  as  they  have  come  from  the  hand  of  Nature,  discovers  that
the  representation  is  not  that  of  living  Nature  ! But  I am  deviating
from  the  track  which  I wish  to  follow,  my  desire  being  simply  to  give
you  an  opportunity,  good  reader,  of  judging  for  yourself  as  to  the  truth
of  my  delineations,  and  to  present  you  with  the  results  of  my  observations
made  in  those  very  woods  where  the  subjects  have  been  found  and  de-
picted.

The  flight  of  the  bird  now  before  you  is  rapid,  silent,  and  horizontal,
as  it  moves  from  one  tree  to  another,  or  across  a field  or  river,  and  is
generally  continued  amongst  the  branches  of  the  trees  in  our  woods.
When  making  its  way  among  the  branches,  it  occasionally  inclines  the
body  to  either  side,  so  as  alternately  to  shew  its  whole  upper  or  under
parts.  During  its  southward  migration,  it  flies  high  in  the  air,  and  in
such  loose  flocks  that  the  birds  might  seem  to  follow  each  other,  instead  of
their  keeping  company  together.  On  the  other  hand,  early  in  March,
the  greater  number  enter  our  southern  boundaries  singly,  the  males
arriving  first,  and  the  females  a few  weeks  after.  They  do  not  fly  in  a
continued  line,  but  in  a broad  front,  as,  while  travelling  with  great  ra-
pidity in  a steam-boat,  so  as  to  include  a range  of  a hundred  miles  in  one
day,  I have  observed  this  Cuckoo  crossing  the  Mississippi  at  many  dif-
ferent points  on  the  same  day.  At  this  season,  they  resort  to  the  deepest


YELLOW-BILLED  CUCKOO.


19


shades  of  the  forests,  and  intimate  their  presence  by  the  frequent  repeti-
tion of  their  dull  and  unmusical  notes,  which  are  not  unlike  those  of  the
young  Bull-Frog.  These  notes  may  be  represented  by  the  word  cow^
coxv,  repeated  eight  or  ten  times  with  increasing  rapidity.  In  fact,  from
the  resemblance  of  its  notes  to  that  word,  this  Cuckoo  is  named  Cow
Bird  in  nearly  every  part  of  the  Union.  The  Dutch  farmers  of  Penn-
sylvania know  it  better  by  the  name  of  Rain  Crow,  and  in  Louisiana
the  French  settlers  call  it  Coucou.

It  robs  smaller  birds  of  their  eggs,  which  it  sucks  on  all  occasions,  and
is  cowardly  and  shy,  without  being  vigilant.  On  this  latter  account,  it
often  falls  a prey  to  several  species  of  Hawks,  of  which  the  Pigeon
Hawk  (Falco  columbarius)  may  be  considered  as  its  most  dangerous
enemy.  It  prefers  the  Southern  States  for  its  residence,  and  when  very
mild  winters  occur  in  Louisiana,  some  individuals  remain  there,  not  find-
ing it  necessary  to  go  farther  south.

This  bird  is  not  abundant  anywhere,  and  yet  is  found  very  far  north.
I have  met  with  it  in  all  the  low  grounds  and  damp  places  in  Massachu-
sets,  along  the  line  of  Upper  Canada,  pretty  high  on  the  Mississippi  and
Arkansas,  and  in  every  state  between  these  boundary  lines.  Its  appear-
ance in  the  State  of  New  York  seldom  takes  place  before  the  beginning
of  May,  and  at  Green  Bay  not  until  the  middle  of  that  month.  A pair
here  and  there  seem  to  appropriate  certain  tracts  to  themselves,  where
they  rear  their  young  in  the  midst  of  peace  and  plenty.  They  feed  on
insects,  such  as  caterpillars  and  butterflies,  as  well  as  on  berries  of  many
kinds,  evincing  a special  predilection  for  the  mulberry.  In  autumn  they
eat  many  grapes,  and  I have  seen  them  supporting  themselves  by  a mo-
mentary motion  of  their  wings  opposite  a bunch,  as  if  selecting  the  ripest,
when  they  would  seize  it  and  return  to  a branch,  repeating  their  visits  in
this  manner  until  satiated.  They  now  and  then  descend  to  the  ground,
to  pick  up  a wood-snail  or  a beetle.  They  are  extremely  awkward  at
walking,  and  move  in  an  ambling  manner,  or  leap  along  sidewise,  for
which  the  shortness  of  their  legs  is  ample  excuse.  They  are  seldom  seen
perched  conspicuously  on  a twig,  but  on  the  contrary  are  generally  to  be
found  amongst  the  thickest  boughs  and  foliage,  where  they  emit  their
notes  until  late  in  autumn,  at  which  time  they  discontinue  them.

The  nest  is  simple,  flat,  composed  of  a few  dry  sticks  and  grass,  form-
ed much  like  that  of  the  Common  Dove,  and,  like  it,  fastened  to  a hori-
zontal branch,  often  within  the  reach  of  man,  who  seldom  disturbs  it.

B %


‘20


YELLOW-BILLED  CUCKOO.


It  makes  no  particular  selection  as  to  situation  or  the  nature  of  the  tree,
but  settles  any  where  indiscriminately.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a
rather  elongated  oval  form,  and  bright  green  colour.  They  rear  only  one
brood  in  a season,  unless  the  eggs  are  removed  or  destroyed.  The  young
are  principally  fed  with  insects  during  the  first  weeks.  Towards  autumn,
they  become  very  fat,  and  are  fit  for  being  eaten,  although  few  persons,
excepting  the  Creoles  of  Louisiana,  shoot  them  for  the  table.

The  branch,  among  the  foliage  of  which  you  see  the  male  and  female
winging  their  way,  is  one  of  the  Papaw,  a tree  of  small  size,  seldom  more
than  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  height,  with  a diameter  of  from'
three  to  seven  inches.  It  is  found  growing  in  all  rich  grounds,  to  which
it  is  peculiar,  from  the  southern  line  of  our  States  to  central  Pennsylva-"
nia,  seldom  farther  eastward,  here  and  there  only  along  the  alluvial
shores  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi.  In  all  other  places  of  like  nature
you  may  meet  with  groves  of  Papaw  trees,  covering  an  acre  or  more  of
ground.  " The  fruit,  which  is  represented  in  the  plate,  consists  of  a pulpy
and  insipid  substance,  within  which  are  found  several  large,  hard,  and
glossy  seeds.  The  rind  is  extremely  thin.  The  wood  is  light,  soft,
brittle,  and  almost  useless.  The  bark,  which  is  smooth,  may  be  torn  off
from  the  foot  of  the  tree  to  the  very  top,  and  is  frequently  used  for  mak-^
ing  ropes,  after  it  has  been  steeped  in  water  sufficiently  to  detach  the
outer  part,  when  the  fibres  are  obtained,  which,  when  twisted,  are  found
to  be  nearly  as  tough  and  durable  as  hemp.  The  numerous  islands  of
the  Ohio  and  all  the  other  western  rivers  are  generally  well  stocked  with
this  tree.


CoccYZUS  AMERiCANUS,  Ch.  Bonaparte.  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  42.

CucuLUS  AMERICANUS,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol  i.  p.  I70 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  2l9.

Carolina  Cuckoo,  Lath.  Synopsis,  vol.  ii.  p,  527.  ’

Yellow-billed  Cuckoo,  Cuculus  carolinensis.  Wits.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.
p.  13.  PI.  28.  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  II.  Fig.  1.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  acute,  scarcely
more  robust  than  in  many  Sylviae  ; upper  mandible  carinated  above,  its
margins  acute  and  entire ; lower  mandible  carinated  beneath,  acute.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  hnear-elliptical,  half  closed  by  a membrane.  Feet
short ; tarsus  scutellate  before  and  behind ; toes  two  before,  separated  ;


YELLOW-BILLED  CUCKOO.


21


two  behind,  one  of  which  is  versatile,  the  sole  flat ; claws  slender,  com-
pressed, arched.

Plumage  blended,  slightly  glossed.  Wings  long,  the  first  quill  short,
the  third  longest,  the  primaries  tapering.  Tail  long,  graduated,  of  ten
feathers,  which  are  rather  narrow  and  rounded.

Upper  mandible  brownish-black,  yellow  on  the  margin  towards  the
base ; under  mandible  yellow.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  greyish-blue.  The  ge-
neral colour  of  the  upper  parts,  including  the  wing-coverts  and  two
middle  tail-feathers,  is  light  greenish-brown,  deeper  anteriorly.  Primary
quills  with  the  inner  webs  brownish-orange.  Tail-feathers,  excepting  the
two  middle  ones,  black,  the  next  two  entirely  black,  the  rest  broadly  tip-
ped with  white,  the  outermost  white  on  the  outer  web.  The  under  parts
are  greyish- white.

‘ Length  12^  inches,  extent  of  wings  16 ; bill  along  the  ridge  1,  along
the  gap  H,

Adult  Female.  Plate  II.  Fig.  %

. The  female  differs  very  little  from  the  male  in  colouring.


The  Papaw  Tree.

PoRCELiA  TRILOBA,  Puvsh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  383.  Anona  triloba,  Willd.  Sp.
PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1267.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  iii.  p.  162.  PL  9.
— PoLYANDRiA  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn.  Anoka:,  Juss.

Leaves  obovato-cuneate,  acuminate,  smoothish;  outer  petals  orbicu-
late ; fruits  oblong,  large,  and  fleshy.  The  leaves  are  from  six  to  ten
inches  long ; the  flowers  of  a rich  dark  purple.


( 22  )


THE  PROTHONOTARY  WARBLER.

Sylvia  Peotonotarius,  Lath.

PLATE  III.  Male  and  Female.

I never  saw  this  pretty  bird  in  any  of  our  eastern  districts,  and  rarely
farther  up  the  Ohio  than  Louisville,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  place
it  rears  its  young.  Louisiana  seems  in  fact  better  suited  to  its  habits
than  any  other  state,  on  account  of  its  numerous  lakes,  creeks  and  lagoons,
overshadowed  by  large  trees,  and  which  are  favourite  places  of  resort  for
this  species.  It  is  fond  of  flying  over  the  water  of  these  creeks  and  la-
goons, and  is  seldom  seen  in  the  woods.  Its  flight  is  rapid,  and  more
steady  than  is  usual  in  birds  of  its  genus ; and  as  it  moves  along,  the
brightness  of  its  colours  attracts  the  eye.  On  alighting,  it  moves  rapidly
along  the  twigs,  partly  sidewise,  frequently  turning  about  and  extending
its  neck  to  look  under  the  leaves,  from^hich  it  picks  various  kinds  of
insects.  It  often  perches  upon  the  rank  grasses  and  water  plants,  in
quest  of  minute  molluscous  animals  which  creep  upon  them,  and  which,
together  with  small  land  snails,  I have  found  in  its  stomach.  It  does  not
perform  sorties,  or  sally  forth  after  flying  insects,  as  many  other  Warblers
are  in  the  habit  of  doing.  It  has  a few  notes  for  its  song,  which  possess
no  interest.  The  males,  when  chasing  each  other,  keep  up  a creaking
noise,  until  the  little  battle  is  over,  when  they  perch  and  balance  their
body  with  much  grace  and  liveliness.

I have  observed  their  arrival  in  Louisiana  to  take  place,  according  to
the  state  of  the  weather,  from  the  middle  of  March  to  the  first  of  April.
At  Henderson,  in  Kentucky,  they  do  not  arrive  until  a month  later.
They  remain  until  October,  but,  I am  inclined  to  believe,  rear  only  a sin-
gle brood  in  a season.  The  nest  is  fixed  in  the  fork  of  a small  twig  bend-
ing over  the  water,  and  is  constructed  of  slender  grasses,  soft  mosses,  and
fine  fibrous  roots.  The  number  of  eggs  is  from  four  to  six.  I could
never  ascertain  whether  the  male  assists  in  incubation,  as  the  difference
of  plumage  in  the  sexes  is  not  perceptible  when  the  bird  is  at  large,  and
indeed  can  hardly  be  traced  when  one  has  procured  the  male  and  the  fe-
male for  comparison.  It  cannot  be  called  a plentiful  species.  To  search


PROTHONOTARY  WARBLER.


23


for  them  on  the  high  lands,  or  at  any  considerable  distance  from  the
places  mentioned,  would  prove  quite  useless.

The  plant  on  which  you  see  these  birds,  grows  in  swampy  places,  but
is  extremely  rare,  and  I have  not  been  able  to  procure  any  scientific  ap-
pellation for  it.  In  Louisiana,  it  is  called  the  Cane  Vine.  It  bears  a
small  white  flower  in  clusters.  The  berries  are  bitter  and  nauseous.  The
stem,  which  runs  up  and  over  trees,  resembles  that  of  pother  climbing
plants,  is  extremely  elastic,  and  as  tough  as  a cord.  The  leaves,  of  which
you  see  the  form  and  colour,  are  also  tough  and  thick.

Sylvia  Proton-otarius,  Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  ii.  p.  642. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.
of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  86.

PROTHONOTARY  Warbler,  Syl-via  Protonotarius,  WUson,  Americ.  Ornith.
vol.  iii.  p.  72.  PI.  xxiv.  fig.  3.

Adult  Male.  Plate  III.  Fig.  1.  ^

Bill  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  slender,  tapering,  nearly  straight,  as
deep  as  broad  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half  closed
by  a membrane.  Head  rather  small.  Neck  short.  Body  rather  slender.
Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender;  tarsus  longer  than  the r middle  toe,
covered  anteriorly  with  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long : toes  scutel-
late  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size  ; claws  slender,
compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
first  and  second  quills  longest.  Tail  nearly  even,  of  twelve  straight,
rather  narrow  feathers.  Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  and
claws  greyish-blue.  Head  all  round,  neck  and  under  parts  generally,  of
a bright  rich  pure  yellow,  paler  on  the  abdomen,  and  passing  into  white
on  the  under  tail-coverts.  Fore  part  of  the  back  and  lesser  wing-coverts
yellowish-green.  Lower  back  and  wings  light  greyish-blue.  Inner  webs
of  the  quills  blackish.  Inner  webs  of  the  tail-feathers  bluish-grey  at  the
base,  then  white  to  near  the  tip,  which  is  black,  as  well  as  the  outer  webs.
The  two  middle  feathers  blackish,  tinged  with  greyish-blue.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  8^ ; beak  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus

Adult  Female.  Plate  III.  Fig.  %

The  differences  which  the  female  exhibits  are  so  slight  as  scarcely  to
be  describable,  the  tints  being  merely  a little  duller.


( 24  )


THE  PURPLE  FINCH.

Fringilla  purpurea,  Gmel.

• PLATE  IV.  Male  and  Female.

From  the  beginning  of  November  until  April,  flocks  of  the  Purple
Finch,  consisting  of  from  six  to  twenty  individuals,  are  seen  throughout
the  whole  of  Louisiana  and  the  adjoining  States.  They  fly  compactly,
with  an  undulating  motion,  similar  to  that  of  the  Common  Greenfinch  of
Europe.  They  alight  all  at  once,  and  after  a moment  of  rest,  and  as  if
frightened,  all  take  to  wing  again,  make  a circuit  of  no  great  extent,  and
return  to  the  tree  from  which  they  had  thus  started,  or  settle  upon  one
near  it.  Immediately  after  this,  every  individual  is  seen  making  its  way
toward  the  extremities  of  the  branches,  husking  the  buds  with  great
tact,  and  eating  their  internal  portion.  In  doing  this,  they  hang  like  so
many  Titmice,  or  stretch  out  their  necks  to  reach  the  buds  below.  Al-
though they  are  quite  friendly  among  themselves  during  their  flight,  or
while  sitting  without  looking  after  food,  yet,  when  they  are  feeding,  the
moment  one  goes  near  another,  it  is  strenuously  warned  to  keep  off  by
certain  unequivocal  marks  of  displeasure,  such  as  the  erection  of  the
feathers  of  the  head  and  the  opening  of  the  mouth.  Should  this  intima-
tion be  disregarded,  the  stronger  or  more  daring  of  the  two  drives  off  the
other  to  a different  part  pf  the  tree.  They  feed  in  this  manner  princb
pally  in  the  morning,  and  afterwards  retire  to  the  interior  of  the  woods.
Towards  sunset  they  reappear,  fly  about  the  skirts  of  the  fields  and
along  the  woods,  until,  having  made  choice  of  a tree,  they  alight,  and,  as
soon  as  each  bird  has  chosen  a situation,  stand  still,  look  about  them,
plume  themselves,  and  make  short  sallies  after  flies  and  other  insects,
but  without  interfering  with  each  other.  They  frequently  utter  a single
rather  mellow  clink,  and  are  seen  occupied  in  this  manner  until  near  sun-
set, when  they  again  fly  off  to  the  interior  of  the  forest.  I one  night
surprised  a party  of  them  roosting  in  a small  holly  tree,  as  I happened
to  be  brushing  by  it.  In  their  consternation  they  suddenly  started  all
together,  and  in  the  same  direction,,  when,  not  knowing. what  birds  they
were,  I shot  at  them  and  brought  down  two.

It  is  remarkable  that,  at  this  season,  males  in  full  beauty  of  plumage


PURPLE  FINCH.


25


are  as  numerous  as  during  the  summer  months  in  far  more  northern
parts,  where  they  breed ; and  you  may  see  different  gradations  of  plu-
mage, from  the  dingy  greenish-brown  of  the  female  and  ;young  to  the
richest  tints  of  the  oldest  and  handsomest  male  ; while  along  with  these
there  are  others  which,  by  my  habit  of  examining  birds,  I knew  to'  be
old,  and  which  are  of  a yellowish-green,  neither  the  colour  of  the  young
males,  nor  that  of  the  females,  but  a mixture  of  all.  v - -

The  song  of  the  Purple  Finch  is  sweet  and  continued,  and  I have  en-
joyed it  much  during  the  spring  and  summer  months,  in  the  mountain-
ous parts  of  Pennsylvania,  where  it  occasionally  breeds,  particularly
about  the  Great  Pine  Forest,  where,  although  I did  not  find  any  nests,
I saw  pairs  of  these  birds  flying  about  and  feeding  their  young,  which
could  not  have  been  many  days  out,  and  were  not  fully  fledged.  ’ The
food  which  they  carried  to  their  young  consisted  of  insects,  small  berries,
and  the  juicy  part  of  the  cones  of  the  spruce  pine.  .

They  frequently  associate  with  the  Common  Cross-bills,  feeding  on  the
same  trees,  and  like  them  are  at  times  fond  of  alightmg  against  the  mud
used  for  closing  the  log-houses.  They  are  seldom  seen  on  the  ground,
although  their  motions  there  are  by  no  means  embarrassed.  . They  are
considered  as  destructive ' birds  by  some  farmers,  who  accuse  them  of
committing  great  depredations  on  the  blossoms  of  their  fruit-trees.  I
never  observed  this  in  Louisiana,  where  they  remain  long  after  the  peach
and  pear  trees  are  in  full  bloom.  I have  eaten  many  of  them,  and  con-
sider their  flesh  equal  to  that  of  any  other  small  bird,  excepting  the  Rice
Bunting.


Fringilt.a  purpurea,  dmel.  Syst.  vol.  i.  p.  923 — LatJi.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  446.

Purple  Finch,  Fringilla  purpurea,  Wilson,  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  119,
PI.  7,  fig*  4.  Adult  Male ; and  vol.  v.  p.  87,  PI.  42,  fig.  3.  Male.

Adult  Male.  ‘ Plate  IV.  Fig.  1,  2.

Bill  shortish,  robust,  bulging,  conical,  acute ; upper  mandible  with
its  dorsal  outline  a little  convex,  under  mandible  with  its  outline  also
slightly  convex,  both  broadly  convex  transversely,  the  edges  straight  to
near  the  base,  where  they  are  a little  deflected.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish j
open,  partially  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck
.short  and  thick.  Body  full.  Legs  of  moderate  size  ; tarsUs  of  the  same
length  as  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a longitudinal  plate


PURPLE  FINCH.


26

above  and  a few  transverse  scutella  below,  posteriorly  with  an  acutely
angular  longitudinal  plate ; toes  scutellate  above,  free,  the  lateral  ones
nearly  equal ; claws  slender,  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  hind
toe  not  much  larger.

Plumage  compact  above,  blended  beneath,  wings  of  moderate  length,
jthird  and  fourth  primaries  longest,  second  and  first  very  little  shorter.
Tail  forked.  The  lateral  feathers  curved  outwards  toward  the  tip.

Bill  deep  brown  above,  paler  and  tinged  with  blue  beneath.  Iris
blackish-brown.  Feet  and  claws  brown.  Head,  neck,  breast,  back,  and
upper  tail-coverts  of  a rich  deep  lake,  approaching  to  crimson  on  the
head  and  neck,  and  fading  into  rose-colour  on  the  belly.  Fore  part  of
the  back  streaked  with  brown.  Quills  and  larger  coverts  deep  brown,
margined  externally  and  tipped  with  red.  Tail  feathers  deep  brown,
similarly  margined.  A narrow  band  of  cream-colour  across  the  fore-
head margining  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible.

Length  6 inches,  extent  of  wings  9,  beak  along  the  ridge  A?  along
the  gap  tarsus  f.

Female.  Plate  IV.  Fig.  S.

The  young  bird  so  closely  resembles  the  adult  female,  that  the  same
description  will  answer  for  both.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts
is  brownish-olive,  streaked  with  dark  brown.  There  is  a broadish  white
line  over  the  eye,  and  another  from  the  commissure  of  the  gap  back-
wards. The  under  parts  are  greyish  white,  the  sides  streaked  with  brown.
The  quills  and  tail-feathers  are  dark  brown,  margined  with  olive.


The  Red  Larch.

JLarix  america'na,  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  645.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Anier.

Sept.  vol.  iii.  p.  137.  PI*  4. — Mongecia  Polyandria,  Linn.  Conifers,  Juss.

This  species  of  larch,  which  is  distinguished  by  its  short,  deciduous,
fasciculate  leaves,  and  short  ovate  cones,  occurs  in  the  more  northern
parts  of  the  United  States,  and  in  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  mid-
dle states.  It  attains  a height  of  sixty  feet,  and  a diameter  sometimes  of
two  feet.  The  wood  is  highly  esteemed  on  account  of  its  excellent  qua-
lities.


( 27  )


BONAPARTE  S FLY  CATCHER.

Muscicapa  Bonapartii.

PLATE  V.  Male.  '

Whilst  I have  the  pleasure  of  honouring  this  beautiful  new  species
with  the  name  of  so  distinguished  a naturalist  as  Charles  Lucien
Bonaparte,  Prince  of  Musignano,  I regret  that  I am  unable  to  give  any
account  of  its  habits,  or  even  of  its  manner  of  flight,  and  must  therefore
confine  my  remarks  upon  it  within  very  brief  space.  The  following  ex-
tract from  my  journal  contains  all  that  I have  to  say  respecting  it.

‘‘  Monday,  August  ISth  1821. — Louisiana. — On  arriving  at  the
Cypress  Swamp  (about  five  miles  from  St  Francisville),  I saw  a great
number  of  small  birds  of  different  species,  and  as  I looked  at  them  I ob-
served two  engaged  in  a fight  or  quarrel.  I shot  at  them,  but  only  one
fell.  On  reaching  the  spot,  I found  the  bird  was  only  wounded,  and
saw  it  standing  still  and  upright  as  if  stupified  by  its  fall.  When  I
approached  it  to  pick  it  up,  it  spread  its  tail,  opened  its  wings,  and  snap-
ped its  bill  about  twenty  times  sharply  and  in  quick  succession,  as  birds
of  the  genus  do  when  seizing  insects  on  wing.  I carried  it  home,  and
had  the  pleasure  of  drawing  it  while  alive  and  full  of  spirit.  It  often
made  oiF  from  my  hand,  by  starting  suddenly,  and  then  would  hop  round
the  room  as  quickly  as  a Carolina  Wren,  uttering  its  tweet , tweet ^ tweet
all  the  while,  and  snapping  its  bill  every  time  I took  it  up.  I put  it  in-
to a cage  for  a few  minutes,  but  it  obstinately  thrust  its  head  through
the  lower  parts  of  the  wires.  I relieved  it  from  this  sort  of  confinement,
and  allowed  it  to  go  about  the  room.  Next  day  it  was  very  weak  and
ruffled  up,  so  I killed  it  and  put  it  in  spirits.”  To  this  account  I hav^
only  to  add,  that  I have  not  seen  another  individual  since.


Muscicapa  Bonapartii.  Plate  V,

Bill  of  .moderate  length,  straight,  subtrigonal,  depressed  at  the  base,
acute,  upper  mandible  slightly  notched  and  a little  inflected  at  the  tip,
lower  mandible  straight.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  roundish,  partly  cover-


28


BONAPARTE’S  FLY  CATCHER.


ed  by  the  frontal  feathers.  Head  and  neck  moderate.  Eyes  large.
Body  slender.  Legs  of  ordinary  size ; tarsus  a little  longer  than  the
middle  toe ; inner  toe  a little  united  at  the  base ; claws  compressed,
acute,  arched.

Plumage  ordinary,  blended.  Wings  rather  long,  somewhat  acute,
second  primary  longest.  Tail  rather  long,  nearly  even,  straight.  Basi-
rostral  feathers  bristly  and  directed  outwards.

Bill  brown  above,  yellowish  beneath,  orbits  yellow.  Iris  deep  brown.
Feet  and  claws  flesh-colour.  The  upper  parts  of  a light  greyish-blue,
the  quills  dusky,  their  outer  webs  blue,  the  two  first  margined  with
white.  Under  parts  and  forehead  ochre-yellow,  under  tail-coverts  whitish  ;
a few  dark  spots  on  the  upper  part  of  the  breast.

Length  5^  inches  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  gap  | ; tarsus  |.


The  Great  Magnolia.

Magnolia  grandiflora,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1255.  Pursh^  Flor.  Amer.
vol.  ii.  p.  380.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  iii.  p.  71.  PI.  i —
Polyandria  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn.  Magnolia;,  Juss.


■■  The  magnificent  tree,  of  which  a twig,  with  a cone  of  ripe  fruit,  is  re-
presented in  the  plate,  attains  a height  of  a hundred  feet  or  even  more.
The  bright  red  bodies  are  the  seeds,  suspended  by  a filament  for  some
-time  after  the  capsules  have  burst.  The  trunk  is  often  very  straight,
from  two  to  four  feet  in  diameter  at  the  base,  with  a greyish  smooth
bark.  The  leaves  which  remain  during  the  winter  are  stiff*  and  leathery,
smooth,  elliptical,  tapering  at  the  base.  " The’  flowers  are  white,  and
seven  or  eight  inches  in  diameter.  It  is  known  by  the  names  of  Large
Magnolia^  Big  Laurel  and  Bay-tree.^  and  occurs  abundantly  in  some
parts  of  Carolina,  Georgia,  the  Floridas  and  Louisiana.


( -29  )


THE  OHIO.

To  render  more  pleasant  the  task  which  you  have  imposed  upon  your-  ’
self,  of  following  an  author  through  the  mazes  of  descriptive  ornithology,
permit  me,  kind  reader,  to  relieve  the  tedium  which  may  be  apt  now  and
then  to  come  upon  you,  by  presenting  you  with  occasional  descriptions  of
the  scenery  and  manners  of  the  land  which  has  furnished  the  objects  that
engage  your  attention.  The  natural  features  of  that  land  are  not  less'
remarkable  than  the  moral  character  of  her  inhabitants ; and  I cannot  find
a better  subject  with  which  to  begin,  than  one  of  those  magnificent  rivers,
that  roll  the  collected  v>^aters  of  her  extensive  territories  to  the  ocean.

When  my  wife,  my  eldest  son  (then  an  infant),  and  myself  were  re-
turning from  Pennsylvania  to  Kentucky,  we  found  it  expedient,  the
waters  being  unusually  low,  to  provide  ourselves  with  a sTaiff^  to  enable
us  to  proceed  to  our  abode  at  Henderson.  I purchased  a large,  common
dious,  and  light  boat  of  that  denomination.  We  procured  a mattress,
and  our  friends  furnished  us  with  ready  prepared  viands.  We  had  two
stout  Negro  rowers,  and  in  this  trim  we  left  the  village  of  Shippingport,
in  expectation  of  reaching  the  place  of  our  destination  in  a very  few  days.'

It  was  in  the  month  of  October.  The  autumnal  tints  already  deco-
rated the  shores  of  that  queen  of  rivers,  the  Ohio.  Every  tree  was
hung  with  long  and  flowing  festoons  of  different  species  of  vines,  many
loaded  with  clustered  fruits  of  varied  brilliancy,  their  rich  bronzed  car-
mine mingling  beautifully  with  the  yellow  foliage,  which  now  predomi-
nated over  the  yet  green  leaves,  reflecting  more  lively  tints  from  the  clear
stream  than  ever  landscape  painter  portrayed  or  poet  imagined.

The  days  were  yet  warm.  The  sun  had  assumed  the  rich  and  glow-
ing hue  which  at  that  season  produces  the  singular  phenomenon  called
there  the  “ Indian  Summer.”  The  moon  had. rather  passed  the  meri-
dian of  her  grandeur.  We  glided  down  the  river,  meeting  no  other
ripple  of  the  water  than  that  formed  by  the  propulsion  of  our  boat.
Leisurely  we  moved  along,  gazing  all  day  on  the  grandeur  and  beauty
of  the  wild  scenery  around  us.

Now  and  then,  a large  cat-fish  rose  to  the  surface  of  the  water  in  pur-
suit of  a shoal  of  fry,  whi'ch  starting  simultaneously  from  the  liquid  ele-


30


THE  OHIO.


meat,  like  so  many  silvery  arrows,  produced  a shower  of  light,  while  the
pursuer  with  open  jaws  seized  the  stragglers,  and,  with  a splash  of  his  tail,
disappeared  from  our  view.  Other  fishes  we  heard  uttering  beneath  our
bark  a rumbling  noise,  the  strange  sounds  of  which  we  discovered  to
proceed  from  the  white  perch,  for  on  casting  our  net  from  the  bow  we
caught  several  of  that  species,  when  the  noise  ceased  for  a time.

Nature,  in  her  varied  arrangements,  seems  to  have  felt  a partiality
towards  this  portion  of  our  country.  As  the  traveller  ascends  or  de-
scends the  Ohio,  he  cannot  help  remarking  that  alternately,  nearly  the
whole  length  of  the  river,  the  margin,  on  one  side,  is  bounded  by  lofty
hills  and  a rolling  surface,  while  on  the  other,  extensive  plains  of  the
richest  alluvial  land  are  seen  as  far  as  the  eye  can  command  the  view.
Islands  of  varied  size  and  form  rise  here  and  there  from  the  bosom  of
the  water,  and  the  winding  course  of  the  stream  frequently  brings  you  to
places  where  the  idea  of  being  on  a river  of  great  length  changes  to  that
of  floating  on  a lake  of  moderate  extent.  Some  of  these  islands  are  of
considerable  size  and  value ; while  others,  small  and  insignificant,  seem  as
if  intended  for  contrast,  and  as  serving  to  enhance  the  general  interest  of
the  scenery.  These  little  islands  are  frequently  overflowed  during  great
freshets  or  floods,  and  receive  at  their  heads  prodigious  heaps  of  drifted
timber.  We  foresaw  with  great  concern  the  alterations  that  cultivation
would  soon  produce  along  those  delightful  banks.

As  night  came,  sinking  in  darkness  the  broader  portions  of  the  river,
our  minds  became  affected  by  strong  emotions,  and  wandered  far  beyond
the  present  moments.  The  tinkling  of  bells  told  us  that  the  cattle  which
bore  them  were  gently  roving  from  valley  to  valley  in  search  of  food,  or
returning  to  their  distant  homes.  The  hooting  of  the  Great  Owl,  or  the
muffled  noise  of  its  wings  as  it  sailed  smoothly  over  the  stream,  were
matters  of  interest  to  us ; so  was  the  sound  of  the  boatman’s  horn,  as  it
came  winding  more  and  more  softly  from  afar.  When  daylight  return-
ed, many  songsters  burst  forth  with  echoing  notes,  more  and  more  mel-
low to  the  listening  ear.  Here  and  there  the  lonely  cabin  of  a squatter
struck  the  eye,  giving  note  of  commencing  civilization.  The  crossing  of
the  stream  by  a deer  foretold  how  soon  the  hills  would  be  covered  with
snow.

Many  sluggish  flat-boats  we  overtook  and  passed : some  laden  with
produce  from  the  different  head- waters  of  the  small  rivers  that  pour  their
tributary  streams  into  the  Ohio ; others,  of  less  dimensions,  crowded  with


THE  OHIO.


31


emigrants  from  distant  parts,  in  search  of  a new  home.  Purer  pleasures
I never  felt ; nor  have  you,  reader,  I ween,  unless  indeed  you  have  felt
the  like,  and  in  such  company.

The  margins  of  the  shores  and  of  the  river  were  at  this  season  amply
supplied  with  game.  A Wild  Turkey,  a Grouse,  or  a Blue-winged
Teal,  could  be  procured  in  a few  moments ; and  we  fared  well,  for,
whenever  we  pleased,  we  landed,  struck  up  a fire,  and  provided  as  we
were  with  the  necessary  utensils,  procured  a good  repast.

Several  of  these  happy  days  passed,  and  we  neared  our  home,  when,
one  evening,  not  far  from  Pigeon  Creek  (a  small  stream  which  runs  into
the  Ohio,  from  the  State  of  Indiana),  a loud  and  strange  noise  was  heard,
so  like  the  yells  of  Indian  warfare,  that  we  pulled  at  our  oars,  and  made
for  the  opposite  side  as  fast  and  as  quietly  as  possible.  The  sounds  in-
creased, we  imagined  we  heard  cries  of  ‘‘  murder  and  as  we  knew  that
some  depredations  had  lately  been  committed  in  the  country  by  dissatis-
fied parties  of  Aborigines,  we  felt  for  a while  extremely  uncomfortable.
Ere  long,  however,  our  minds  became  more  calmed,  and  we  plainly  dis-
covered that  the  singular  uproar  was  produced  by  an  enthusiastic  set  of
Methodists,  who  had  wandered  thus  far  out  of  the  common  way,  for  the
purpose  of  holding  one  of  their  annual  camp  meetings,  under  the  shade
of  a beech  forest.  AVithout  meeting  with  any  other  interruption,  we
reached  Henderson,  distant  from  Shippingport  by  water  about  two  hun-
dred miles.

When  I think  of  these  times,  and  call  back  to  my  mind  the  grandeur
and  beauty  of  those  almost  uninhabited  shores ; when  I picture  to  my-
self the  dense  and  lofty  summits  of  the  forest,  that  everywhere  spread
along  the  hills,  and  overhung  the  margins  of  the  stream,  unmolested  by
the  axe  of  the  settler ; when  I know  how  dearly  purchased  the  safe  navi-
gation of  that  river  has  been  by  the  blood  of  many  worthy  Virginians ;
when  I see  that  no  longer  any  Aborigines  are  to  be  found  there,  and
that  the  vast  herds  of  elks,  deer  and  buffaloes  which  once  pastured  on
these  hills  and  in  these  valleys,  making  for  themselves  great  roads  to  the
several  salt-springs,  have  ceased  to  exist;  when  I reflect  that  all  this
grand  portion  of  our  Union,  instead  of  being  in  a state  of  nature,  is  now
more  or  less  covered  with  villages,  farms,  and  towns,  where  the  din  of
hammers  and  machinery  is  constantly  heard ; that  the  woods  are  fast
disappearing  under  the  axe  by  day,  and  the  fire  by  night ; that  hun-
dreds of  steam-boats  are  gliding  to  and  fro,  over  the  whole  length  of  the


32


THE  OHIO,


majestic  river,  Torcing  commerce  to  take  root  and  to  prosper  at  every
spot ; when  I see  the  surplus  population  of  Europe  coming  to  assist
in  the  destruction  of  the  forest,  and  transplanting  civilization  into  its
darkest  recesses when  I remember  that  these  extraordinary  changes
have  all  taken  place  in  the  short  period  of  twenty  years,  I pause,  wonder,
and,  although  I know  all  to  be  fact,  can  scarcely  believe  its  reality.

Whether  these  changes  are  for  the  better  or  for  the  worse,  I shall  not
pretend  to  say  ; . but  in  whatever  way  my  conclusions  may  incline,  I feel
with  regret  that  there  are  on  record  no  satisfactory  accounts  of  the  state
of  that  portion  of  the  country,  from  the  time  when  our  people  first  set-
tled in  it.  This  has  not  been  because  no  one  in  America  is  able  to  ac-
complish such  an  undertaking.  Our  Irvings  and  our  Coopers  have
proved  themselves  fully  competent  for  the  task.  It  has  more  probably
been  because  the  changes  have  succeeded  each  other  with  such  rapidity,
as  almost  to  rival  the  movements  of  their  pen.  However,  it  is  not  too
late  yet ; and  I sincerely  hope  that  either  or  both  of  them  will  ere  long
furnish  the  generations  to  come  with  those  delightful  descriptions  which
they  are  so  well  qualified  to  give,  of  the  original  state  of  a country  that
has  been  so  rapidly  forced  to  change  her  form  and  attire  under  the  influ^
ence  of  increasing  population.  Yes  ; I hope  to  read,  ere  I close  my
earthly  career,  accounts  from  those  delightful  writers  of  the  progress  of
civilization  in  our  western  country.  They  will  speak  of  the  Clarks,
the  Croghans,  the  Boons,  and  many  other  men  of  great  and  daring
enterprise.  They  will  analyze,  as  it  were,  into  each  component  part,  the
country  as  it  once  existed,  and  will  render  the  picture,  as  it  ought  to  be,
immortal.


( 33  )


THE  WILD  TURKEY.

Melejgris  Gallopavo,  Linn.

PLATE  VI.  Female  AND  Young.

The  Male  Turkey  has  already  been  described,  and  you  have  seen  that
magnificent  bird  roaming  in  the  forests,  approaching  the  haunts  of  man,
and  performing  all  the  offices  for  which  he  is  destined  in  the  economy  of
nature.  Here  you  have  his  mate,  now  converted  into  a kind  and  anxi-
ous parent,  leading  her  young  progeny,  with  measured  step  and  watchful
eye,  through  the  intricacies  of  the  forest.  The  chickens,  still  covered
with  down,  are  running  among  her  feet  in  pursuit  of  insects.  One  is
picking  its  sprouting  plumelets,  while  another  is  ridding  itself  of  a tick
which  has  fastened  upon  its  little  wing.

In  addition  to  what  has  already  been  said  respecting  the  manners  of
the  Wild  Turkey,  I have  a few  circumstances  to  mention,  which  relate
chiefly  to  both  sexes.  Its  flight  is  powerful  and  rapid,  and  is  composed
of  strong  flappings,  which  enable  it  to  rise  with  ease  to  the  highest
branches  of  the  largest  forest  trees.  When  it  starts  from  the  ground,  it
generally  leaves  marks  which  are  made  by  the  first  motions  of  its  wings,
which  are  so  powerful  as  raise  the  withered  leaves  around  it.  When  the
ground  is  covered  with  snow,  the  impressions  are  so  distinctly  defined  as
to  imitate  the  form  of  the  pinions.  When  it  leaves  its  perch,  it  flaps  its
wings  only  a few  times  at  the  outset,  and  then  sails  for  many  hundred
yards,  balancing  itself  as  it  proceeds,  with  great  steadiness,  until  it  reaches
the  ground.  If  it  has  flown  from  its  perch  with  the  view  of  reaching
another,  it  repeats  the  flappings  at  intervals  of  a hundred  yards  or  so.
On  coming  to  the  ground,  it  is  obliged  to  run  for  a few  yards,  its  great
weight  rendering  this  necessary  to  prevent  its  body  from  being  injured.

The  great  strength  of  a full  grown  Turkey-cock  renders  it  no  easy
matter  to  hold  it  when  but  slightly  wounded ; and  once  or  twice  I have
thought  myself  in  jeopardy,  when  on  entering  a pen  in  which  six  or  seven
large  cocks  had  imprisoned  themselves,  their  flutterings  and  struggles
rendered  it  extremely  difficult  to  secure  them.

The  Female  Turkey,  which  is  considerably  inferior  in  size  to  the

c


34


WILD  TURKEY,


male,  differs  further  from  him  in  wanting  the  spurs  and  pendulous  wat-
tles, in  having  the  frontal  papilla  much  smaller,  the  naked  space  of  the
neck  less,  and  the  colours  much  duller,  although  similar  in  distribution.
The  naked  parts  of  the  head  and  neck  are  more  furnished  with  bristly
feathers,  and  are  of  a light  blue  colour,  with  reddish  tints  interspersed.
The  bill,  the  eyes,  and  the  feet,  are  of  the  same  colour  as  in  the  male,
the  latter  considerably  paler.  There  is  a line  of  short  bristly  dark-co-
loured feathers  down  the  back  of  the  neck.  The  general  colour  of  the
upper  and  under  parts  is  greyish-brown,  with  metallic  bronzed  reflec-
tions, each  feather  terminated  by  a band  of  black.  On  the  lower  back
the  brown  tints  become  brighter,  and  on  the  rump  and  upper  tail-coverts
change  into  bright  chestnut,  with  transverse  bands  of  brown.  The
ground  colour  of  the  tail  is  pale  yellowish-brown,  transversely  barred
and  mottled  as  in  the  male,  and  with  a broad  subterminal  band  of  brown-
ish-black, beyond  which  the  feathers  are  mottled,  and  finally  terminated
by  uniform  light  brown.  The  abdominal  region  is  dull  brownish-grey.
The  primary  quills  are  greyish-white,  barred  with  brownish-black  ; the
secondaries  brownish-grey,  similarly  barred.  The  wing-coverts  are  si-
milar to  the  feathers  of  the  back.

Length  3 feet  1 inch,  extent  of  wings  4 feet  6 inches ; bill  1 inch
along  the  ridge,  l|  along  the  gap ; tarsus  6 ; middle  toe  3f,  hind  toe  1|,,
pectoral  appendage  4 inches.

The  young,  a few  days  old,  are  pale  brownish-yellow  above,  pale  yel-
lowish-grey beneath,  the  top  of  the  head  brighter,  marked  in  the  middle
with  a longitudinal  pale  brown  band,  the  back  and  wings  spotted  with
brownish-black,  excepting  the  lesser  wing-coverts,  which  are  uniformly
dull  brown.  Iris  yellowish-brown  ; bill  and  feet  flesh-coloured.


( 35  )


PURPLE  GRAKLE  OR  COMxMON  CROW-BLACKBIRD.

Quiscjlus  versicolor.  Vie  ill.

PLATE  VII.  Male  and  Female.

I COULD  not  think  of  any  better  mode  of  representing  these  birds  than
that  which  I have  adopted,  as  it  exhibits  them  in  the  exercise  of  their  ne-
farious propensities.  Look  at  them  : The  male,  as  if  full  of  delight  at  the
sight  of  the  havoc  which  he  has  already  committed  on  the  tender,  juicy,
unripe  corn  on  which  he  stands,  has  swelled  his  throat,  and  is  calling  in
exultation  to  his  companions  to  come  and  assist  him  in  demolishing  it.
The  female  has  fed  herself,  and  is  about  to  fly  off  with  a well-loaded  bill
to  her  hungry  and  expectant  brood,  that,  from  the  nest,  look  on  their
plundering  parents,  joyously  anticipating  the  pleasures  of  which  they  shall
ere  long  be  allowed  to  participate.  See  how  torn  the  husk  is  from  the  ear,
and  how  nearly  devoured  the  grains  of  corn  already  are ! This  is  the
tithe  our  Blackbirds  take  from  our  planters  and  farmers  ; but  it  was  so
appointed,  and  such  is  the  will  of  the  beneficent  Creator.

These  birds  are  constant  residents  in  Louisiana.  I say  they  are  so,  be-
cause a certain  number  of  them,  which  in  some  countries  would  be  called
immense,  is  found  there  at  all  seasons  of  the  year.  No  sooner  has  the
cotton  or  corn  planter  begun  to  turn  his  land  into  brown  furrows,  than
the  Crow-Blackbirds  are  seen  sailing  down  from  the  skirts  of  the  woods,
alighting  in  the  fields,  and  following  his  track  along  the  ridges  of  newly-
turned  earth,  with  an  elegant  and  elevated  step,  which  shews  them  to  be
as  fearless  and  free  as  the  air  through  which  they  wing  their  way.  The
genial  rays  of  the  sun  shine  on  their  silky  plumage,  and  offer  to  the  plough-
man’s  eye  such  rich  and  varying  tints,  that  no  painter,  however  gifted,
could  ever  imitate  them.  The  coppery  bronze,  which  in  one  light  shews
its  rich  gloss,  is,  by  the  least  motion  of  the  bird,  changed  in  a moment
to  brilliant  and  deep  azure,  and  again,  in  the  next  light,  becomes  reful-
gent sapphire  or  emerald-green.

The  bird  stops,  spreads  its  tail,  lowers  its  wings,  and,  with  swelled
throat  and  open  bill,  sounds  a call  to  those  which  may  chance  to  be  pass-
ing near.  The  stately  step  is  resumed.  Its  keen  eye,  busily  engaged  on
either  side,  is  immediately  attracted  by  a grub,  hastening  to  hide  itself

c 2


3G


PURPLE  GRAKLE.


iTom  the  sudden  exposure  made  by  the  plough.  In  vain  does  it  hurry,
for  the  Grakle  has  seen  and  marked  it  for  its  own,  and  it  is  snatched  up
and  swallowed  in  a moment.

Thus  does  the  Grakle  follow  the  husbandman  as  he  turns  one  furrow
after  another,  destroying  a far  worse  enemy  to  the  corn  than  itself,  for
every  worm  which  it  devours  would  else  shortly  cut  the  slender  blade,  and
thereby  destroy  the  plant  when  it  would  perhaps  be  too  late  to  renew  it
by  fresh  seed.  Every  reflecting  farmer  knows  this  well,  and  refrains  from
disturbing  the  Grakle  at  this  season.  Were  he  as  merciful  at  another
time,  it  would  prove  his  grateful  recollection  of  the  services  thus  render-
ed him.  But  man  is  too  often  forgetful  of  the  benefit  which  he  has  re-
ceived ; he  permits  his  too  commonly  weak  and  selfish  feelings  to  prevail
over  his  reason  ; and  no  sooner  does  the  corn  become  fit  for  his  own  use,
than  he  vows  and  executes  vengeance  on  all  intruders.  But  to  return  to
our  Blackbird.

The  season  of  love  has  arrived.  Each  male  having,  by  assiduity,  va-
lour, or  good  fortune,  received  the  affectionate  regards  of  a faithful  mate,
unites  with  her  in  seeking  a safe  and  agreeable  retreat.  The  lofty  dead
trees  left  standing  in  our  newly  cultivated  fields,  have  many  holes  and
cavities,  some  of  which  have  been  bored  by  woodpeckers,  and  others
caused  by  insects  or  decay.  These  are  visited  and  examined  in  succes-
sion, until  a choice  being  made,  and  a few  dry  weeds  and  feathers  collect-
ed, the  female  deposits  her  eggs,  which  are  from  four  to  six  in  number,
of  a bluish  tint,  blotched  and  streaked  with  brown  and  black.  She
sits  upon  them  while  her  valiant  mate  and  guardian  mounts  to  the
summit  of  a broken  branch,  pours  forth  his  rude  notes,  and  cheers  and
watches  her  with  the  kindest  and  most  unremitting  care.  I think  I see
Inm  plunging  through  the  air  and  overtaking  the  Red-headed  or  the
Golden- winged  Woodpecker,  which,  in  search  of  their  last  year’s  nest,
liave  imprudently  alighted  at  the  entrance  of  the  already  chosen  and  oc-
cupied hole.  The  conflict  is  but  momentary  ; the  creeping  bird  is  forced
to  yield,  and  after  whirling  round  in  the  air  as  it  defends  itself,  and  very
nearly  comes  to  the  ground,  makes  the  best  of  its  way  off,  well  knowing
that  there  its  opponent  is  more  formidable  than  even  in  the  air.

This  over,  the  Grakle  roams  in  quest  of  food.  Little  heaps  of  gimbs,
with  a few  grains  of  corn,  afford  delicious  repasts  to  himself  and  his  mate.
They  thus  share  the  labours  of  incubation,  and  see  the  time  pass  in  eager
and  pleasant  expectation.  And  now  the  emerging  brood  shake  off  the


PURPLE  GRAKLE.


87.

shell  that  so  long  enclosed  them ; their  tottering  heads  are  already  raised
toward  their  mother,  while  she,  with  intense  anxiety,  dries  and  cherishes
them.  They  grow  op  day  after  day.  The  hole  becomes  nearly  filled
with  their  increased  bulk.  The  vigilance  and  industry  of  the  parents  also
augment  apace.  I wish,  good-natured  reader,  you  would  seek  out  such
a sight : it  would  gladden  your  heart,  for  the  rearing  of  such  a family  is
worthy  of  your  contemplation.

It  is  with  regret  that  I must  turn  from  this  picture.  I have  already
told  you  that  the  Grakles  are  at  least  as  fond  of  corn  as  the  lords  of  the
land  are.  Hark  to  the  sound  of  rattles,  and  the  hallooing  of  the  farmer’s
sons  and  servants,  as  they  spread  over  the  field  ! Now  and  then  the  report
of  a gun  comes  on  the  ear.  The  Grakles  have  scarcely  a single  moment
of  quiet ; they  are  chased,  stolen  upon,  and  killed  in  great  numbers,  all
the  country  round  ; but  the  hungry  birds  heed  not  the  slaughter  of  their
brethren.  They  fly  in  flocks  from  place  to  place,  and,  in  spite  of  all  that
the  farmer  has  done  or  threatens  to  do,  continue  their  depredations.
Food  must  be  had.  Grubs  and  worms  have  already  retired  to  their  win-
ter quarters  within  the  earth  ; no  beech-nuts  or  acorns  have  yet  fallen
from  the  trees ; corn  is  now  their  only  resource,  and  the  quantity  of  it
which  they  devour  is  immense.

Now  gloomy  November  brings  up  its  cold  blasts  from  the  north,  and
drives  before  it  the  Grakles  from  the  Eastern  States.  They  reach  Loui-
siana and  all  the  Southern  States  when  autumn  has  not  yet  retired,  when
the  weather  is  still  mild  and  serene,  and  the  yellow  foliage  of  the  wide
woods  gives  shelter  to  myriads  of  birds.  The  Grakles,  congregated  in
prodigious  flocks,  alight  on  the  trees  that  border  the  vast  forests,  cover-
ing every  twig  and  bough  in  such  astonishing  masses,  that  the  most  un-
skilful or  most  avaricious  gunner  finds  no  difficulty  in  satisfying  his  wish
for  sport  or  game.  This  is  the  time  to  listen  to  their  choruses.  They
seem  to  congratulate  each  other  on  their  escape,  and  vociferate  at  such  a
rate  as  to  make  one  imagine  their  number  double  what  it  is.

Beech-nuts  and  acorns  are  now  abundant  in  the  woods,  having  by  this
time  fallen  from  the  trees,  and  the  Grakles  roam  in  quest  of  them  in  im-
mense bodies,  rising  on  wing  when  disturbed,  uttering  at  the  same  time
a tremendous  noise,  then  making  a few  rounds,  and  alighting  again.
They  thus  gradually  clear  away  the  mast,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  wild
pigeons  are  wont  to  do.  As  the  weather  becomes  colder,  they  frequent
the  farms,  and  even  resort  to  the  cattle  pens,  where,  from  among  the  litter


38


PURPLE  GRAKLE.


and  refuse  straw,  they  pick  the  scattered  grains  that  have  fallen  from  the
stores  with  which  the  farmer  has  supplied  his  stock.  They  remain  about
the  farms  until  the  commencement  of  spring.  They  are  easily  caught  in
traps,  and  shew  little  fear  when  seized,  biting  so  severely  as  often  to  draw
blood,  and  laying  hold  with  their  claws  in  a very  energetic  manner.

During  the  winter  of  1821,  I caught  a number  of  them,  as  well  as
many  other  birds,  for  the  purpose  of  sending  them  alive  to  Europe.  The
whole  of  my  captives  were  confined  together  in  a large  cage,  where  they
were  well  fed  and  watered,  and  received  all  necessary  attention.  Things
went  on  favourably  for  several  days,  and  I with  pleasure  saw  them  be-
coming daily  more  gentle.  An  unexpected  change,  however,  soon  took
place,  for  as  the  Grakles  became  reconciled  to  confinement,  they  began
to  attack  the  other  birds,  beating  and  killing  one  after  another  so  fast
that  I was  obliged  to  remove  them  from  the  cage.  Even  this  did  not
prevent  further  breach  of  the  peace,  for  the  strong  attacked  and  killed
the  weak  of  their  own  race,  so  that  only  a few  remained  in  the  end.  The
Grakles  thus  mangled,  killed  and  partially  devoured  several  Cardinal
Grosbeaks,  Doves,  Pigeons,  and  Blue  Jays.  I look  upon  this  remarkable
instance  of  ferocity  in  the  Grakle  with  the  more  amazement,  as  I never
observed  it  killing  any  bird  Avhen  in  a state  of  freedom.

What  I have  said  respecting  the  Purple  Grakle  (which  by  some  is  im-
properly named  the  Boat-tailed  Grakle)  refers  particularly  to  the  habits
of  those  in  the  south,  where  some  of  them  are  found  at  all  seasons.  I
shall  now  speak  of  those  of  the  Western  and  Middle  States.  Most  of  these
birds  leave  the  south  about  the  middle  of  February,  setting  out  in  small
detached  flocks.  They  reach  the  State  of  New  York  in  this  straggling
manner  about  the  middle  of  May.  Their  migratory  flight  is  performed
in  short  undulating  lines,  resembling  small  segments  of  very  large  circles.
It  may  be  explained  in  this  manner.  Supposing,  the  bird  poised  in  the
air  and  intent  on  moving  forwards,  it  propels  itself  by  a strenuous  flap  of
the  wings,  which  carries  it  forward  in  a curve,  along  which  it  ascends  un-
til it  attains  the  level  of  its  original  point  of  departure,  when  it  flaps  its
wings  again,  and  performs  another  curve.  In  this  form  of  flight  they
pursue  their  long  journey,  during  which  they  keep  up  a continual  low
chattering,  as  if  they  were  discussing  some  important  question.  When
they  reach  Pennsylvania,  they  commence  the  avocations  which  I have  al-
ready described,  and  are  seen  following  the  plough,  while  their  kindred
that  have  been  left  in  Louisiana  are  probably  by  this  time  feeding  their


PURPLE  GRAKLE.


39


^oung,  as  the  difference  of  climate  between  these  latitudes  leaves  the
northern  states  a month  later  in  their  seasons  than  the  southern.

In  the  Northern  States  these  birds  construct  their  nests  in  a much  more
perfect,  and  therefore  more  natural  manner.  A pine  tree,  whenever  it
occurs  in  a convenient  place,  is  selected  by  preference,  its  dense  foliage
and  horizontal  branches  being  well  adapted  for  nidification.  There  the
Grakle  forms  a nest,  which  from  the  ground  might  easily  be  mistaken  for
that  of  our  Robin,  the  Tiirdus  migratorms,  were  it  less  bulky.  But  it
is  much  larger,  and  instead  of  being  placed  by  itself,  is  associated  with
others,  often  to  the  number  of  a dozen  or  more,  on  the  horizontal  arms  of
the  pine,  forming  tier  above  tier,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  branches.
The  centre  of  the  nest  is  what  I would  call  saddled  on  the  bough,  the
materials  being  laid  so  that  the  nest  is  thinner  in  its  middle  part  and
thicker  at  the  two  opposite  sides,  so  as  to  have  a firm  hold.  It  is  about  six
inches  in  diameter  outside,  and  four  inches  within,  the  depth  being  the
same,  and  is  composed  of  grass,  slender  roots  and  mud,  lined  with  hair
and  finer  grasses.  I had  a white  pine-tree  in  one  of  my  fields  on  Mill
Grove  Farm,  on  which  many  of  these  birds  bred  every  spring,  when  some
mischievous  lads  frequently  amused  themselves  with  beating  down  the
nests  with  long  fishing-rods,  to  my  great  annoyance.  Some  of  the  Penn-
sylvanian farmers,  from  a very  laudable  motive,  have  given  out  that
Grakles  are  fond  of  pulling  up  the  garlic  plant,  so  injurious  to  the  pas-
tures of  the  Middle  States ; but  I am  sorry  to  say  this  assertion  is  by  no
means  correct,  and  were  these  good  people  to  look  to  the  Grakles  for  the
clearing  of  their  fields  from  that  evil,  they  might  wait  long  enough.

The  flesh  of  the  Purple  Grakle  is  little  better  than  that  of  the  Crow,
being  dry  and  ill-flavoured,  notwithstanding  which  it  is  frequently  used,
with  the  addition  of  one  or  two  Golden- winged  W oodpeckers  or  Redwings,
to  make  what  is  here  called  pot  pie^  even  amidst  a profusion  of  so  many
better  things.  The  eggs,  on  the  contrary,  are  very  delicate,  and  I am
astonished  that  those  who  are  so  anxious  for  the  destruction  of  these  birds
do  not  gratify  their  wishes  by  eating  them  while  yet  in  embryo  in  the  egg.
In  some  parts  of  Louisiana,  the  farmers,  or,  as  they  are  styled,  the  planters,
steep  the  seed  corn  for  a few  hours  in  a solution  of  Glauber’s  salt,  to  deter
the  Grakles  and  other  birds  from  eating  the  grains  when  just  planted,  as
we  term  it  in  America,  the  word  sow  being  seldom  employed  there  to  de-
note the  act  of  depositing  in  the  earth  even  the  smallest  seed.

The  Purple  Grakle  travels  very  far  north,  I have  found  it  everywhere


40


PURPLE  GRAKLE


during  my  peregrinations,  and  in  one  or  two  instances  have  seen  it  form
its  nest  in  the  fissures  of  rocks.


Quiscalus  versicolor,  Vieill.  Nouv.  Diet.  d’Hist.  Nat.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  488 — Ch.
Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  54. ; and  Americ.  Ornith.
vol.  i.  p.  42,  PI.  V.  fig.  1.  Female.

Gracula  Barita,  Gmel.  Syst.  vol.  i.  p.  396 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  p.  191.

Purple  Grakle,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  462.

Boat-tailed  Grakle,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  460. — Wilson,  Americ.  Ornith.
vol.  iii.  p.  44,  PI.  xxi.  fig.  4.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  VII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longish,  straight,  tapering,  compressed  from  the  base ; upper
mandible  prolonged  on  the  forehead,  forming  an  acute  angle  there,  a little
declinate  at  the  tip,  its  dorsal  outline  slightly  convex,  as  are  the  sides  ;
under  mandible  nearly  straight  in  its  lower  outline,  convex  on  the  sides,
acute  at  the  tip ; edges  of  both  acute,  of  the  lower  inflected  ; the  gap
line  deflected  at  the  base,  reaching  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  basal,
oval,  half  closed  by  a membrane.  Head  large,  rounded  above.  Neck  of
moderate  length,  thick.  Body  rather  robust.  Feet  of  moderate  length,
strong  ; tarsus  considerably  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly
with  longish  scutella,  shorter  below,  laterally  with  two  longitudinal  plates,
meeting  behind  at  an  acute  angle  ; lateral  toes  nearly  equal,  the  outer
connected  at  the  base  by  a membrane  ; claws  strong,  arched,  compressed,
acute.

Plumage  soft,  silky,  glossy,  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  length  ;
second,  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  first  and  fifth  nearly  equal  and
little  shorter.  Tail  longish,  of  twelve  feathers,  much  rounded,  concave
along  the  middle  above,  or  what  is  termed  boat-shaped.

Bill,  feet  and  claws  black.  Iris  bright-yellow.  Head,  neck,  and
upper  part  of  the  breast  blackish,  with  vivid  reflections  of  violet,  steel-
blue,  and  green.  General  colour  of  the  body  black,  with  bright-green,
purple  and  bronze-coloured  reflections  above,  dull  beneath.  Quills  and
tail-feathers  black,  the  latter  with  purple  and  green  reflections  ; seconda-
ries and  wing-coverts  tinged  with  brown.

I^ength  13  inches,  extent  of  wings  19  ; beak  IJ  along  the  ridge,
li  along  the  gap;  tarsus  IJ,  middle  toe  1|.


PURPLE  GRAKLE.


41


Adult  Female.  Plate  VII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  in  being  smaller,  in  having  the  tail
less  hollow  above,  and  in  the  less  brilliant  reflections  of  its  plumage,
which  has  more  of  a brown  tint.

Length  11  inches,  extent  of  wings  16  ; bill  1 along  the  ridge,  1|  along
the  gap.


The  Maize  or  Indian  Corn.

Zea  Mays,  TVilld.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iv.  p.  200.  Pursk,  Flor.  Americ.  p.  46 Mon(Ecia

Triandria,  Linn.  Graminea:,  Juss.

This  very  important  plant  is  abundantly  cultivated  in  all  parts  of
America.  As  it  is  generally  known,  and  as  I shall  have  occasion  to  speak
of  it  elsewhere,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  describe  it  here.


( 42  )


THE  WHITE-THROATED  SPARROW.

Fringilla  pennsylvanica.  Lath.

PLATE  VIIL  Male  and  Female.

This  pretty  little  bird  is  a visitor  of  Louisiana  and  all  the  southern
districts,  where  it  remains  only  a very  short  time.  Its  arrival  in  Louisia-
na may  be  stated  to  take  place  in  the  beginning  of  November,  and  its
departure  in  the  first  days  of  March.  In  all  the  Middle  States  it  remains
longer.  How  it  comes  and  how  it  departs  are  to  me  quite  unknown.  I
can  only  say,  that,  all  of  a sudden,  the  hedges  of  the  fields  bordering  on
creeks  or  swampy  places,  and  overgrown  with  different  species  of  vines,
sumach  bushes,  briars,  and  the  taller  kinds  of  grasses,  appear  covered
with  these  birds.  They  form  groups,  sometimes  containing  from  thirty
to  fifty  individuals,  and  live  together  in  harmony.  They  are  constantly
moving  up  and  down  among  these  recesses,  with  frequent  jerkings  of  the
tail,  and  uttering  a note  common  to  the  tribe.  From  the  hedges  and
thickets  they  issue  one  by  one  in  quick  succession,  and  ramble  to  the  dis-
tance of  eight  or  ten  yards,  hopping  and  scratching,  in  quest  of  small
seeds,  and  preserving  the  utmost  silence.  When  the  least  noise  is  heard,
or  alarm  given,  and  frequently,  as  I thought,  without  any  alarm  at  all,
they  all  fly  back  to  their  covert,  pushing  directly  into  the  very  thickest
part  of  it.  A moment  elapses,  when  they  become  reassured,  and  ascend-
ing to  the  highest  branches  and  twigs,  open  a little  concert,  which,  al-
though of  short  duration,  is  extremely  sweet.  There  is  much  plaintive
softness  in  their  note,  which  I wish,  kind  reader,  I could  describe  to  you ;
but  this  is  impossible,  although  it  is  yet  ringing  in  my  ear,  as  if  I were
in  those  very  fields  where  I have  so  often  listened  to  it  with  delight.  No
sooner  is  their  music  over  than  they  return  to  the  field,  and  thus  con-
tinue alternately  sallying  forth  and  retreating  during  the  greater  part  of
the  day.  At  the  approach  of  night,  they  utter  a sharper  and  shriller
note,  consisting  of  a single  twit,  repeated  in  smart  succession  by  the
whole  group,  and  continuing  until  the  first  hooting  of  some  owl  frightens
them  into  silence.  Yet,  often  during  fine  nights,  I have  heard  the  little
creatures  emit  here  and  there  a twit,  as  if  to  assure  each  other  that  all’s
well.”


WHITE-THROATED  SPARROW.


43


During  the  warmer  days,  they  remove  partially  to  the  woods,  but
never  out  of  reach  of  their  favourite  briar  thickets,  ascend  the  tops  of
hollies,  or  such  other  trees  as  are  covered  with  tangled  vines,  and  pick
either  a berry  or  a winter  grape.  Their  principal  enemies  in  the  day-
time, are  the  little  Sparrow  Hawk,  the  Slate-coloured  or  Sharp-shinned
Hawk,  and  above  all,  the  Hen-harrier  or  Marsh  Hawk.  The  latter
passes  over  their  little  coteries  with  such  light  wings,  and  so  unlooked
for,  that  he  seldom  fails  in  securing  one  of  them.

No  sooner  does  spring  return,  when  our  woods  are  covered  with  white
blossoms,  in  gay  mimicry  of  the  now  melted  snows,  and  the  delighted  eye
is  attracted  by  the  beautiful  flowers  of  the  Dog-wood  tree,  than  the
White-throated  Sparrow  bids  farewell  to  these  parts,  not  to  return  till
winter.  Where  it  spends  the  summer  I know  hot,  but  I should  think
not  within  the  States.

It  is  a plump  bird,  fattening  almost  to  excess,  whilst  in  Louisiana,
and  affords  delicious  eating,  for  which  purpose  many  are  killed  with
hlow-guns.  These  instruments — -should  you  not  have  seen  them — are
prepared  by  the  Indians,  who  cut  the  straightest  canes,  perforating  them
by  forcing  a hickery  rod  through  the  internal  partitions  which  intersect
this  species  of  bamboo,  and  render  them  quite  smooth  within  by  passing  the
rod  repeatedly  through.  The  cane  is  then  kept  perfectly  straight,  and  is
well  dried,  after  which  it  is  ready  for  use.  Splints  of  wood,  or  more  fre-
quently of  cane,  are  then  worked  into  tiny  arrows,  quite  sharp  at  one  end,
and  at  the  other,  instead  of  being  feathered,  covered  with  squirrel  hair  or
other  soft  substances,  in  the  manner  of  a bottle-brush,  so  as  to  fill  the
tube  and  receive  the  impulse  imparted  by  a smart  puff‘  of  breath,  which
is  sufficient  to  propel  such  an  arrow  with  force  enough  to  kill  a small
bird  at  the  distance  of  eight  or  ten  paces.  With  these  blow-guns  or
pipes,  several  species  of  birds  are  killed  in  large  quantities ; and  the
Indians  sometimes  procure  even  squirrels  by  means  of  them.

The  Dog-wood,  of  which  I have  represented  a twig  in  early  spring,
is  a small  tree  found  nearly  throughout  the  Union,  but  generally  prefer-
ring such  lands  as  with  us  are  called  of  second  quality,  although  it  occa-
sionally makes  its  appearance  in  the  richest  alluvial  deposits.  Its  height
seldom  exceeds  twenty  feet,  or  its  diameter  ten  inches.  It  is  scarcely
ever  straight  to  any  extent,  but  the  wood,  being  extremely  hard  and  com-
pact, is  useful  for  turning,  when  well  dried  and  free  of  wind-shakes,  to
which  it  is  rather  liable.  Its  berries  are  eaten  by  various  species  of  birds.


44


WHITE-THROATED  SPARROW.


and  especially  by  our  different  kinds  of  Squirrels,  all  of  which  shew  great
partiality  to  them.  Its  flowers,  although  so  interesting  in  early  spring,
are  destitute  of  odour,  and  of  short  duration.  The  bark  is  used  by  the
inhabitants  in  decoction  as  a remedy  for  intermittent  fevers,  and  the
berries  are  employed  by  the  housewife  for  dyeing  black.


Fringilla  pennsylvanica,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  445. — Ch.  Bonaparte,
Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  Slates,  p.  108.

White-throated  Sparrow,  Fringilla  albicollis,  Wils,  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  hi.
p.  51,  PI.  xxxi.  fig.  5.  Male.

White-throated  Finch,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iiL  p.  443.

Adult  Male.  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  conical,  acute ; upper  mandible  broader  than  the
lower,  scarcely  declinate  at  the  tip,  almost  straight  in  its  dorsal  outline,
as  is  the  lower,  both  being  rounded  on  the  sides,  and  the  lower  with  in-
flected, acute  edges  ; the  gap  line  nearly  straight,  a little  deflected  at  the
base,  and  not  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,
open,  partially  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck
shortish.  Body  robust.  Legs  of  moderate  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer
than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  longish  scutella ; toes
scutellate  above,  free,  the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  slender,  arched,
compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  hind  toe  rather  large.

Plumage  compact  above,  soft  and  blended  beneath.  Wings  short
and  curved,  rounded,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  the  first  much
shorter,  the  secondaries  long.  Tail  longish,  forked,  the  lateral  feathers
curved  outwards  towards  the  tip.

Upper  mandible  dark  brown,  its  edges  and  the  lower  mandible  light
blue.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  flesh-coloured,  claws  light  brown.  Upper  part
of  the  head  black,  with  a narrow  white  stripe  from  the  forehead  to  the
upper  part  of  the  neck.  A broader  white  stripe,  anteriorly  passing  into
bright  orange,  over  each  eye,  margined  by  a narrow  black  stripe  extend-
ing from  the  eye  down  the  neck.  Upper  part  of  the  back,  and  the  lesser
wing- coverts,  bright  bay,  variegated  with  black  ; lower  back  and  tail-
coverts  brownish-grey.  Quills  and  large  coverts  blackish,  margined  with
bay,  the  latter,  as  well  as  the  next  series,  tipped  with  white,  forming  two
conspicuous  bands  on  the  wing.  Tail  dusky  brown.  Throat  white  ;


WHITE-THROATED  SPARROW.


45


sides  and  fore-part  of  the  neck  and  breast  bluish-grey  ; the  rest  of  the
under  parts  greyish-white.

I.ength  6i  inches,  extent  of  wings  9 ; bill  along  the  ridge,  along
the  gap ; tarsus  IJ,  middle  toe  1.

Adult  Female.  Plate  VIII.  Fig.  %

In  the  female,  the  colours  are  similarly  arranged,  but  much  duller,  the
bright  bay  of  the  male  being  changed  into  reddish-brown,  the  black  into
dark  brown,  and  the  white  into  greyish-white.  The  white  streak  above
the  eye  is  narrower,  shorter,  and  anteriorly  less  yellow,  the  greyish-blue
of  the  breast  paler,  and  the  white  spot  on  the  throat  less  defined.

Length  6*|  inches,  extent  of  wings  8^ ; bill  J along  the  ridge,  ^ along
the  gap.


Dog-wood.

CoRNDS  FLORIDA,  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  vol.  i.  p.  66*1.  Michaux,  Abr.  Forest,  de  PAmer.
Sept.  t.  iii.  p.  138,  Pl.  iii.  Pursh^  Flora  Americ.  p.  108.— Tetrandria  Mono-
GYNiA,  Linn.  Caprifolia,  Juss.

A beautiful  small  tree,  generally  about  twenty  feet  in  height,  with
very  hard  wood ; darL  grey  bark,  cracked  into  squarish  compartments ;
ovate-elliptical,  acuminate  leaves,  which  are  light  green  above,  whitish
beneath  ; large,  obcordate  involucral  leaves ; and  bright-red  oval  berries.


f 46  )


SELBY’S  FLY-CATCHER.

Muse  I CAPA  Selbii,

PLATE  IX.  Male.

The  works  of  every  student  of  nature  are  always  pleasing  to  me,
and  it  is  with  delight  that  I see  the  number  of  such  students  daily  in-
creasing ; but  when  I meet  with  one  who,  regardless  of  the  labour  attend-
ing upon  figuring  in  their  full  size  the  objects  from  which  he  has  derived
his  knowledge,  my  heart  expands,  and  I hail  his  name  with  enthusiasm.
Mr  Selby’s  great  work  is  so  well  known  to  the  scientific  world,  that  I
need  only  here  mention  the  favour  which  its  accomplished  author  has  con-
ferred upon  me  by  permitting  me  to  decorate  one  of  my  pages  with  his
name,  in  quality  of  foster-father  to  a beautiful  and  hitherto  unknown
species  of  Fly-catcher.

As  this  bird,  to  the  day  on  which  my  engraving  of  it  appeared,  had
not  been  described,  or,  in  as  far  as  I know,  obtained  by  any  other  person
than  myself,  notwithstanding  the  great  number  of  individuals  who  have
of  late  years  been  searching  our  States  for  new  and  rare  species,  it  must
be  considered  as  of  very  unfrequent  occurrence,  and  probably  as  seldom
going  farther  north  or  east  than  the  place  where  I discovered  it.  More-
over, it  is  so  scarce  even  there,  that  in  all  my  walks  I only  shot  three  in-
dividuals, in  the  course  of  nine  years.  In  no  instance  have  I been  able
to  cultivate  its  society  longer  than  a few  minutes,  as,  before  it  might
escape  from  me,  I was  obliged  to  shoot  it,  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  that
it  was  indeed  a different  bird  from  any  figured  or  described  in  books.

My  journal,  under  the  date  of  1st  July  1821,  contains  the  following
statement : — “ I found  this  bird  about  three  miles  from  St  Francisville  in
Louisiana,  whilst  engaged  in  searching  for  a Turkey,  which  I had
wounded.  It  was  afternoon,  and  the  heat  oppressive.  I saw  it  inno-
cently approaching  us  until  within  a few  yards,  anxiously  looking,  as  if
trying  to  discover  our  intentions ; but  as  we  stood  motionless,  it  once
came  so  near  that  I could  easily  have  reached  it  with  my  gun  barrel.
It  moved  nimbly  among  the  twigs  of  the  low  bushes,  making  now  and
then  short  dashes  at  flies,  which  it  swallowed  after  killing  them  under
foot,  as  many  other  Fly-catchers  are  in  the  habit  of  doing,  then  peeping  at
us,  and  again  setting  off  in  pursuit  of  flies.  The  snapping  of  its  bill


SELBY’S  FLY  CATCHER.


47


when  seizing  an  insect,  was  sharp,  and  as  distinct  as  if  the  bird  had  been
in  my  hand.  At  length,  fearing  that  it  might  escape,  I desired  my
young  friend  Joseph  Mason  to  retire  further  from  it,  that  we  might
shoot  it.”

On  the  4th  July,  while  searching  with  care  about  the  same  place,  to
find  its  nest  or  the  female,  I shot  another  of  these  birds,  which  I found
to  be  a female.  It  differed  only  in  being  rather  smaller,  darker  above,
and  paler  beneath.  On  the  27th  September  of  the  same  year,  I shot
a second  male  in  beautiful  plumage,  six  or  seven  miles  off,  in  a different
direction,  in  the  same  State.  Finding  the  pretty  flower  on  which  the
bird  is  drawn,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  growing  wild,
although  I am  assured  it  is  originally  from  Europe,  I have  represented
it,  thinking  it  might  contrast  well  with  the  Fly-catcher  in  its  richly
coloured  flowers,  and  be  assimilated  to  it  in  that  of  its  stem  and  leaves.
This  flower  is  found  in  damp  places,  in  Louisiana  only,  at  least  I have
not  met  with  it  in  the  woods  of  any  other  State.


Selby’s  Fly-Catcheb,  MusCicapa  Selbii.

Adult  Male.  Plate  X.

Bill  longish,  depressed,  tapering  to  a sharp  point,  very  broad  at  the
base,  the  gap  reaching  to  nearly  under  the  eye ; upper  mandible  slightly
notched  and  inflected  at  the  tip  ; lower  straight.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,
linear.  Head  and  neck  of  moderate  size.  Body  somewhat  slender.
Feet  moderately  long,  slender ; tarsus  covered  with  short  scutella  above,
with  a longitudinal  keeled  plate  behind,  longer  than  the  middle  toe;
toes  slender,  unconnected  ; claws  small,  weak,  slightly  arched,  compres-
sed, acute.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  glossy.  The  beak  margined  at  the  base
with  long  spreading  bristles.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  third  quill
longest,  second  and  first  little  shorter,  the  other  quills  graduated.  Tail
rather  long,  forked  when  closed,  rounded  when  spread,  the  feathers
acuminate.

Bill  brown,  horn-colour  above,  passing  into  dark  flesh-colour  below.
Iris  dark  brown.  Legs,  feet,  and  claws  very  light  flesh-colour.  The
whole  upper  parts  dark  olive  ; wings  black,  the  feathers  margined  exter-
nally with  light  olive,  internally  with  white.  The  whole  under  parts,  in-


48


SELBY’S  FLY  CATCHER.


eluding  the  tail-coverts,  and  a broad  line  over  the  eyes,  rich  yellow.  The
three  external  feathers  of  the  tail  marked  internally  with  white,  the  first
more  so  than  the  second,  and  the  third  less  than  the  latter.  Shafts  of
the  quills  and  tail-feathers  aeep  brownish-black.  Basirostral  bristles
black.

Length  5L  inches,  extent  of  wings  7| ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ~ ; tarsus  1,  middle  toe  |.

The  female,  as  has  been  said,  is  nearly  similar,  the  distribution  of  the
colours  being  the  same.


Flos-Adonis.

Adonis  autumnalis,  Linn.  Sp.  PI.  p.  771*  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1304.  Smith.
Engl.  FI.  vol.  iii.  p.  43. — Polyandria  Pentagynia, //iwn.  Ranunculace^,
Juss.

This  plant,  vulgarly  named  PheasantVeye,  grows  in  Europe  in  corn-
fields. It  has  an  erect,  branched  stem,  with  copiously  pinnatifid,  alter-
nate, sessile,  dark  green  leaves,  the  segments  of  which  are  linear  and
acute,  and  deep  crimson  flowers,  having  a black  spot  near  the  claw  of
each  of  the  petals,  which  vary  from  six  to  ten.


2


( 49  )


THE  BROWN  TITLARK.

Anthus  Spinoletta.  Bonap.

PLATE  X.  Male  and  Female.

Although  this  species  is  met  with  in  every  portion  of  the  United
States  which  I have  visited,  I have  not  seen  it  anywhere  during  the  sum-
mer months,  or  heard  of  it  breeding  with  us.  It  is  one  of  the  birds  that
I should  call  gifted  with  a double  set  of  habits,  for,  like  a very  few
others  that  are  strictly  named  land  birds,  it  occurs  not  only  in  the  fields  in
the  interior  of  the  country,  but  also  on  the  borders  of  rivers,  and  even  on
the  shores  of  the  Atlantic,

Its  flight  is  extremely  easy,  and  what  I would  call  of  a beautiful  and
delicate  nature.  In  other  words,  these  birds  pass  and  repass  through  the
air,  performing  numberless  evolutions,  as  if  it  did  not  cost  them  the  least
labour  to  fly.  When  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  they  resort  to  the  old
fields,  and  the  vast  prairies,  as  well  as  the  ploughed  lands,  seldom  in
flocks  of  less  than  ten  or  a dozen,  and  not  unfrequently  by  hundreds.
Now,  they  are  seen  high,  loosely  moving  in  short  reiterated  undulations,
inspecting  the  ground  below;  now,  they  come  sweeping  over  and  close
to  it,  and  seem  about  to  alight,  when,  on  the  contrary,  their  ranks  close
in  an  instant,  they  wheel  about,  and  rise  again  into  the  air.  These  feats
are  often  repeated  six  or  seven  times,  when  at  last,  satisfied  as  to  their
safety,  or  the  abundance  of  food  in  the  spot,  they  alight,  and  immediately
run  about  in  quest  of  food.  They  run  briskly,  and  as  lightly  as  birds
usually  called  Larks  are  wont  to  do,  but  with  this  difference,  that  they
suffer  their  tails  to  vibrate  whenever  they  stop  running.  Again,  instead
of  squatting  partially  down,  as  true  I..arks  do,  to  pick  up  their  food,  they
move  their  body  upon  the  upper  joints  of  the  legs,  in  the  manner  of
Thrushes  and  other  birds.  Another  habit  seldom  found  in  the  Lark  ge-
nus is  that  of  settling  on  fences  and  trees,  and  walking  along  them  with
apparent  ease.  In  fact,  the  bird,  although  called  a Lark  by  Wilson  and
others,  belongs  to  the  Pipit  or  Titlark  family.

Whilst  residing  among  the  meadows  and  ploughed  fields,  these  birds
feed  on  insects  and  small  seeds,  picking  up  some  gravel  at  the  same  time.
Along  the  rivers,  or  on  the  sea-shores,  they  are  fond  of  running  as  near

n


50


BROWN  LARK.


the  edge  of  the  water  as  possible,  and  searching  among  the  drifted  leaves
and  weeds  for  such  insects  as  are  usually  found  there.  The  vibratory
motion  of  their  tail  is  now  more  perceptible,  being  quicker.  Their  feeble
notes  are  also  frequently  uttered.  When  shot  along  the  shores,  their
stomachs  have  been  found  filled  with  fragments  of  minute  shells,  as  well
as  small  shrimps,  and  other  garbage.  When  raised  by  the  report  of  a
gun,  they  rise  high,  and  sometimes  fly  to  a considerable  distance ; but
you  may  expect  their  return  to  the  same  spot,  if  you  keep  yourself  con-
cealed for  a few  minutes.  They  are  expert  fly-catchers,  inasmuch  as
they  leap  from  the  ground,  and  follow  insects  on  the  wing  for  several
feet  with  avidity.  The  company  of  cattle  is  agreeable  to  them,  so  much
so,  that  they  walk  almost  under  them  in  quest  of  insects.  When  in  fields,
the  Brown  Titlarks  are  often  seen  mixed  with  a few  other  birds  known
by  the  name  of  Winter  Larks,  the  habits  of  which  I shall  detail  in  my
next  volume.

The  species  now  under  consideration  reaches  Louisiana  about  .the
middle  of  October,  and  leaves  it  in  the  beginning  of  March.  I caught
some  of  these  birds  on  my  passage  from  France  to  the  United  States,  on
the  Great  Newfoundland  Banks.  They  came  on  board  wearied,  and  so
hungry  that  the  crumbs  of  biscuit  thrown  to  them  were  picked  up  with
the  greatest  activity.  I am  inclined  to  consider  the  Brown  Titlark
identical  with  the  Water  Pipit  of  Europe.

Anthus  Spinoletta,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  90.

Alauda  Spinoletta,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  p.  288.

Pipit  spioncelle,  Temm.  Man.  d’Ornith.  Part  i.  p.  205.

Brown  Lark,  Alauda  rufa,  Wilson,  Anier.  Ornith.  vol.  v.  p.  89.  PI.  42.  fig.  4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  X.  Fig.  1.

Bill  straight,  subulate,  depressed  at  the  base,  acute,  the  edges
slightly  inflected  at  the  middle,  the  gap  not  reaching  to  beneath  the
eyes ; upper  mandible  keeled  at  the  base,  afterwards  rounded,  slightly
notched  and  declinate  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  half  closed  above
by  a membrane.  Head  small.  Neck  slender.  Body  slender.  Feet
longish,  slender ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  longish  scu-
tella,  longer  than  the  middle  toe ; toes  scutellate  above,  granulated  be-
neath ; inner  toe  free  ; hind  toe  with  a very  long,  almost  straight
claw,  which,  together  with  the  rest,  is  slender,  compressed  and  acute


BROWN  LARK.


51


Plumage  blended,' soft,  with  little  gloss.  Wings  rather  long,  acute,
the  first,  second,  and  third  primaries  longest.  Tail  longish,  forked,  the
feathers  rather  narrow  and  sharpish.

Bill  brownish-black.  Legs  and  claws  deep  brown,  tinged  with
green.  Iris  brown.  Upper  parts  olive-brown  tinged  with  grey  ; throat
and  a line  over  the  eye  brownish-white.  Quills  brownish-black,  mar-
gined externally  with  whitish ; tail  of  the  same  colour,  the  outermost
feather  half  white,  the  next  obliquely  white  at  the  end.  Under  parts
reddish  white,  the  sides  of  the  neck  and  the  breast  longitudinally  spotted
with  dark  brown.

Length  6^  inches,  extent  of  wings  10^ ; bill  ^ along  the  ridge,
f along  the  gap ; tarsus  middle  toe  | ; hind  toe  f including  the  claw,
which  is  1%.

Adult  Female.  Plate  X.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  only  in  being  somewhat  smaller,  and
in  having  the  colours  paler,  and  the  upper  parts  more  tinged  with
brown.


( 52  )


THE  GREAT  PINE  SWAMP.

I LEFT  Philadelphia,  at  four  of  the  morning,  by  the  coach,  with  no  other
accoutrements  than  I knew  to  be  absolutely  necessary  for  the  jaunt  which
I intended  to  make.  These  consisted  of  a wooden  box,  containing  a small
stock  of  linen,  drawing  paper,  my  journal,  colours  and  pencils,  together
with  25  pounds  of  shot,  some  flints,  the  due  quantum  of  cash,  my  gun-
Tear-jacket^  and  a heart  as  true  to  nature  as  ever.

Our  coaches  are  none  of  the  best,  nor  do  they  move  with  the  velocity
of  those  of  some  other  countries.  It  was  eight,  and  a dark  night,  when  I
reached  Mauch  Chunk,  now  so  celebrated  in  the  Union  for  its  rich  coal
mines,  and  eighty-eight  miles  distant  from  Philadelphia.  I had  passed
through  a very  diversified  country,  part  of  which  was  highly  cultivated,
while  the  rest  was  yet  in  a state  of  nature,  and  consequently  much  more
agreeable  to  me.  On  alighting,  I was  shewn  to  the  travellers’  room,  and
on  asking  for  the  landlord,  saw  coming  towards  me  a fine-looking  young
man,  to  whom  I made  known  my  wishes.  He  spoke  kindly,  and  offered
to  lodge  and  board  me  at  a much  lower  rate  than  travellers  who  go  there
for  the  very  simple  pleasure  of  being  dragged  on  the  railway.  In  a word,
I was  fixed  in  four  minutes,  and  that  most  comfortably.

No  sooner  had  the  approach  of  day  been  announced  by  the  cocks  of
the  little  village,  than  I marched  out  with  my  gun  and  note-book,  to
judge  for  myself  of  the  wealth  of  the  country.  After  traversing  much
ground,  and  crossing  many  steep  hills,  I returned,  if  not  wearied,  at  least
much  disappointed  at  the  extraordinary  scarcity  of  birds.  So  I bargained
to  be  carried  in  a cart  to  the  central  parts  of  the  Great  Pine  Swamp,  and,
although  a heavy  storm  was  rising,  ordered  my  conductor  to  proceed.
We  winded  round  many  a mountain,  and  at  last  crossed  the  highest.
The  weather  had  become  tremendous,  and  we  were  thoroughly  drenched,
but  my  resolution  being  fixed,  the  boy  was  obliged  to  continue  his  driv-
ing. Having  already  travelled  about  fifteen  miles  or  so,  we  left  the  turn-
pike, and  struck  up  a narrow  and  bad  road,  that  seemed  merely  cut  out
to  enable  the  people  of  the  Swamp  to  receive  the  necessary  supplies  from
the  village  which  I had  left.  Some  mistakes  were  made,  and  it  was  al-
most  dark,  when  a post  directed  us  to  the  habitation  of  a Mr  Jediah
Irish,  to  whom  I had  been  recommended.  We  now  rattled  down  a steep
declivity,  edged  on  one  side  by  almost  perpendicular  rocks,  and  on  the


GREAT  PINE  SWAMP.


53


other  by  a noisy  stream,  which  seemed  grumbling  at  the  approach  of
strangers.  The  ground  was  so  overgrown  by  laurels  and  tall  pines  of
different  kinds,  that  the  whole  presented  only  a mass  of  darkness.

At  length  we  got  to  the  house,  the  door  of  which  was  already  opened,
the  sight  of  strangers  being  nothing  uncommon  in  our  woods,  even  in  the
most  remote  parts.  On  entering,  I was  presented  with  a chair,  while  my
conductor  was  shewn  the  way  to  the  stable,  and  on  expressing  a wish
that  I should  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  house  for  some  weeks,  I was
gratified  by  receiving  the  sanction  of  the  good  woman  to  my  proposal,  al-
though her  husband  was  then  from  home.  As  I immediately  fell  a-talk-
ing  about  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  inquired  if  birds  were  numerous
in  the  neighbourhood,  Mrs  Irish,  more  au  fait  to  household  affairs  than
ornithology,  sent  for  a nephew  of  her  husband's,  who  soon  made  his  ap-
pearance, and  in  whose  favour  I became  at  once  prepossessed.  He  convers-
ed like  an  educated  person,  saw  that  I was  comfortably  disposed  of,  and
finally  bade  me  good-night  in  such  a tone  as  made  me  quite  happy.

The  storm  had  rolled  away  before  the  first  beams  of  the  morning  sun
shone  brightly  on  the  vfet  foliage,  displaying  all  its  richness  and  beauty.
My  ears  were  greeted  by  the  notes,  always  sweet  and  mellow,  of  the  Wood
Thrush  and  other  songsters.  Before  I had  gone  many  steps,  the  woods
echoed  to  the  report  of  my  gun,  and  I picked  from  among  the  leaves  a
lovely  Sylvia,  long  sought  for,  but  until  then  sought  for  in  vain.  I need-
ed no  more,  and  standing  still  for  awhile,  I was  soon  convinced  that  the
Great  Pine  Swamp  harboured  many  other  objects  as  valuable  to  me.  '

The  young  man  joined  me,  bearing  his  ride,  and  offered  to  accompany
me  through  the  woods,  all  of  which  he  well  knew.  But  I was  anxious  to
transfer  to  paper  the  form  and  beauty  of  the  little  bird  I had  in  my  hand  ;
and  requesting  him  to  break  a twig  of  blooming  laurel,  we  returned  to  the
house,  speaking  of  nothing  else  than  the  picturesque  beauty  of  the  coun^
try  around.

A few  days  passed,  during  which  I became  acquainted  with  my  hostess
and  her  sweet  children,  and  made  occasional  rambles,  but  spent  the  greater
portion  of  my  time  in  drawing.  One  morning,  as  I stood  near  the  win-
dow of  my  room,  I remarked  a tall  and  powerful  man  alight  from  his
horse,  loose  the  girth  of  the  saddle,  raise  the  latter  with  one  hand,  pass
the  bridle  over  the  head  of  the  animal  with  the  other,  and  move  towards
the  house,  while  the  horse  betook  himself  to  the  little  brook  to  drink.  I
heard  some  movements  in  the  room  below,  and  again  the  same  tall  person
walked  tovrards  the  mills  and  stores,  a few  hundred  yards  from  the  house.


54


GREAT  PINE  SWAMP.


In  America,  business  is  the  first  objecf  in  view  at  all  times,  and  right  it
is  that  it  should  be  so.  Soon  after  my  hostess  entered  my  room,  accom-
panied by  the  fine-looking  woodsman,  to  whom,  as  Mr  Jediah  Irish,  I
was  introduced.  Reader,  to  describe  to  you  the  qualities  of  that  excellent
man  were  vain ; you  should  know  him,  as  I do,  to  estimate  the  value  of
such  men  in  our  sequestered  forests.  He  not  only  made  me  welcome,  but
promised  all  his  assistance  in  forwarding  my  views.

The  long  walks  and  long  talks  we  have  had  together  I never  can  for-
get, or  the  many  beautiful  birds  which  we  pursued,  shot,  and  admired.
The  juicy  venison,  excellent  bear  flesh,  and  delightful  trout  that  daily
formed  my  food,  methinks  I can  still  enjoy.  And  then,  what  pleasure  I
had  in  listening  to  him  as  he  read  his  favourite  Poems  of  Burns,  while  my
pencil  was  occupied  in  smoothing  and  softening  the  drawing  of  the  bird
before  me  ! Was  not  this  enough  to  recall  to  my  mind  the  early  impres-
sions that  had  been  made  upon  it  by  the  description  of  the  golden  age,
which  I here  found  realized

The  Lehigh  about  this  place  forms  numerous  short  turns  between  the
mountains,  and  affords  frequent  falls,  as  well  as  below  the  falls  deep
pools,  which  render  this  stream  a most  valuable  one  for  mills  of  any  kind.
Not  many  years  before  this  date,  my  host  was  chosen  by  the  agent  of  the
Lehigh  Coal  Company,  as  their  mill-wright,  and  manager  for  cutting  down
the  fine  trees  which  covered  the  mountains  around.  He  was  young,  ro-
bust, active,  industrious,  and  persevering.  He  marched  to  the  spot  where
his  abode  now  is,  with  some  workmen,  and  by  dint  of  hard  labour  first
cleared  the  road  mentioned  above,  and  reached  the  river  at  thn  centre  of
a bend,  where  he  fixed  on  erecting  various  mills.  The  pass  here  is  so
narrow  that  it  looks  as  if  formed  by  the  bursting  asunder  of  the  mountain,
both  sides  ascending  abruptly,  so  that  the  place  where  the  settlement  was
made  is  in  many  parts  difficult  of  access,  and  the  road  then  newly  cut
was  only  sufficient  to  permit  men  and  horses  to  come  to  the  spot  where
J EDiAH  and  his  men  were  at  work.  So  great,  in  fact,  were  the  difficulties
of  access,  that,  as  he  told  me,  pointing  to  a spot  about  1 50  feet  above  us,
they  for  many  months  slipped  from  it  their  barrelled  provisions,  assisted
by  ropes,  to  their  camp  below.  But  no  sooner  was  the  first  saw-mill  erect-
ed, than  the  axemen  began  their  devastations.  Trees  one  after  another
were,  and  are  yet,  constantly  heard  falling,  during  the  days  ; and  in  calm
nights,  the  greedy  mills  told  the  sad  tale,  that  in  a century  the  noble  fo-
rests around  should  exist  no  more.  Many  mills  were  erected,  many  dams
raised,  in  defiance  of  the  impetuous  Lehigh.  One  full  third  of  the  trees


ORE  AT  PINE  SWAMP.


55


have  already  been  culled,  turned  into  boards,  and  floated  as  far  as  Phila-
delphia.

In  such  an  undertaking,  the  cutting  of  the  trees  is  not  all.  They  have
afterwards  to  be  hauled  to  the  edge  of  the  mountains  bordering  the  river,
launched  into  the  stream,  and  led  to  the  mills  over  many  shallows  and
difiicult  places.  Whilst  I was  in  the  Great  Pine  Swamp,  I frequently
visited  one  of  the  principal  places  for  the  launching  of  logs.  To  see  them
tumbling  from  such  a height,  touching  here  and  there  the  rough  angle  of
a projecting  rock,  bouncing  from  it  with  the  elasticity  of  a foot-ball,  and  at
last  falling  with  awful  crash  into  the  river,  forms  a sight  interesting  in  the
highest  degree,  but  impossible  for  me  to  describe.  Shall  I tell  you  that  I
have  seen  masses  of  these  logs  heaped  above  each  other  to  the  number  of
five  thousand  ? I may  so  tell  you,  for  such  I have  seen.  My  friend  Irish
assured  me  that  at  some  seasons,  these  piles  consisted  of  a much  greater
number,  the  river  becoming  in  those  places  completely  choked  up.

When  freshets  (or  floods)  take  place,  then  is  the  time  chosen  for  for-
warding the  logs  to  the  different  mills.  This  is  called  Si  Frolic,  Jed i ah
Irish,  who  is  generally  the  leader,  proceeds  to  the  upper  leap  with  his  men,
each  provided  with  a strong  wooden  handspike,  and  a short-handled  axe.
They  all  take  to  the  water,  be  it  summer  or  winter,  like  so  many  New-
foundland spaniels.  The  logs  are  gradually  detached,  and,  after  a
time,  are  seen  floating  down  the  dancing  stream,  here  striking  against
a rock  and  whirling  many  times  round,  there  suddenly  checked  in  dozens
by  a shallow,  over  which  they  have  to  be  forced  with  the  handspikes.
Now  they  arrive  at  the  edge  of  a dam,  and  are  again  pushed  over.  Cer-
tain numbers  are  left  in  each  dam,  and  when  the  party  has  arrived  at  the
last,  which  lies  just  where  my  friend  Irish’s  camp  was  first  formed,  the
drenched  leader  and  his  men,  about  sixty  in  number,  make  their  way  home,
find  there  a healthful  repast,  and  spend  the  evening  and  a portion  of  the
night  in  dancing  and  frolicking,  in  their  own  simple  manner,  in  the  most
perfect  amity,  seldom  troubling  themselves  with  the  idea  of  the  labour
prepared  for  them  on  the  morrow.

That  morrow  now  come,  one  sounds  a horn  from  the  door  of  the  store-
house, at  the  call  of  which  each  returns  to  his  work.  The  sawyers,  the
millers,  the  rafters  and  raftsmen  are  all  immediately  busy.  The  mills  are  all
going,  and  the  logs,  which  a few  months  before  were  the  supporters  of  broad
and  leafy  tops,  are  now  in  the  act  of  being  split  asunder.  The  boards  are
then  launched  into  the  stream,  and  rafts  are  formed  of  them  for  market.


5G


GREAT  PINE  SWAMP.


During  the  summer  and  autumnal  months^  the  Lehigh,  a small  river
of  itself,  soon  becomes  extremely  shallow,  and  to  float  the  rafts  would
prove  impossible,  had  not  art  managed  to  provide  a supply  of  water  for
this  express  purpose.  At  the  breast  of  the  lower  dam  is  a curiously  con-
structed lock,  which  is  opened  at  the  approach  of  the  rafts.  They  pass
through  this  lock  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  propelled  by  the  water
that  had  been  accumulated  in  the  dam,  and  which  is  of  itself  generally
sufficient  to  float  them  to  Mauch  Chunk,  after  which,  entering  regular
canals,  they  find  no  other  impediments,  but  are  conveyed  to  their  ultimate
destination.

Before  population  had  greatly  advanced  in  this  part  of  Pennsylvania,
game  of  all  descriptions  found  within  that  range  was  extremely  abun-
dant. The  Elk  itself  did  not  disdain  to  browse  on  the  shoulders  of  the
mountains,  near  the  Lehigh.  Bears  and  the  Common  Deer  must  have
been  plentiful,  as,  at  the  moment  when  I write,  many  of  both  kinds  are
seen  and  killed  by  the  resident  hunters.  The  Wild  Turkey,  the  Pheasant
and  the  Grouse,  are  also  tolerably  abundant ; and  as  to  trout  in  the  streams
— Ah,  reader,  if  you  are  an  angler,  do  go  there,  and  try  for  yourself.
For  my  part,  I can  only  say,  that  I have  been  made  weary  with  pulling
up  from  the  rivulets  the  sparkling  fish,  allured  by  the  struggles  of  the
common  grasshopper.

A comical  affair  happened  with  the  bears,  which  I shall  relate  to  you,
good  reader.  A party  of  my  friend  Irish’s  raftsmen,  returning  from
Mauch  Chunk,  one  afternoon,  through  sundry  short  cuts  over  the  moun-
tains, at  the  season  when  the  huckle-berries  are  ripe  and  plentiful,  were
suddenly  apprised  of  the  proximity  of  some  of  these  animals,  by  their
snuffing  the  air.  No  sooner  was  this  perceived  than,  to  the  astonishment
of  the  party,  not  fewer  than  eight  bears,  I was  told,  made  their  appear-
ance. Each  man,  being  provided  with  his  short-handled  axe,  faced
about,  and  willingly  came  to  the  scratch  ; but  the  assailed  soon  proved
the  assailants,  and  with  claw  and  tooth  drove  off  the  men  in  a twinkling.
Down  they  all  rushed  from  the  mountain;  the  noise  spread  quickly;
rifles  were  soon  procured  and  shouldered ; but  when  the  spot  was  reached,
no  bears  were  to  be  found  ; night  forced  the  hunters  back  to  their  homes,
and  a laugh  concluded  the  affair.

I spent  six  weeks  in  the  Great  Pine  Forest — Swamp  it  cannot  be  call-
ed— v/here  I made  many  a drawing-  Wishing  to  leave  Pennsylvania,
and  to  follow  the  migratory  flocks  of  our  birds  to  the  south,  I bade  adieu


GREAT  PINE  SWAMP.


37


to  the  excellent  wife  and  rosy  children  of  my  friend,  and  to  his  kind  ne-
phew. Jediah  Irish,  shouldering  his  heavy  rifle,  accompanied  me,  and
trudging  directly  across  the  mountains,  we  arrived  at  Mauch  Chunk  in
good  time  for  dinner.  Shall  I ever  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  that  good,
that  generous  man  again  ?

At  Mauch  Chunk,  where  we  both  spent  the  night,  Mr  White,  the  ci-
vil engineer,  visited  me,  and  looked  at  the  drawings  which  I had  made
•in  the  Great  Pine  Forest.  The  news  he  gave  me  of  my  sons,  then  in
Kentucky,  made  me  still  more  anxious  to  move  in  their  direction,  and,
long  before  day-break,  I shook  hands  with  the  goodman  of  the  forest,
and  found  myself  moving  towards  the  capital  of  Pennsylvania,  having  as
my  sole  companion  a sharp  frosty  breeze.  Left  to  my  thoughts,  I felt
amazed  that  such  a place  as  the  Great  Pine  Forest  should  be  so  little
known  to  the  Philadelphians,  scarcely  any  of  whom  could  direct  me  to-
wards it.  How  much  is  it  to  be  regretted,  thought  I,  that  the  many
young  gentlemen  who  are  there  so  much  at  a loss  how  to  employ  their
leisure  days,  should  not  visit  these  wild  retreats,  valuable  as  they  are  to
the  student  of  nature.  How  diflPerently  would  they  feel,  if,  instead  of
spending  weeks  in  smoothing  a useless  bow,  and  walking  out  in  full  dress,
intent  on  displaying  the  make  of  their  legs,  to  some  rendezvous  where
they  may  enjoy  their  wines,  they  were  to  occupy  themselves  in  contem-
plating the  rich  profusion  which  nature  has  poured  around  them,  or  even
in  procuring  some  desiderated  specimen  for  their  Peale's  Museum^  once
so  valuable  and  so  finely  arranged But  alas  ! no : they  are  none  of
them  aware  of  the  richness  of  the  Great  Pine  Swamp,  nor  are  they  likely
to  share  the  hospitality  to  be  found  there.

Night  came  on,  as  I was  thinking  of  such  things,  and  I was  turned  out
of  the  coach  in  the  streets  of  the  fair  city,  just  as  the  clock  struck  ten.
I cannot  say  that  my  bones  were  much  rested,  but  not  a moment  was  to
be  lost.  So  I desired  a porter  to  take  up  my  little  luggage,  and  leading
him  towards  the  nearest  wharf,  I found  myself  soon  after  gliding  across
the  Delaware,  towards  my  former  lodgings  in  the  Jerseys.  The  lights
were  shining  from  the  parallel  streets  as  I crossed  them,  all  was  tranquil
and  serene,  until  there  came  the  increasing  sound  of  the  Baltimore
steamer,  which,  for  some  reason  unknown  to  me,  was  that  evening  later
than  usual  in  its  arrival.  My  luggage  was  landed,  and  carried  home  by
means  of  a bribe.  The  people  had  all  retired  to  rest,  but  my  voice  was
instantly  recognised,  and  an  entrance  was  afforded  to  me.


( 58  )


THE  BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.

Falco  Washingtonii.

PLATE  XI.  Male.

It  was  in  the  month  of  February  1814,  that  I obtained  the  first  sight
of  this  noble  bird,  and  never  shall  I forget  the  delight  which  it  gave  me.
Not  even  Herschel,  when  he  discovered  the  planet  which  bears  his  name,
could  have  experienced  more  rapturous  feelings.  We  were  on  a trading
voyage,  ascending  the  Upper  Mississippi.  The  keen  wintry  blasts
whistled  around  us,  and  the  cold  from  which  I suffered  had,  in  a great  de-
gree, extinguished  the  deep  interest  which,  at  other  seasons,  this  magni-
ficent river  has  been  wont  to  awake  in  me.  I lay  stretched  beside  our
patroon.  The  safety  of  the  cargo  Was  forgotten,  and  the  only  thing  that
called  my  attention  was  the  multitude  of  ducks,  of  different  species,  ac-
companied by  vast  flocks  of  swans,  which  from  time  to  time  passed  us.
My  patroon,  a Canadian,  had  been  engaged  many  years  in  the  fur  trade.
He  was  a man  of  much  intelligence,  and,  perceiving  that  these  birds  had
engaged  my  curiosity,  seemed  anxious  to  find  some  new  object  to  divert
me.  An  eagle  flew  over  us.  “ How  fortunate  !”  he  exclaimed ; “ this
is  what  I could  have  wished.  Look,  sir ! the  Great  Eagle,  and  the  only
one  I have  seen  since  I left  the  lakes.”  I was  instantly  on  my  feet,  and
having  observed  it  attentively,  concluded,  as  I lost  it  in  the  distance,  that
it  was  a species  quite  new  to  me.  My  patroon  assured  me  that  such
birds  were  indeed  rare ; that  they  sometimes  followed  the  hunters,  to  feed
on  the  entrails  of  animals  which  they  had  killed,  when  the  lakes  were
frozen  over,  but  that  when  the  lakes  were  open,  they  would  dive  in  the
daytime  after  fish,  and  snatch  them  up  in  the  manner  of  the  Fishing  Hawk ;
and  that  they  roosted  generally  on  the  shelves  of  the  rocks,  where  they
built  their  nests,  of  which  he  had  discovered  several  by  the  quantity  of
white  dung  scattered  below.

Convinced  that  the  bird  was  unknown  to  naturalists,  I felt  particular-
ly anxious  to  learn  its  habits,  and  to  discover  in  what  particulars  it  dif-
fered from  the  rest  of  its  genus.  My  next  meeting  with  this  bird  was  a
few  years  afterwards,  whilst  engaged  in  collecting  crayfish  on  one  of  those
flats  which  border  and  divide  Green  River,  in  Kentucky,  near  its  June-


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


59


tion  with  the  Ohio.  The  river  is  there  bordered  by  a range  of  high
cliffs,  which,  for  some  distance,  follow  its  windings.  I observed  on  the
rocks,  which,  at  that  place,  are  nearly  perpendicular,  a quantity  of  white
ordure,  which  I attributed  to  owls  that  might  have  resorted  thither.  I
mentioned  the  circumstance  to  my  companions,  when  one  of  them,  who
lived  within  a mile  and  a half  of  the  place,  told  me  it  was  from  the  nest  of
the  Brown  Eagle,  meaning  the  White-headed  Eagle  (Falco  leiicocephalus)
in  its  immature  state.  I assured  him  this  could  not  be,  and  remarked
that  neither  the  old  nor  the  young  birds  of  that  species  ever  build  in  such
places,  but  always  in  trees.  Although  he  could  not  answer  my  objection,
he  stoutly  maintained  that  a brown  eagle  of  some  kind,  above  the  usual
size,  had  built  there ; and  added  that  he  had  espied  the  nest  some  days
before,  and  had  seen  one  of  the  old  birds  dive  and  catch  a fish.  This  he
thought  strange,  having,  till  then,  always  observed  that  both  Brown
Eagles  and  Bald  Eagles  procured  this  kind  of  food  by  robbing  the  fish-
hawks.  He  said  that  if  I felt  particularly  anxious  to  know  what  nest  it
was,  I might  soon  satisfy  myself,  as  the  old  birds  would  come  and  feed
their  young  with  fish,  for  he  had  seen  them  do  so  before.

In  high  expectation,  I seated  myself  about  a hundred  yards  from  the
foot  of  the  rock.  Never  did  time  pass  more  slowly.  I could  not  help
betraying  the  most  impatient  curiosity,  for  my  hopes  whispered  it  was  a
Sea  Eagle’s  nest.  Two  long  hours  had  elapsed  before  the  old  bird  made
his  appearance,  which  was  announced  to  us  by  the  loud  hissings  of  the
two  young  ones,  which  crawled  to  the  extremity  of  the  hole  to  receive  a
fine  fish.  I had  a perfect  view  of  this  noble  bird  as  he  held  himself  to
the  edging  rock,  hanging  like  the  Barn,  Bank,  or  Social  Swallow,  his
tail  spread,  and  his  wings  partly  so.  I trembled  lest  a word  should
escape  from  my  companions.  The  slightest  murmur  had  been  treason
from  them.  They  entered  into  my  feelings,  and,  although  little  inte-
rested, gazed  with  me.  In  a few  minutes  the  other  parent  joined  her
mate,  and  from  the  difference  in  size  (the  female  of  rapacious  birds  being
much  larger),  we  knew  this  to  be  the  mother  bird.  She  also  had  brought
a fish ; but,  more  cautious  than  her  mate,  she  glanced  her  quick  and
piercing  eye  around,  and  instantly  perceived  that  her  abode  had  been
discovered.  She  dropped  her  prey,  with  a loud  shriek  communicated  the
alarm  to  the  male,  and,  hovering  with  him  over  our  heads,  kept  up  a
growling  cry,  to  intimidate  us  from  our  suspected  design.  This  watch-


60


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


ful  solicitude  I have  ever  found  peculiar  to  the  female  : — must  I be  un-
derstood to  speak  only  of  birds  ?

The  young  having  concealed  themselves,  we  went  and  picked  up  the
fish  which  the  mother  had  let  fall.  It  was  a white  perch,  weighing  about
5^  lb.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  was  broken  in,  and  the  back  torn
by  the  talons  of  the  eagle.  We  had  plainly  seen  her  bearing  it  in  the
manner  of  the  Fish-Hawk.

This  day’s  sport  being  at  an  end,  as  we  journeyed  homewards,  we
agreed  to  return  the  next  morning,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  both  the
old  and  young  birds  ; but  rainy  and  tempestuous  weather  setting  in,  it
became  necessary  to  defer  the  expedition  till  the  third  day  following,
when,  with  guns  and  men  all  in  readiness,  we  reached  the  rock.  Some
posted  themselves  at  the  foot,  others  upon  it,  but  in  vain.  We  passed
the  entire  day,  without  either  seeing  or  hearing  an  eagle,  the  sagacious
birds,  no  doubt,  having  anticipated  an  invasion,  and  removed  their  young
to  new  quarters.

I come  at  last  to  the  day  which  I had  so  often  and  so  ardently  desired.
Two  years  had  gone  by  since  the  discovery  of  the  nest,  in  fruitless  ex-
cursions ; but  my  wishes  were  no  longer  to  remain  ungratified.  In  re-
turning from  the  little  village  of  Henderson,  to  the  house  of  Doctor
Rankin,  about  a mile  distant,  I saw  an  eagle  rise  from  a small  enclosure
not  a hundred  yards  before  me,  where  the  Doctor  had  a few  days  before
slaughtered  some  hogs,  and  alight  upon  a low  tree  branching  over  the
road.  I prepared  my  double-barrelled  piece,  which  I constantly  carry,
and  went  slowly  and  cautiously  towards  him.  Quite  fearlessly  he  await-
ed my  approach,  looking  upon  me  with  undaunted  eye.  I fired  and  he
fell.  Before  I reached  him  he  was  dead.  With  what  delight  did  I sur-
vey the  magnificent  bird  ! Had  the  finest  salmon  ever  pleased  him  as  he
did  me  — Never.  I ran  and  presented  him  to  my  friend,  with  a pride
which  they  alone  can  feel,  who,  like  me,  ha\e  devoted  themselves  from
their  earliest  childhood  to  such  pursuits,  and  who  have  derived  from  them
their  first  pleasures.  To  others  I must  seem  to  “ prattle  out  of  fashion.”
The  Doctor,  who  was  an  experienced  hunter,  examined  the  bird  with
much  satisfaction,  and  frankly  acknowledged  he  had  never  before  seen  or
heard  of  it.

The  name  which  I have  chosen  for  this  new  species  of  Eagle,  “ The
Bird  of  Washington,”  may,  by  some,  be  considered  as  preposterous  and


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


61


unfit ; but  as  it  is  indisputably  the  noblest  bird  of  its  genus  that  has  yet
been  discovered  in  the  United  States,  I trust  I shall  be  allowed  to  honour
it  with  the  name  of  one  yet  nobler,  who  was  the  saviour  of  his  country,
and  whose  name  will  ever  be  dear  to  it.  To  those  who  may  be  curious
to  know  my  reasons,  I can  only  say,  that,  as  the  new  world  gave  me  birth
and  liberty,  the  great  man  who  ensured  its  independence  is  next  to  my
heart.  He  had  a nobility  of  mind,  and  a generosity  of  soul,  such  as  are
seldom  possessed.  He  was  brave,  go  is  the  eagle ; like  it,  too,  he  was  the
terror  of  his  foes ; and  his  fame,  extending  from  pole  to  pole,  resembles
the  majestic  soarings  of  the  mightiest  of  the  feathered  tribe.  If  A^merica
has  reason  to  be  proud  of  her  Washington,  so  has  she  to  be  proud  of  her
Great  Eagle.

In  the  month  of  January  following,  I saw  a pair  of  these  eagles  flying
over  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  one  in  pursuit  of  the  other.  The  next  day  I
saw  them  again.  The  female  had  relaxed  her  severity,  had  laid  aside
her  coyness,  and  to  a favourite  tree  they  continually  resorted.  I pur«
sued  them  unsuccessfully  for  several  days,  when  they  forsook  the  place.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  White-headed
Eagle.  The  former  encircles  a greater  space,  whilst  sailing  keeps  nearer
to  the  land  and  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  when  about  to  dive  for  fish
falls  in  a spiral  manner,  as  if  with  the  intention  of  checking  any  retreat-
ing movement  which  its  prey  might  attempt,  darting  upon  it  only  when
a few  yards  distant.  The  Fish-hawk  often  does  the  same.  When  rising
with  a fish,  the  Bird  of  Washington  flies  to  a considerable  distance,  form-
ing, in  its  line  of  course,  a very  acute  angle  with  the  surface  line  of  the
water.  My  last  opportunity  of  seeing  this  bird,  was  on  the  15th  of  No-
vember 1821,  a few  miles  above  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  when  two  passed
over  our  boat,  moving  down  the  river  with  a gentle  motion.  In  a letter
from  a kind  relative,  Mr  W.  Bakewell,  dated,  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  July

1819,”  and  containing  particulars  relative  to  the  Swallow-tailed  Hawk
{Falco  furcatns) , that  gentleman  says  : — “ Yesterday,  for  the  first  time,
I had  an  opportunity  of  viewing  one  of  those  magnificent  birds,  which
you  call  the  Sea  Eagle,  as  it  passed  low  over  me,  whilst  fishing.  I shall
be  really  glad  when  I can  again  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  your  draw-
ing of  it.’’

Whilst  in  Philadelphia,  about  twelve  months  ago,  I had  the  gratifi-
cation of  seeing  a fine  specimen  of  this  Eagle  at  Mr  Brano’s  museum.  It
was  a m.ale  in  fine  plumage,  and  beautifully  preserved.  I wished  to  pur-


62


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


chase  it  with  a view  to  carry  it  to  Europe,  but  the  price  put  upon  it  was
above  my  means.

My  excellent  friend  Richard  Harlan,  M.  D.  of  that  city,  speaking
of  this  bird  in  a letter  dated  ‘‘  Philadelphia,  August  19,  1830,”  says,
“ That  fine  specimen  of  Washington  Eagle^  which  you  noticed  in  Brano’s
museum,  is  at  present  in  my  possession.  I have  deposited  it  in  the  Aca-
demy, where  it  will  most  likely  remain.”  I saw  the  specimen  alluded  to,
which,  in  as  far  as  I could  observe,  agreed  in  size  and  markings  exactly
with  my  drawing,  to  which,  however,  I could  not  at  the  time  refer,  as  it
was,  with  the  whole  of  my  collection,  deposited  in  the  British  Museum,
under  the  care  of  my  ever  kind  and  esteemed  friend  J.  G.  Children,  Esq.
of  that  Institution.

The  glands  containing  the  oil  used  for  the  purpose  of  anointing  the
surface  of  the  plumage  were,  in  the  specimen  represented  in  the  plate,  ex-
tremely large.  Their  contents  had  the  appearance  of  hog’s  lard,  which
had  been  melted  and  become  rancid.  This  bird  makes  more  copious  use
of  that  substance  than  the  White-headed  Eagle,  or  any  of  the  tribe  to
which  it  belongs,  excepting  the  Fish-hawk,  the  whole  plumage  looking,
upon  close  examination,  as  if  it  had  received  a general  coating  of  a thin
clear  dilution  of  gum-arabic,  and  presenting  less  of  the  downy  gloss  ex-
hibited in  the  upper  part  of  the  White-headed  Eagle’s  plumage.  The
male  bird  weighs  lb.  avoirdupois,  and  measures  3 feet  7 inches  in
length,  and  10  feet  inches  in  extent.

Falco  Washington II.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XI.

Bill  shortish,  very  deep,  compressed;  upper  mandible  with  the' dor-
sal outline  forming  the  third  of  a circle,  rounded  above,  sloping  and  flat-
tish  on  the  sides,  nearly  straight  with  a slight  obtuse  process,  on  the
acute,  overlapping  edges,  the  tip  deflected,  trigonal,  acute,  at  its  lower
part  perpendicular  to  the  gap  line  ; lower  mandible  convex  in  its  dorsal
outline,  with  inflected  acute  edges,  which  are  deflected  at  the  end.  A
naked  cere,  in  the  fore  part  of  which  are  the  oblong,  oblique,  nearly
dorsal,  open  nostrils,  which  have  a process  from  the  anterior  margin.
Head  rather  large,  flat  above.  Neck  robust,  of  ordinary  length.  Body
ovate.  Feet  rather  short,  with  the  leg  long,  the  tarsus  short,  rounded,


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


63


anteriorly  covered  with' transversely  narrow  scutella,  posteriorly  with
large,  laterally  with  small  tuberculous  scales ; toes  robust,  free,  scutellate
above,  papillar  and  scabrous  beneath,  with  large  tubercles ; claws  curved,
rounded,  marginate  beneath,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated,  glossy ; feathers  of  the  head,  neck  and-
breast  narrow  and  pointed  ; of  the  back,  breast  and  belly,  ovate,  distinct,
acute ; the  wing-coverts  narrow,  acute,  compact.  Space ' between  the
beak  and  eye  barish,  being  sparsely  covered  with  feathers  consisting  of  a
shaft,  downy  at  the  base,  prolonged  into  a hair.  Eyebrow  bare,  and
greatly  projecting.  Wings  long,  second  quill  longest,  first  considera-
bly shorter.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  rounded^  extending  considera-
bly beyond  the  tips  of  the  wings,  of  twelve  broad  acute  feathers.  Tarsus
feathered  one-third  down.

Bill  bluish-black,  the  edges  pale,  the  soft  margin  towards  the  com-
missure, and  the  base  of  the  under  mandible  yellow.  Cere  yellowish-
brown.  Lore  light  greenish-blue.  Iris  chestnut-brown.  Feet  deep  yel-
low ; claws  bluish-black.  Upper  part  of  the  head,  hind  neck,  back,  sca-
pulars, rump,  tail-coverts,  and  posterior  tibial  feathers  blackish-brown,
glossed  with  a coppery  tint.  Throat,  fore-neck,  breast  and  belly  light
brownish-yellow,  each  feather  marked  along  the  centre  with  blackish-
brown.  Wing-coverts  light  greyish-brown,  those  next  the  body  becom-
ing darker  and  approaching  the  colour  of  the  back.  Primary  quills  dark
brown,  deeper  on  their  inner  webs  ; secondaries  lighter,  and  on  their
outer  webs  of  nearly  the  same  light  tint  as  their  coverts.  Tail  uniform
dark  brown.  Anterior  tibial  feathers  greyish-brown.

Length  3 feet  7 inches,  extent  of  wings  10  feet  2 inches.  Bill
inches  along  the  back ; along  the  gap,  which  commences  directly  under
the  eye,  to  the  tip  of  the  lower  mandible  3y,  and  If  deep.  Length  of
wing  when  folded  32  inches ; length  of  tail  1 5 inches  ; tarsus  4^,  middle
4|,  hind  claw  2J.

The  two  stomachs  large  and  baggy.  Their  contents  in  the  indivi-
dual described  were  fish,  fishes’  scales,  and  entrails  of  various  kinds.  In-
testines large,  but  thin  and  transparent.

Passing  over  the  affinity  of  this  bird  to  the  young  of  the  White-headed
Eagle  [Falco  leucocephalus)^  which  Wilson  has  described  and  figured  un-
der the  name  of  Sea  Eagle  {Falco  Ossifragus  Linn.),  I shall  institute  a
comparison  between  it  and  the  true  Sea  Eagle  or  Cinereous  Eagle  (Falco
Albicilla),  which  bears  so  strong  a resemblance  to  the  Bird  of  Washing-


64


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


ton,  that  by  a superficial  observer  they  might  be  confounded,  at  least
were  he  to  view  them  separately.

The  White-tailed  or  Cinereous  Eagle  (Falco  Albicilla  of  Linnaeus),
has,  when  full  grown,  the  bill  and  iris  yellow,  the  general  colour  of  the
upper  parts  pale  greyish-brown,  passing  into  wood-brown,  the  belly  and
thighs  chocolate-brown,  some  of  the  upper  tail-coverts,  and  the  whole  of
the  tail,  white.  In  this  state,  it  is  sufficiently  different  from  our  bird,  at
least  in  colouring,  but  the  young  has  a different  appearance.  In  the
bird  just  fully  fledged,  the  bill  is  deep  brown,  tinged  with  blue,  its
base  and  the  cere  greenish-yellow ; the  iris  dark  brown  ; the  feet  gamboge-
yellow  ; the  head  deep  brown,  the  bases  of  all  the  feathers  of  the  body
^hite ; on  the  hind  neck  the  whole  feathers  white,  excepting  the  ends
which  are  deep  brown ; the  upper  and  middle  back  light  brown,  the  tips
umber ; the  lower  back  white,  with  umber  tips ; the  tail  greyish  at  its  ori-
gin, deep  brown,  with  an  irregular  brownish -white  patch  along  the  inner
webs,  the  fore-neck  and  upper  breast  brownish- white,  spotted  with  umber,
the  tips  being  of  the  latter  colour ; the  belly  pale  brown,  spotted  with
umber ; the  thighs  brown  ; the  under  tail-coverts  whitish,  tipped  with
deep  brown.  In  this  state,  and  until  nearly  full  grown,  it  has  been  de-
scribed as  a distinct  species,  under  the  name  of  Sea  Eagle  or  Osprey
{Falco  Oss'ifragusy  Linn.).

The  principal  changes  which  take  place  in  regard  to  colour  as  the
bird  advances,  are  these  : the  bill  first  becomes  bluish-black,  and  ulti-
mately yellow,  the  cere  becomes  brighter,  the  iris  assumes  more  of  yellow,
the  white  at  the  base  of  the  plumage  gradually  disappears,  the  tail  be-
comes lighter,  the  general  colour  of  the  plumage  at  first  darker,  but  ulti-
mately paler.  At  the  age  of  two  years,  the  only  period  when  the  bird
much  resembles  ours,  it  is  as  follows : — and  here  I shall  make  the  descrip-
tion correspond  in  its  arrangement  with  that  of  the  Bird  of  Washington,
that  the  two  may  be  more  satisfactorily  compared.

The  bill  corresponds  with  that  of  our  bird,  only  that  it  is  not  so
deep^  and  proportionally  more  elongated.  The  other  circumstances  men-
tioned in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  description  of  the  Bird  of  Washing-
ton are  the  same  in  the  Sea  Eagle.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated,  glossy  ; feathers  of  the  head,  neck  and
breast,  narrow  and  pointed  ; of  the  back,  breast  and  belly,  ovate,  distinct,
acute  ; the  wing-coverts  ovate  and  pointed.  Space  between  the  beak  and
eye  barish,  being  sparsely  covered  with  bristly  feathers.  Eyebrow  pro-

1


BIRD  OF  WASHINGTON.


65


jecting  and  bare  on  the  edge.  Wings  long,  fourth  and  fifth  quills
longest,  the  first  considerably  shorter.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  rounded,
of  the  same  length  as  the  closed  wing,  and  consisting  of  twelve  broad
acute  feathers.  Tarsus  feathered  one-third  down.

Bill  bluish-black,  brownish  at  the  tip  of  the  upper  mandible,  and
along  the  greater  part  of  the  under ; yellowish  at  the  edges  of  the  lower.
Cere  greenish-yellow.  Lore  of  the  same  colour.  Iris  darkish  brown.
Head  and  hind  neck  dark  brown,  the  latter  still  marhed  with  white.
Fore  neck  and  breast  brownish  white,  longitudinally  marked  with  deep
brown.  Upper  parts  in  general  pale  brown,  spotted  with  deeper,  some  of
the  scapulars  glossed  with  purple,  l^ower  back  white,  the  tips  umber.
Tail-coverts  brownish-grey.  Base,  outer  webs  and  tips  of  tail-feathers
deep  brown ; inner  webs  and  part  of  outer  near  the  tip  brownish-white.
Belly  pale  brown  spotted  with  umber.  Primaries  brownish-black,  secon-
daries greyish-brown.

Length  3 feet,  extent  of  wings  6 feet  9 inches ; bill  inches  along
the  back,  deep.

All  circumstances  duly  considered,  the  Bird  of  Washington  stands
forth  as  the  champion  of  America,  sui  speciei,  and  henceforth  not  to  be
confounded  with  any  of  its  rivals  or  relatives.  If  ornithologists  are
proud  of  describing  new  species,  I may  be  allowed  to  express  some
degree  of  pleasure  in  giving  to  the  world  the  knowledge  of  so  majestic
a bird.


E


( OG  )


THE  BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.

ICTEJX  US  Bjl  timore.  D au  d.

PLATE  XII.  Male  in  different  states  of  Plumage,  and  Nest.

No  traveller  who  is  at  all  gifted  with  the  faculty  of  observation,  can
ascend  that  extraordinary  river,  the  Mississippi,  in  the  first  days  of
autumn,  without  feeling  enchanted  by  the  varied  vegetation  which
adorns  its  alluvial  shores : — The  tall  Cotton-tree  descending  to  the  very
margin  of  the  stream,  the  arrow-shaped  Ash  mixing  its  branches  with
those  of  the  Pecan  and  Black  Walnut,  immense  Oaks  and  numerous  spe-
cies of  Hickory,  covering  with  their  foliage  the  densely  tangled  Canes,  from
amongst  which,  at  every  step.  Vines  of  various  kinds  shoot  up,  winding
round  the  stems  and  interlacing  their  twigs  and  tendrils,  stretching  from
one  branch  to  another,  until  they  have  reached  and  overspread  the  whole,
like  a verdant  canopy,  forming  one  solid  mass  of  richest  vegetation,  in  the
fore  ground  of  the  picture ; whilst,  wherever  the  hills  are  in  view,  the  great
Magnolias,  the  Hollies,  and  the  noble  Pines,  are  seen  gently  waving  their
lofty  heads  to  the  breeze.

The  current  becomes  rapid,  and  ere  long  several  of  the  windings  of
the  great  stream  have  been  met  and  passed,  and  with  these  new  scenes
present  themselves  to  the  view.  The  forest  at  this  place,  as  if  in  doleful
mourning  at  the  sight  of  the  havock  made  on  its  margin  by  the  impetuous
and  regardless  \vaters,  has  thrown  over  her  a ragged  veil,  produced  by
the  long  dangling  masses  that  spread  from  branch  to  branch  over  the  cy-
press trees.  The  dejected  Indian’s  camp  lies  in  your  sight.  He  casts  a
melancholy  glance  over  the  scene,  and  remembers  that  he  is  no  longer  the
peaceful  and  sole  possessor  of  the  land.  Islands,  one  after  another,  come
in  sight,  and  at  every  winding  of  the  stream  you  see  boats  propelled  by
steam  ascending  the  river,  and  others,  without  such  aid,  silently  gliding
with  the  current.

Much  might  the  traveller  find  to  occupy  his  mind,  and  lead  him  into
speculations  regarding  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  were  he  not
attracted  by  the  clear  mellow  notes,  that  issue  from  the  woods,  and  gra-
tified by  the  sight  of  the  brilliant  Oriole  now  before  you.  In  solitudes
like  these,  the  traveller  might  feel  pleased  with  any  sound,  even  the  howl


BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.


67


of  the  wolf,  or  the  still  more' dismal  bellow  of  the  alligator.  Then  how
delightful  must  it  be  to  hear  the  melody  resulting  from  thousands  of  mu-
sical voices  that  come  from  some  neighbouring  tree,  and  which  insensibly
leads  the  mind,  with  whatever  it  may  previously  have  been  occupied,
first  to  the  contemplation  of  the  wonders  of  nature,  and  then  to  that  of
the  Great  Creator  himself.

Now  we  have  ascended  the  mighty  river,  have  left  it,  and  entered  the
still  more  enchanting  Ohio,  and  yet  never  for  a day  have  we  been  with-
out the  company  of  the  Oriole.  Here,  amongst  the  pendulous  branches
of  the  lofty  Tulip-trees,  it  moves  gracefully  up  and  down,  seeking  in  the
expanding  leaves  and  opening  blossoms  the  caterpillar  and  the  green  beetle,
which  generally  contribute  to  its  food.  Well,  reader,  it  was  one  of  these
pendulous  twigs  which  I took  when  I made  the  drawing  before  you.
But  instead  of  having  cut  it  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  I found  it  in  the
State  of  Louisiana,  to  which  we  shall  return.

The  Baltimore  Oriole  arrives  from  the  south,  perhaps  from  Mexico,  or
perhaps  from  a more  distant  region,  and  enters  Louisiana  as  soon  as  spring
commences  there.  It  approaches  the  planter’s  house,  and  searches  amongst
the  surrounding  trees  for  a suitable  place  in  which  to  settle  for  the  sea-
son. It  prefers,  I believe,  the  trees  that  grow  on  the  sides  of  a gentle
declivity.  The  choice  of  a twig  being  made,  the  male  Oriole  becomes
extremely  conspicuous.  He  flies  to  the  ground,  searches  for  the  longest
and  driest  filaments  of  the  moss,  which  in  that  State  is  known  by  the  name
of  Spanish  Beard,  and  whenever  he  finds  one  fit  for  his  purpose,  ascends
to  the  favourite  spot  where  the  nest  is  to  be,  uttering  all  the  while  a con-
tinued chirrup,  which  seems  to  imply  that  he  knows  no  fear,  but  on  the
contrary  fancies  himself  the  acknowledged  king  of  the  woods.  This  sort
of  chirruping  becomes  louder,  and  is  emitted  in  an  angry  tone,  whenever
an  enemy  approaches,  or  the  bird  is  accidentally  surprised,  the  sight  of  a
cat  or  a dog  being  always  likely  to  produce  it.  No  sooner  does  he  reach
the  branches,  than  with  bill  and  claws,  aided  by  an  astonishing  sagacity,
he  fastens  one  end  of  the  moss  to  a twig,  with  as  much  art  as  a sailor
might  do,  and  takes  up  the  other  end,  which  he  secures  also,  but  to  another
twig  a few  inches  off,  leaving  the  thread  floating  in  the  air  like  a swing,
the  curve  of  which  is  perhaps  seven  or  eight  inches  from  the  twigs.  The
female  comes  to  his  assistance  with  another  filament  of  moss,  or  perhaps
some  cotton  thread,  or  other  fibrous  substance,  inspects  the  work  whicli
her  mate  has  done,  and  immediately  commences  her  operations,  placing


68


BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.


each  thread  in  a contrary  direction  to  those  arranged  by  her  lordly  mate,
and  making  the  whole  cross  and  recross,  so  as  to  form  an  irregular  net-
work. Their  love  increases  daily  as  they  see  the  graceful  fabric  ap-
proaching perfection,  until  their  conjugal  affection  and  faith  become  as
complete  as  in  any  species  of  birds  with  which  I am  acquainted.

The  nest  has  now  been  woven  from  the  bottom  to  the  top,  and  so  se-
cured that  no  tempest  can  carry  it  off  without  breaking  the  branch  to
which  it  is  suspended.  Remark  what  follows.  This  nest  contains  no
warming  substance,  such  as  wool,  cotton,  or  cloth,  but  is  almost  entirely
composed  of  the  Spanish  moss,  interwoven  in  such  a manner  that  the  air
can  easily  pass  through  it.  The  parents  no  doubt  are  aware  of  the  in-
tense heat  which  will  exist  ere  long  in  this  part  of  the  world,  and  more-
over take  especial  care  to  place  their  nest  on  the  north-east  side  of  the
trees.  On  the  contrary,  had  they  gone  as  far  as  Pennsylvania  or  New
York,  they  would  have  formed  it  of  the  warmest  and  softest  mate-
rials, and  have  placed  it  in  a position  which  would  have  left  it  exposed
to  the  sun’s  rays,  the  changes  in  the  weather  during  the  early  period
of  incubation  being  sometimes  so  great  there,  that  the  bird  looks  on  these
precautions  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  life  of  its  brood  against  intense  cold,
should  it  come,  while  it  knows  that  the  heat  in  these  northern  latitudes
will  not  be  so  great  as  to  incommode  them.  I have  observed  these
sensible  differences  in  the  formation  and  position  of  the  nests  of  the
Baltimore  Oriole,  a great  many  times,  as  no  doubt  have  other  persons.
The  female  lays  from  four  to  six  eggs,  and  in  Louisiana  frequently  rears
two  broods  in  a season.  The  period  of  incubation  is  fourteen  days.  The
eggs  are  about  an  inch  in  length,  rather  broadly  ovate,  pale  brown,
dotted,  spotted,  and  tortuously  lined  with  dark  brown.

The  movements  of  these  birds  as  they  run  among  the  branches  of  trees
differ  materially  from  those  of  almost  all  others.  They  cling  frequently
by  the  feet  in  order  to  reach  an  insect  at  such  a distance  from  them  as  to
require  the  full  extension  of  their  neck,  body,  and  legs,  without  letting
go  their  hold.  They  sometimes  glide,  as  it  were,  along  a small  twig,  and
at  other  times  move  sidewise  for  a few  steps.  Their  motions  are  elegant
and  stately.  Their  song  consists  of  three  or  four,  or  at  most  eight  or  ten,
loud,  full,  and  mellow  notes,  extremely  agreeable  to  the  ear.

A day  or  two  before  the  young  are  quite  able  to  leave  the  nest,  they
often  cling  to  the  outside,  and  creep  in  and  out  of  it  like  young  Wood-
peckers. After  leaving  the  nest,  they  follow  the  parents  for  nearly  a


BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.


69


fortnight,  and  are  fed  by  them.  As  soon  as  the  mulberries  and  figs  become
ripe,  they  resort  to  these  fruits,  and  are  equally  fond  of  sweet  cherries,
strawberries,  and  others.  During  spring,  their  principal  food  is  insects,
which  they  seldom  pursue  on  the  wing,  but  which  they  search  for  with  great
activity,  among  the  leaves  and  branches.  I have  seen  the  young  of  the
first  brood  out  early  in  May,  and  of  the  second  in  July.  As  soon  as  they
are  fully  able  to  take  care  of  themselves,  they  generally  part  from  each
other,  and  leave  the  country,  as  their  parents  had  come,  that  is,  singly.

During  migration,  the  flight  of  the  Baltimore  Oriole  is  performed  high
above  all  the  trees,  and  mostly  during  day,  as  I have  usually  observed
them  alighting,  always  singly,  about  the  setting  of  the  sun,  uttering  a
note  or  two,  and  darting  into  the  lower  branches  to  feed,  and  afterwards
to  rest.  To  assure  myself  of  this  mode  of  travelling  by  day,  I marked
the  place  where  a beautiful  male  had  perched  one  evening,  and  on  going
to  the  spot  next  morning,  long  before  dawn,  I had  the  pleasure  of  hearing
his  first  notes  as  light  appeared,  and  saw  him  search  a while  for  food,  and
afterwards  mount  in  the  air,  making  his  way  to  warmer  climes.  Their
flight  is  straight  and  continuous.

This  beautiful  bird  is  easily  kept  in  cages,  and  may  be  fed  on  dried
figs,  raisins,  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  insects.  When  shot  they  will  often
clench  the  twig  so  firmly  as  to  remain  hanging  fast  to  it  until  dislodged
by  another  shot  or  a blow  against  the  twig.

The  plumage  of  the  male  bird  is  not  mature  until  the  third  spring,
and  I have  therefore  in  my  drawing  represented  the  males  of  the  first,
second,  and  third  years.  The  female  will  form  the  subject  of  another
plate.  The  male  of  the  first  year  was  taken  for  a female  by  my  engraver,
during  my  absence,  and  marked  as  such,  although  some  of  the  plates  were
corrected  the  moment  I saw  the  mistake.

The  Baltimore  Oriole,  although  found  throughout  the  Union,  is  so  par-
tial to  particular  sections  or  districts,  that  of  two  places  not  twenty  miles
distant  from  each  other,  while  none  are  to  be  seen  in  the  one,  a dozen
pairs  or  more  may  be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  other.  They  are  fond-
est of  hilly  grounds,  refreshed  by  streams.


70


BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.


Icterus  Baltimore  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  51.

Oriolus  Baltimore,  Linn.  Syst  Nat  p.  1G2 — Gmel.  Syst.  vol.  i.  p.  389.— La/A.

Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  180.

Baltimore  Oriole,  Oriolus  Baltimore,  Wilsm,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p 23.

PI.  i.  fig.  3.  Male ; and  vol.  vi.  p.  83,  PI.  53.  fig.  4.  Female.

Baltimore  Bird,  Lath.  Synops.  vol,  ii.  p.  432.

Adult  Male,  three  years  old,  in  spring.  Plate  XII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  conical,  slender,  longish,  compressed,  a little  curved,  very  acute,
with  inflected  acute  margins ; upper  mandible  obtuse  above,  lower  broad-
ly obtuse  beneath.  Nostrils  oval,  covered  by  a membrane,  basal.  Head
and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  length ;
tarsus  a little  longer  than  the  middle  toe ; inner  toe  little  shorter  than  the
outer ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  hind  toe  twice  the
size  of  the  others.

Plumage  blended,  glossy.  Wings  longish,  somewhat  rounded,  the  first
quill  being  almost  as  long  as  the  second  and  third,  which  are  the  longest.
Tail  longish,  rounded,  and  slightly  forked,  the  feathers  rather  narrow,
and  acuminate.

Bill  and  feet  light  blue.  Iris  orange.  Head,  throat,  back  part  of  the
neck,  fore  part  of  the  back,  quills  and  larger  secondaries,  black,  as  are  the
two  middle  tail-feathers,  and  the  base  of  all  the  rest.  The  whole  under
parts,  the  lesser  wing-coverts,  and  the  posterior  part  of  the  back,  bright
orange,  deeply  tinged  with  vermilion  on  the  breast  and  neck.  The  tips
of  the  two  middle  tail-feathers,  and  the  terminal  ends  of  the  others,  of  a
duller  orange.  Quills,  excepting  the  first,  margined  with  white.

Length  7f  inches,  extent  of  wings  12  ; bill  f along  the  ridge,  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  |,  toe  1.

Male,  two  years  old,  in  spring.  Plate  XII.  Fig.  2.

The  distribution  of  the  colours  is  the  same  as  in  the  adult  male,  but
the  yellow  is  less  vivid,  the  upper  mandible  is  brownish-black  above,  and
the  iris  is  light-brown.

Young  Male,  one  year  old,  in  spring.  Plate  XII.  Fig.  I.

The  bill  is  dark  brown  above,  pale  blue  beneath.  Iris  brown.  Feet
light  blue.  The  general  colour  is  dull  brownish-yellow,  tinged  with  olive
on  the  head  and  back.  The  wings  are  blackish-brown,  the  quills  and


BALTIMORE  ORIOLE.


71


large  coverts  margined  and  tipped  with  white.  The  lesser  coverts  are
olivaceous,  the  tail  destitute  of  black,  and  the  under  parts  paler  than  in
the  adult,  without  any  approach  to  the  vivid  orange  tints  displayed  on  it.
Length  7^  inches.


The  Tulip-Tree.

Liriodendron  tulipifera,  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  vol.  ii.  p.  1254.  Pursh.  Flora  Ame-
ric.  p.  332.  Mich.  Abr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  t.  ill.  p.  202,  PL  v. — Polyan-
DRiA  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn.  Magnoli^,  Juss.

This  tree  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of  those  indigenous  to  the  United
States,  and  attains  a height  of  seventy,  eighty,  or  even  a hundred  feet.
The  flowers  are  yellow  and  bright  red,  mixed  with  green,  and  upwards
of  three  inches  in  diameter.  The  leaves  are  ovate  at  the  base,  truncato-
bilobate  at  the  end,  with  one  or  two  lobes  on  each  side,  all  the  lobes  acu-
minate. It  is  generally  distributed,  but  prefers  rich  soils.  Its  bark  is
smooth  on  the  branches,  cracked  and  fissured  on  the  stems.  The  wood
is  yellow,  hard,  but  easily  wrought,  and  is  employed  for  numerous  pur-
poses, particularly  in  the  construction  of  houses,  and  for  charcoal.  The
Indians  often  form  their  canoes  of  it,  for  which  purpose  it  is  well  adapted,
the  trunk  being  of  great  length  and  diameter,  and  the  wood  light.  In
different  parts  of  the  United  States,  it  receives  the  names  of  Poplar,  White
Wood,  and  Cane  Wood.


( 72  )


THE  SNOW  BIRD.

Fringilla  hyemalis.  Linn.

PLATE  XIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  is  one  of  our  winter  visitants  from  the  north,  which,  along  with
many  others,  makes  its  appearance  in  Louisiana  about  the  beginning  of
November,  to  remain  a few  months,  and  again,  when  spring  returns,  fly
off',  to  seek  in  higher  latitudes  a place  in  which  to  nestle  and  rear  its
young.  So  gentle  and  tame  does  it  become  on  the  least  approach  of  hard
weather,  that  it  forms,  as  it  were,  a companion  to  every  child.  Indeed,
there  is  not  an  individual  in  the  Union  who  does  not  know  the  little  Snow
Bird,  which,  in  America,  is  cherished  as  the  Robin  is  in  Europe.  I have
seen  it  fed  by  persons  from  the  “ Old  Country,”  and  have  always  been
pleased  by  such  a sight.  During  fine  weather,  however,  it  becomes  more
timorous,  and  keeps  aloof,  resorting  to  the  briar  patches  and  the  edges  of
the  fences  ; but  even  then  it  is  easily  approached,  and  will  suffer  a person
on  horseback  to  pass  within  a few  feet  of  the  place  where  it  may  be
searching  for  food  on  the  road,  or  the  rails  of  the  fences  on  which  it  is
perched.

Although  the  Snow  Birds  live  in  little  families,  consisting  of  twenty,
thirty,  or  more  individuals,  they  seem  always  inclined  to  keep  up  a cer-
tain degree  of  etiquette  among  themselves,  and  will  not  suffer  one  of  their
kind,  or  indeed  any  other  bird,  to  come  into  immediate  contact  with
them.  To  prevent  intrusions  of  this  kind,  when  a stranger  comes  too
near,  their  little  bills  are  instantly  opened,  their  wings  are  extended,  their
eyes  are  seen  to  sparkle,  and  they  emit  a repelling  sound  peculiar  to
themselves  on  such  occasions.

They  are  aware  of  the  advantages  to  be  derived  by  them  from  larger
birds  scratching  the  earth,  and  in  some  degree  keep  company  with  Par-
tridges, Wild  Turkeys,  and  even  Squirrels,  for  the  purpose  of  picking  up
such  food  as  these  animals  may  deem  beneath  their  notice.  This  habit  is
more  easily  observed  in  those  which  frequent  the  farm-yards,  where  the
domestic  fowls  prove  regular  purveyors  to  them.  The  report  of  a gun,
or  the  unexpected  barking  of  a dog,  cause  the  little  flock  to  rise  and
pcrch  either  on  the  fences  or  an  adjoining  tree,  where,  however,  they  re-


SNOW  BIRD.


73


main  only  for  a few  minutes,  after  which  they  return  to  their  avocations.
They  are  particularly  fond  of  grass- seeds,  to  procure  which  they  often
leap  up  from  the  ground,  and  dexterously  seize  the  bending  panicles.

It  is  a true  hopping  bird,  and  performs  its  little  leaps  without  the
least  appearance  of  moving  either  feet  or  legs,  in  which  circumstance  it
resembles  the  Sparrows.  Another  of  its  habits,  also  indicative  of  affinity
to  these  birds,  is  it  resorting  at  night,  during  cold  weather,  to  stacks  of
corn  or  hay,  in  which  it  forms  a hole  that  affords  a snug  retreat  during
the  continuance  of  such  weather,  or  its  recurrence  through  the  winter.
In  fine  weather,  however,  it  prefers  the  evergreen  foliage  of  the  holly,  the
cedar  or  low  pines,  among  which  to  roost.  Its  flight  is  easy,  and  as
spring  approaches,  and  its  passions  become  excited  by  the  increased  tem-
perature, the  males  chase  each  other  on  wing,  when  their  tails  being  fully
expanded,  the  white  and  black  colours  displayed  in  them  present  a quite
remarkable  contrast.

The  migration  of  these  birds  is  performed  by  night,  as  they  are  seen
in  a district  one  day,  and  have  disappeared  the  next.  Early  in  March,
the  Snow  Bird  is  scarcely  to  be  seen  in  Louisiana,  but  may  be  followed,
as  the  season  advances,  retreating  towards  the  mountains  of  the  middle
districts,  where  many  remain  during  the  summer  and  breed.  Although  I
have  never  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  any  of  their  nestsj  yet  I have
seen  them  rear  their  young  in  such  places,  and  particularly  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Great  Pine  Forest,  where  many  persons  told  me  they
had  often  seen  their  nests.

During  the  period  when  the  huckleberries  are  ripe,  they  feed  partially
upon  them,  being  found  chiefly  on  the  poorest  mountain  lands,  in  which
that  shrub  grows  most  abundantly.  I have  seen  the  Snow  Birds  far  up
the  Arkansas,  and  in  the  province  of  Maine,  as  well  as  on  our  Upper
Lakes.  I have  been  told  of  their  congregating  so  as  to  form  large  flocks
of  a thousand  individuals,  but  have  never  seen  so  many  together.  Their
flesh  is  extremely  delicate  and  juicy,  and  on  this  account  small  strings  of
them  are  frequently  seen  in  the  New  Orleans  market,  during  the  short
period  of  their  sojourn  in  that  district.  Towards  the  spring,  the  males
have  a tolerably  agreeable  song.

The  twig  on  which  you  see  them  is  one  of  the  Tupelo,  a tree  of  great
magnitude,  growing  in  the  low  grounds  of  the  state  of  Louisiana,  and  on
one  of  which  I happened  to  shoot  the  pair  represented  in  the  plate.


74


SNOW  BIRD.


Fringilla  hyemalis,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  Ed.  10.  p.  183 — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synopsis  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  109.

Emberiza  hyemalis,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  Ed.  12.  p.  308.

Snow  Bird,  Fringilla  nivalis,  Wilson,  American  Ornithology,  vol.  ii.  p.  129.
PI.  16.  fig.  6.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  rather  small,  conical,  very  acute ; upper  mandible  a little
broader  than  the  lower,  very  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip,  rounded  on  the
sides,  as  is  the  lower,  which  has  the  edges  inflected  and  acute ; the  gap
line  straight,  not  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,
concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck  short.  Body  full.
Legs  of  moderate  length,  slender;  tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,
covered  anteriorly  with  a few  longish  scutella ; toes  scutellate  above,  free,
the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  very  slender,  greatly  compressed,
acute  and  slightly  arched,  that  of  the  hind  toe  little  larger.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Wings  shortish,  curved,  rounded,  the
third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  the  second  nearly  as  long,  the  first  little
shorter.  Tail  long,  forked,  the  lateral  feathers  curved  outwards  a little
towards  the  tip.

Bill  white,  tinged  with  red,  dark  coloured  at  the  tip.  Iris  blackish-
brown.  Feet  and  claws  flesh-coloured.  Head,  neck,  fore  part  of  the
breast,  back,  wings  and  upper  part  of  the  sides,  blackish-grey,  deeper  on
the  head.  Quills  margined  with  whitish ; tail  of  the  same  dark  colour  as
the  wings,  excepting  the  two  outer  feathers  on  each  side,  which  are  white,
as  are  the  lower  breast  and  abdomen.

Length  6^  inches,  extent  of  wings  9 ; beak  ^ along  the  ridge,  i along
the  gap  ; tarsus  f , middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  in  being  of  a lighter  grey,  tinged  on
the  back  with  brown.  Length  inches.


SNOW  BIRD.


75


The  Large  Tupelo.

Nyssa  tomentosa,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  1113.  Pursh,  Flora  Americ.  p.  177*

GRANDiDENTATA,  Michaux,  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  t.  ii.  p.  PI.  19.

POLYGAMIA  Dkecia,  Linn.  El(EAGNI,  Jtiss.

This  species,  which  occurs  in  the  Southern  States  only,  growing  in  low
and  marshy  grounds,  attains  a height  of  from  seventy  to  eighty  feet,  with
a diameter  of  eighteen  or  twenty  inches  some  feet  above  the  ground,  al-
though at  the  very  base  it  is  sometimes  five  or  six  feet.  The  leaves  are
five  or  six  inches  in  length,  elliptical,  acuminate,  distantly  toothed,  when
young  very  downy,  but  finally  smooth.  The  fruit  is  oblong,  and  of  a
dark  purple  colour.  The  wood  is  remarkably  light  and  soft.


{ 76  )


THE  PRAIRIE  WARBLER.

Sylvia  DISCOLOR.  Vieill.

PLATE  XIV.  Male  and  Female.

This  little  bird  has  no  song,  at  least  I never  heard  any  from  it,  ex-
cepting a delicate  soft  whirr ejaculated  whilst  it  stands  erect  on  the  top
of  some  rank  wved  or  low  bush.  Its  nest,  which  forms  by  far  the  most
interesting  part  of  its  history,  is  uncommonly  small  and  delicate.  Its
eggs  I have  uniformly  found  to  be  four  in  number,  and  of  a white  colour,
with  a few  brownish  spots  near  the  larger  end.  The  nest  is  sometimes
attached  to  three  or  four  blades  of  tall  grass,  or  hangs  between  two  small
sprigs  of  a slender  twig.  At  first  sight,  it  seems  to  be  formed  like  that  of
the  Humming  Bird,  the  external  parts  being  composed  of  delicate  grey
lichens  and  other  substances,  and  skins  of  black  caterpillars,  and  the  in-
terior finished  with  the  finest  fibres  of  dried  vines.  Two  broods  are  rear-
ed each  season.

In  Louisiana  I found  this  bird  amongst  our  cotton  fields,  where  it
easily  procures  the  small  insects  and  flies  of  which  its  food  is  entirely
composed.  It  is  also  found  in  the  prairies  along  the  skirts  of  the  wood-
lands. I have  shot  several  within  a few  miles  of  Philadelphia,  in  the
Jerseys,  in  a large  opening  where  the  woods  had  been  cut  down,  and  were
beginning  to  spring  up  again.  Its  flight  is  light  and  short,  it  making
an  effort  to  rise  to  the  height  of  eight  or  ten  yards,  and  immediately  sink-
ing down  to  the  grass  or  bushes.  Whilst  on  the  ground,  where  it  re-
mains a good  deal,  it  searches  amongst  the  leaves  slowly  and  carefully,
differing  in  this  respect  from  all  the  true  warblers  with  which  I am  ac-
quainted. They  go  singly,  and  far  apart,  scarcely  more  than  three  or
four  being  ever  seen  on  an  extent  of  twenty  or  thirty  acres.  It  is  one  of
the  first  birds  that  arrives  in  spring  in  Louisiana,  and  one  of  the  first  to
depart,  being  rarely  found  after  the  first  week  of  September.  I never
saw  it  farther  east  than  on  the  ridges  of  the  Broad  Mountain,  about
twelve  miles  from  Mauch  Chunk ; but  I have  seen  it  on  the  Arkansas
River,  and  high  up  on  the  Mississippi,  as  well  as  along  the  southern  bor-
ders of  Lake  Erie.  The  young  are  apt  to  leave  the  nest  if  discovered
when  unable  to  fly,  and  follow  their  parents  through  the  grass  to  be  fed.


PRAIRIE  WARBLER.


77


The  plant  on  which  a pair  of  Prairie  Warblers^  are  represented,  is
commonly  called  Buffalo  Grass,  and  is  found  all  along  the  edges  of  our  ex-
tensive prairies,  in  the  barrens  of  Kentucky,  and  in  Louisiana,  except-
ing in  the  swamps,  it  being  more  inclined  to  grow  in  dry  soil  and  stiff*
grounds.


Sylvia  discolor,  Ch,  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  83.

Prairie  Warbler,  Sylvia  minuta,  Wils*  Americ.  Omith.  vol.  iii.  p.  87*  PI.  25.
fig.  4.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  slender,  nearly  straight,  acute,  as  deep  as
broad  at  the  base,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  oval,  basal,  la-
teral, half  closed  by  a membrane.  Head  rather  small,  elongated.  Neck
and  body  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer  than
the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  by  a few  scutella,  the  upper  long ; toes
scutellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size ; claws  slen-
der, compressed,  acute,  arched..

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  A few  short  bristles  at  the  base  of  the
upper  mandible.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  second  quill  longest.
Tail  longish,  rounded.

Bill  brown,  paler  at  the  margin.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Feet  and  claws
dark  brown.  The  upper  parts  are  light  olive,  the  back  spotted  with
brownish-red.  The  under  parts,  a line  over  the  eye,  and  the  cheeks,  dull
ochrey  yellow,  the  sides  of  the  neck  and  breast  spotted  with  brownish-
black.  Lore,  and  a curved  streak  under  the  eye,  black.  Quills  and  tail-
feathers  deep  brown,  the  former  margined  with  pale  yellow ; larger  co-
verts margined  and  tipped  with  the  same,  the  second  row  almost  entirely
yellow,  the  three  outer  tail-feathers  with  a broad  oblique  band  of  white.

Length  5 inches,  extent  of  wings  7 ; beak  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ^ ; tarsus  f , middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XIV.  Fig.  %

The  female  is  nearly  of  the  same  size,  and  is  coloured  in  the  same
manner,  but  wants  the  black  markings  about  the  eye,  and  has  only  two
of  the  lateral  tail-feathers  white  in  the  middle.  The  spots  on  the  sides  of
the  neck  and  breast  are  also  much  paler.

Length  4|.


( 78  )


THE  BLUE  YELLOW-BACKED  WARBLER.

Sylvia  AMERICANA,  Lath.

PLATE  XV.  Male  and  Female.

This  pretty  species  enters  Louisiana  from  the  south  as  early  as  spring
appears,  at  the  period  when  most  insects  are  found  closer  to  the  ground,
and  more  about  water-courses,  than  shortly  after,  when  a warmer  sun  has
invited  every  leaf  and  blossom  to  hail  the  approach  of  that  season  when
they  all  become  as  brilliant  as  nature  intended  them  to  be.  The  little  fel-
low under  your  eye  is  then  seen  flitting  over  damp  places,  such  as  the
edges  of  ponds,  lakes,  and  rivers,  chasing  its  prey  with  as  much  activity
and  liveliness  as  any  other  of  the  delicate  and  interesting  tribe  to  which
it  belongs.  It  alights  on  every  plant  in  its  way,  runs  up  and  down  it,
picks  here  and  there  a small  winged  insect,  and  should  one,  aware  of  its
approach,  fly  off,  pursues  it  and  snatches  it  in  an  instant.

I have  placed  a pair  of  these  Warblers  on  a handsome  species  of  Iris.
This  plant  grows  in  the  water,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Orleans,
a few  miles  below  that  city,  where  I found  it  abundantly,  and  in  bloom,  in
the  beginning  of  April.  Several  flowers  are  produced  upon  the  same
stem.  I have  not  met  with  it  anywhere  else,  and  the  name  of  Louisiana
Flag  is  the  one  commonly  given  it.

As  soon  as  the  foliage  of  the  forests  begins  to  expand,  the  Blue  Yel-
low-backed Warbler  flies  to  the  tops  of  the  trees,  and  there  remains  during
the  season,  gleaning  amongst  the  leaves  and  branches,  in  the  same  active
manner  as  it  employed  when  nearer  the  ground,  not  leaving  off  its  quick
and  short  pursuit  of  small  insects  on  the  wing.  When  on  the  branches,
it  frequently  raises  its  body  (which  is  scarcely  larger  when  stripped  of
its  feathers  than  the  first  joint  of  a man’s  finger)  upwards  to  the  full
length  of  its  legs  and  toes,  and  is  thus  enabled  to  seize  insects  otherwise
beyond  its  reach.

Its  flight  is  that  of  a true  Sylvia.  It  ascends  for  a while  in  a very
zigzag  manner,  and  returns  suddenly  to  nearly  the  same  place,  as  if  afraid
to  encounter  the  dangers  of  a prolonged  excursion.  I do  not  think  it
ever  flies  to  the  ground.  It  hops  sidewise  as  well  as  straight  forward.


BLUE  YELLOW-BACK  WARBLER.


79


hanga  like  a Titmousej  and  searches  the  cups  of  even  the  smallest  flowers
for  its  favourite  insects.

I am  inclined  to  think  that  it  raises  two  broods  in  a season,  having
seen  and  shot  the  young  on  the  trees,  in  Louisiana,  early  in  May,  and
again  in  the  beginning  of  July.  The  nest  is  small,  formed  of  lichens,
beautifully  arranged  on  the  outside,  and  lined  with  the  cottony  sub-
stances found  on  the  edges  of  different  mosses.  It  is  placed  in  the
fork  of  a small  twig,  and  so  far  towards  the  extremity  of  the  branches
as  to  have  forced  me  to  cut  them  ten  or  fifteen  feet  from  it,  to  pro-
cure one.  On  drawing  in  the  branch  carefully  to  secure  the  nest^  the
male  and  female  always  flew  toward  me,  exhibiting  all  the  rage  and  ani-
mosity befitting  the  occasion.  The  eggs  are  pure  white,  with  a few  red-
dish dots  at  the  larger  end,  and  were  in  two  instances  fom*  in  number.
It  was  several  years  before  I discovered  one  of  these  nests,  so  small  are
they,  and  so  difficult  to  be  seen  from  the  ground.

This  species  is  found  throughout  the  United  States,  and  may  be  con-
sidered as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the  birds  of  those  countries.  It
has  no  song,  but  merely  a soft,  greatly  prolonged  twitter,  repeated  at
short  intervals.  It  returns  southward,  out  of  the  Union,  in  the  beginning
of  October.


Sylvia  amemcaka,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  520. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  33.

Yellow-backed  Warbler,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  440.

Blue  Yellow-back  Warbler,  Sylvia  pusilla,  Wils.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.
p.  17.  Pi.  28.  fig.  3.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XV.  Pig.  1.

Bill  longish,  depressed  at  the  base,  nearly  straight,  tapering  to  a
point.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  half  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Feet  of  or-
dinary length,  slender;  tarsus  compressed,  covered,  anteriorly  with  a few
long  scutella,  acute  behind,  longer  than,  the  middle  toe ; toes  scuteUate
above,  free;  claws  arched,  slendear,  compressed,  acute,  '

Plumage  blended,  glossy.  Wings  longish,  little  curved,  the  first  quill
longest.  Tail  slightly  forked,  of  ordinary  length,  the  twelve  feathers  ra-
ther narrow  and  obtuse.  A few  longish  bristles  at  the  base  of  the  upper
mandible.


80


BLUE  YELLOW-BACK  WARBLER.


Bill  brownish-black  above,  yellow  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet
and  claws  dusky.  Front  and  lore  black.  Head  and  back  part  of  the
neck  bright  rich  blue,  including  the  eye,  above  and  beneath  which  is  a
slight  streak  of  white.  Back  yellowish-green ; rump  pale  blue.  Quills
blackish,  margined  externally  with  bright  blue,  of  which  colour  are  the
wing-coverts,  the  tips  of  the  first  two  rows  of  which  are  white,  forming
two  bands  of  that  colour  on  the  wings.  Tail-feathers  blackish,  the  outer
webs  blue,  a white  spot  on  the  inner  webs  of  the  three  outer,  towards  the
end.  Throat  whitish,  spotted  with  yellow ; a lunulated  blackish  spot  on
the  lower  neck  in  front ; breast  yellow,  spotted  with  orange  ; the  rest  of
the  under  parts  yellowish,  fading  into  white  on  the  abdomen  and  under
tail  coverts.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  6j  ; bill  along  the  ridge  J,  along
the  gap  tarsus  J.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XV.  Fig.  2.

Beak  and  feet  of  the  same  colour.  Upper  parts  similarly  coloured
but  paler,  the  frontal  band  wanting.  Throat,  fore  neck  and  breast,  yel-
low, without  the  orange  spots,  or  black  lunule.  The  other  parts  as  in
the  male,  but  fainter.

Length  4 inches.


The  Coppery  Iris,  or  Louisiana  Flag.

Iris  cuprea,  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  30. — Triandria  Monogynia,  Linn.

Irides.  Juss.

“ Beardless,  the  stem  equal  in  height  to  the  leaves,  which  are  broad-
ly ensiform,  the  stigmas  linear  and  short,  all  the  petals  emarginate,  re-
flected, and  obovate,  the  inner  shorter,  the  capsules  large  and  hexagonal.
Found  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  near  New  Orleans.  Flowers  of  a
beautiful  copper  colour,  veined  with  purple.”


( 81  )


THE  PRAIRIE.

On  my  return  from  the  Upper  Mississippi,  I found  myself  obliged  to
cross  one  of  the  wide  Prairies,  which,  in  that  portion  of  the  United  States,
vary  the  appearance  of  the  country.  The  weather  was  fine,  all  around
me  was  as  fresh  and  blooming  as  if  it  had  just  issued  from  the  bosom  of  na-
ture. My  napsack,  my  gun,  and  my  dog,  were  all  I had  for  baggage  and
company.  But,  although  well  moccassined,  I moved  slowly  along,  attract-
ed by  the  brilliancy  of  the  flowers,  and  the  gambols  of  the  fawns  around  ^
their  dams,  to  all  appearance,  as  thoughtless  of  danger  as  I felt  myself.

My  march  was  of  long  duration ; I saw  the  sun  sinking  beneath  the
horizon  long  before  I could  perceive  any  appearance  of  woodland,  and
nothing  in  the  shape  of  man  had  I met  with  that  day.  The  track  which
I followed  was  only  an  old  Indian  trace,  and  as  darkness  over  shaded  the
prairie,  I felt  some  desire  to  reach  at  least  a copse,  in  which  I might  lie
down  to  rest.  The  Night-hawks  were  skimming  over  and  around  me,  at-
tracted by  the  buzzing  wings  of  the  beetles  which  form  their  food,  and
the  distant  howling  of  wolves,  gave  me  some  hope  that  I should  soon  ar-
rive at  the  skirts  of  some  woodland.

I did  so,  and  almost  at  the  same  instant  a fire-light  attracting  my  eye,

I moved  towards  it,  full  of  confidence  that  it  proceeded  from  the  camp  of
some  wandering  Indians.  I was  mistaken  t — I discovered  by  its  glare
that  it  was  from  the  hearth  of  a small  log  cabin,  and  that  a tall  figure
passed  and  repassed  between  it  and  me,  as  if  busily  engaged  in  household
arrangements.

I reached  the  spot,  and  presenting  myself  at  the  door,  asked  the  tall
figure,  which  proved  to  be  a woman,  if  I might  take  shelter  under  her  roof
for  the  night.  Her  voice  was  grufi*,  and  her  attire  negligently  thrown  about
her.  She  answered  in  the  affirmative.  I walked  in,  took  a wooden  stool,
and  quietly  seated  myself  by  the  fire.  The  next  object  that  attracted  my
notice  was  a finely  formed  young  Indian,  resting  his  head  between  his
hands,  with  his  elbows  on  his  knees.  A long  bow  rested  against  the  log
wall  near  him,  while  a quantity  of  arrows  and  two  or  three  raccoon  skins
lay  at  his  feet.  He  moved  not ; he  apparently  breathed  not.  Accustomed
to  the  habits  of  the  Indians,  and  knowing  that  they  pay  little  attention

F


82


THE  PRAIRIE.


to  the  approach  of  civilized  strangers  (a  circumstance  which  in  some  coun-
tries is  considered  as  evincing  the  apathy  of  their  character),  I addressed
him  in  French,  a language  not  unfrequently  partially  known  to  the  people
in  that  neighbourhood.  He  raised  his  head,  pointed  to  one  of  his  eyes
with  his  linger,  and  gave  me  a significant  glance  with  the  other.  His  face
was  covered  with  blood.  The  fact  was,  that  an  hour  before  this,  as  he
was  in  the  act  of  discharging  an  arrow  at  a raccoon  in  the  top  of  a tree,  the
arrow  had  split  upon  the  cord,  and  sprung  back  with  such  violence  into
his  right  eye  as  to  destroy  it  for  ever.

Feeling  hungry,  I inquired  what  sort  of  fare  I might  expect.  Such
a thing  as  a bed  was  not  to  be  seen,  but  many  large  untanned  bear  and
buffalo  hides  lay  piled  in  a corner.  I drew  a fine  time-piece  from  my
breast,  and  told  the  woman  that  it  was  late,  and  that  I was  fatigued.
She  had  espied  my  watch,  the  richness  of  which  seemed  to  operate  upon
her  feelings  with  electric  quickness.  She  told  me  that  there  was  plenty
of  venison  and  jerked  buffalo  meat,  and  that  on  removing  the  ashes  I
should  find  a cake.  But  my  watch  had  struck  her  fancy,  and  her  curio-
sity had  to  be  gratified  by  an  immediate  sight  of  it.  I took  off  the  gold
chain  that  secured  it  from  around  my  neck,  and  presented  it  to  her.  She
was  all  ecstacy,  spoke  of  its  beauty,  asked  me  its  value,  and  put  the  chain
round  her  brawny  neck,  saying  how  happy  the  possession  of  such  a watch
should  make  her.  Thoughtless,  and,  as  I fancied  myself,  in  so  retired  a
spot,  secure,  I paid  little  attention  to  her  talk  or  her  movements.  I
helped  my  dog  to  a good  supper  of  venison,  and  was  not  long  in  satisfy-
ing the  demands  of  my  own  appetite.

The  Indian  rose  from  his  seat,  as  if  in  extreme  suffering.  He  passed
and  repassed  me  several  times,  and  once  pinched  me  on  the  side  so  vio-
lently, that  the  pain  nearly  brought  forth  an  exclamation  of  anger.  I
looked  at  him.  His  eye  met  mine ; but  his  look  was  so  forbidding,  that
it  struck  a chill  into  the  more  nervous  part  of  my  system.  He  again
seated  himself,  drew  his  butcher-knife  from  its  greasy  scabbard,  examined
its  edge,  as  I would  do  that  of  a razor  suspected  dull,  replaced  it,  and
again  taking  his  tomahawk  from  his  back,  filled  the  pipe  of  it  with  tobac-
co, and  sent  me  expressive  glances  whenever  our  hostess  chanced  to  have
her  back  toward  us.

Never  until  that  moment  had  my  senses  been  awakened  to  the
danger  which  I now  suspected  to  be  about  me.  I returned  glance  for


THE  PRAIRIE.


83


glance  to  my  companion,  and  rested  well  assured  that,  whatever  enemies
I might  have,  he  was  not  of  their  number.

I asked  the  woman  for  my  watch,  wound  it  up,  and  under  pretence
of  wishing  to  see  how  the  weather  might  probably  be  on  the  morrow,  took
up  my  gun,  and  walked  out  of  the  cabin.  I slipped  a ball  into  each  bar-
rel, scraped  the  edges  of  my  flints,  renewed  the  primings,  and  returning
to  the  hut,  gave  a favourable  account  of  my  observations.  I took  a few
bear-skins,  made  a pallet  of  them,  and  calhng  my  faithful  dog  to  my  side,
lay  down,  with  my  gun  close  to  my  body,  and  in  a few  minutes  was,  to
all  appearance,  fast  asleep.

A short  time  had  elapsed,  when  some  voices  were  heard,  and  from  the
corner  of  my  eyes  I saw  two  athletic  youths  making  their  entrance,  bear-
ing a dead  stag  on  a pola  They  disposed  of  their  burden,  and  asking
for  whisky,  helped  themselves  freely  to  it.  Observing  me  and  the
wounded  Indian,  they  asked  who  I was,  and  why  the  devil  that  rascal
(meaning  the  Indian,  who,  they  knew,  understood  not  a word  of  English)
was  in  the  house.  The  mother — ^for  so  she  proved  to  be,  bade  them
speak  less  loudly,  made  mention  of  my  watch,  and  took  them  to  a
corner,  where  a conversation  took  place,  the  purport  of  which  it  re-
quired little  shrewdness  in  me  to  guess.  I tapped  my  dog  gently.
He  moved  his  tail,  and  with  indescribable  pleasure  I saw  his  fine  eyes  al-
ternately fixed  on  me  and  raised  towards  the  trio  in  the  corner.  I felt
that  he  perceived  danger  in  my  situation.  The  Indian  exchanged  a last
glance  with  me.

The  lads  had  eaten  and  drunk  themselves  into  such  condition,  that  I
already  looked  upon  them  as  Tiora  de  combat ; and  the  frequent  visits  of
the  whisky  bottle  to  the  ugly  mouth  of  their  dam  I hoped  would  soon
reduce  her  to  alike  state.  Judge  of  my  astonishment,  reader,  when  I saw
this  incarnate  fiend  take  a large  carving-knife,  and  go  to  the  grindstone
to  whet  its  edge.  I saw  her  pour  the  water  on  the  turning  machine,  and
watched  her  working  away  with  the  dangerous  instrument,  until  the  cold
sweat  covered  every  part  of  my  body,  in  despite  of  my  determination  to
defend  myself  to  the  last.  Her  task  finished,  she  walked  to  her  reeling

sons,  and  said,  There,  that’ll  soon  settle  him  ! Boys,  kill  you* , and

then  for  the  watch.”

I turned,  cocked  my  gun-locks  silently,  touched  my  faithful  compa-
nion, and  lay  ready  to  start  up  and  shoot  the  first  who  might  attempt  my
life.  The  moment  was  fast  approaching,  and  that  night  might  have  been

r 2


84


THE  PRAIRIE.


my  last  in  this  world,  had  not  Providence  made  preparations  for  my
rescue.  All  was  ready.  The  infernal  hag  was  advancing  slowly,  pro-
bably contemplating  the  best  way  of  despatching  me,  whilst  her  sons
should  be  engaged  with  the  Indian.  I was  several  times  on  the  eve  of
rising,  and  shooting  her  on  the  spot : — but  she  was  not  to  be  punished
thus.  The  door  was  suddenly  opened,  and  there  entered  two  stout  tra^
vellers,  each  with  a long  rifle  on  his  shoulder.  I bounced  up  on  my  feet,
and  making  them  most  heartily  welcome,  told  them  how  well  it  was  for
me  that  they  should  have  arrived  at  that  moment.  The  tale  was  told  in
a minute.  The  drunken  sons  were  secured,  and  the  woman,  in  spite  of
her  defence  and  vociferations,  shared  the  same  fate.  The  Indian  fairly
danced  with  joy,  and  gave  us  to  understand  that,  as  he  could  not  sleep  for
pain,  he  would  watch  over  us.  You  may  suppose  we  slept  much  less  than
we  talked.  The  two  strangers  gave  me  an  account  of  their  once  having
been  themselves  in  a somewhat  similar  situation.  Day  came,  fair  and  rosy,
and  with  it  the  punishment  of  our  captives.

They  were  now  quite  sobered.  Their  feet  were  unbound,  but  their
arms  were  still  securely  tied.  We  marched  them  into  the  woods  off  the
road,  and  having  used  them  as  Regulators  were  wont  to  use  such  delin-
quents, we  set  fire  to  the  cabin,  gave  all  the  skins  and' implements  to  the
young  Indian  warrior,  and  proceeded,  well  pleased,  towards  the  settlements.

During  upwards  of  twenty- five  years,  when  my  wanderings  extended
to  all  parts  of  our  country,  this  was  the  only  time  at  which  my  life  was
in  danger  from  my  fellow  creatures.  Indeed,  so  little  risk  do  travellers
run  in  the  United  States,  that  no  one  born  there  ever  dreams  of  any  to  be
encountered  on  the  road ; and  I can  only  account  for  this  occurrence  by
supposing  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  cabin  were  not  Americans.

Will  you  believe,  good-natured  reader,  that  not  many  miles  from  the
place  where  this  adventure  happened,  and  where  fifteen  years  ago,  no  ha-
bitation belonging  to  civilized  man  was  expected,  and  very  few  ever  seen,
large  roads  are  now  laid  out,  cultivation  has  converted  the  woods  into
fertile  fields,  taverns  have  been  erected,  and  much  of  what  we  Americans
call  comfort  is  to  be  met  with.  So  fast  does  improvement  proceed  in  our
abundant  and  free  country.


( 85  )


THE  GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.

Falco  pjerugrinus,  Gmel.

PLATE  XVI.  Adult  Male  and  Female.

The  French  and  Spaniards  of  Louisiana  have  designated  all  the  spe-
cies of  the  genus  Falco  by  the  name  of  “ Mangeurs  de  Poulets and  the
farmers  in  other  portions  of  the  Union  have  bestowed  upon  them,  accord-
ing to  their  size,  the  appellations  of  Hen  Hawk,”  Chicken  Hawk,”
“ Pigeon  Hawk,”  &c.  This  mode  of  naming  these  rapacious  birds  is
doubtless  natural  enough,  but  it  displays  little  knowledge  of  the  charac-
teristic manners  of  the  species.  No  bird  can  better  illustrate  the  frequent
inaccuracy  of  the  names  bestowed  by  ignorant  persons  than  the  present,
of  which  on  referring  to  the  plate,  you  will  see  a pair  enjoying  themselves
over  a brace  of  ducks  of  different  species.  Very  likely,  were  tame  ducks
as  plentiful  on  the  plantations  in  our  States,  as  wild  ducks  are  on  our
rivers,  lakes  and  estuaries,  these  hawks  might  have  been  named  by  some
of  our  settlers  Mangeurs  de  Canards?''

Look  at  these  two  pirates  eating  their  dejeune  d la  Jhurchette,  as  it
were,  congratulating  each  other  on  the  savouriness  of  the  food  in  their
grasp.  One  might  think  them  real  epicures,  but  they  are  in  fact  true
gluttons.  The  male  has  obtained  possession  of  a Green-winged  Teal,
while  his  mate  has  procured  a Gadwal  Duck.  Their  appetites  are  equal
to  their  reckless  daring,  and  they  well  deserve  the  name  of  “ Pirates,”
which  I have  above  bestowed  upon  them.

The  Great-footed  Hawk,  or  Peregrine  Falcon,  is  now  frequently  to  be
met  with  in  the  United  States,  but  within  my  remembrance  it  was  a very
scarce  species  in  America.  I can  well  recollect  the  time  when,  if  I shot
one  or  two  individuals  of  the  species  in  the  course  of  a whole  winter,  I
thought  myself  a fortunate  mortal ; whereas  of  late  years  I have  shot  two
in  one  day,  and  perhaps  a dozen  in  the  course  of  a winter.  It  is  quite
impossible  for  me  to  account  for  this  increase  in  their  number,  the  more
so  that  our  plantations  have  equally  increased,  and  we  have  now  three  gun-
ners for  every  one  that  existed  twenty  years  ago,  and  all  of  them  ready
to  destroy  a hawk  of  any  kind  whenever  an  occasion  presents  itself.


86


GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.


The  flight  of  this  bird  is  of  astonishing  rapidity.  It  is  scarcely  ever
seen  sailing,  unless  after  being  disappointed  in  its  attempt  to  secure  the
prey  which  it  has  been  pursuing,  and  even  at  such  times  it  merely  rises
with  a broad  spiral  circuit,  to  attain  a sufficient  elevation  to  enable  it  to
reconnoitre  a certain  space  below.  It  then  emits  a cry  much  resembling
that  of  the  Sparrow  Hawk,  but  greatly  louder,  like  that  of  the  European
Kestrel,  and  flies  off  swiftly  in  quest  of  plunder.  The  search  is  often
performed  with  a flight  resembling  that  of  the  tame  pigeon,  until  per-
ceiving an  object,  it  redoubles  its  flappings,  and  pursues  the  fugitive  with
a rapidity  scarcely  to  be  conceived.  Its  turnings,  windings  and  cuttings
through  the  air  are  now  surprising.  It  follows  and  nears  the  timorous
quarry  at  every  turn  and  back-cutting  which  the  latter  attempts.
Arrived  within  a few  feet  of  the  prey,  the  Falcon  is  seen  protruding  his
powerful  legs  and  talons  to  their  full  stretch.  Flis  wings  are  for  a mo-
ment almost  closed ; the  next  instant  he  grapples  the  prize,  which,  if
too  weighty  to  be  carried  off  directly,  he  forces  obliquely  toward  the
ground,  sometimes  a hundred  yards  from  where  it  was  seized,  to  kill  it,
and  devour  it  on  the  spot.  Should  this  happen  over  a large  extent  of
water,  the  Falcon  drops  his  prey,  and  sets  off*  in  quest  of  another.  On
the  contrary,  should  it  not  prove  too  heavy,  the  exulting  bird  carries  it
off  to  a sequestered  and  secure  place.  He  pursues  the  smaller  Ducks,
Water-hens,  and  other  swimming  birds,  and  if  they  are  not  quick  in
diving,  seizes  them,  and  rises  with  them  from  the  water.  I have  seen
this  Hawk  come  at  the  report  of  a gun,  and  carry  off  a Teal  not  thirty
steps  distant  from  the  sportsman  who  had  killed  it,  with  a daring  assu-
rance as  surprising  as  unexpected.  This  conduct  has  been  observed  by
many  individuals,  and  is  a characteristic  trait  of  the  species.  The  largest
duck  that  I have  seen  this  bird  attack  and  grapple  with  on  the  wing  is
the  Mallard.

The  Great-footed  Hawk  does  not  however  content  himself  with  water-
fowl.  Fie  is  generally  seen  following  the  flocks  of  Pigeons  and  even
Blackbirds,  causing  great  terror  in  their  ranks,  and  forcing  them  to  per-
form various  aerial  evolutions  to  escape  the  grasp  of  his  dreaded  talons.
For  several  days  I watched  one  of  them  that  had  taken  a particular
fancy  to  some  tame  pigeons,  to  secure  which  it  went  so  far  as  to  enter
their  house  at  one  of  the  holes,  seize  a bird,  and  issue  by  another  hole
in  an  instant,  causing  such  terror  among  the  rest  as  to  render  me  fearful


GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.


87


that  they  would  abandon  the  place.  However,  I fortunately  shot  the
depredator.

They  occasionally  feed  on  dead  fish  that  have  floated  to  the  shores  or
sand  bars.  I saw  several  of  them  thus  occupied  while  descending  the
Mississippi  on  a journey  undertaken  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  observ-
ing and  procuring  different  specimens  of  birds,  and  which  lasted  four
months,  as  I followed  the  windings  of  that  great  river,  floating  down  it
only  a few  miles  daily.  During  that  period,  I and  my  companion  count-
ed upwards  of  fifty  of  these  Hawks,  and  killed  several,  among  which  was
the  female  represented  in  the  plate  now  before  you,  and  which  was  found
to  contain  in  its  stomach  bones  of  birds,  a few  downy  feathers,  the  giz-
zard of  a Teal,  and  the  eyes  and  many  scales  of  a fish.  It  was  shot  on
on  the  26th  December  1820.  The  ovary  contained  numerous  eggs,  two
of  which  were  as  large  as  pease.

Whilst  in  quest  of  food,  the  Great-footed  Hawk  will  frequently  alight
on  the  highest  dead  branch  of  a tree  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
such  wet  or  marshy  grounds  as  the  Common  Snipe  resorts  to  by  prefer-
ence. His  head  is  seen  moving  in  short  starts,  as  if  he  were  counting
every  little  space  below  ; and  while  so  engaged,  the  moment  he  spies  a
Snipe,  down  he  darts  like  an  arrow,  making  a rustling  noise  with  his
wings  that  may  be  heard  several  hundred  yards  off*,  seizes  the  Snipe,
and  flies  away  to  some  near  wood  to  devour  it.

It  is  a cleanly  bird,  in  respect  to  feeding.  No  sooner  is  the  prey
dead  than  the  Falcon  turns  its  belly  upward,  and  begins  to  pluck  it  with
his  bill,  which  he  does  very  expertly,  holding  it  meantime  quite  fast  in
his  talons  ; and  as  soon  as  a portion  is  cleared  of  feathers,  tears  the  flesh
in  large  pieces,  and  swallows  it  with  great  avidity.  If  it  is  a large  bird,
he  leaves  the  refuse  parts,  but,  if  small,  swallows  the  whole  in  pieces.
Should  he  be  approached  by  an  enemy,  he  rises  with  it  and  flies  off*  into
the  interior  of  the  woods,  or  if  he  happens  to  be  in  a meadow,  to  some
considerable  distance,  he  being  more  wary  at  such  times  than  when  he
has  alighted  on  a tree.

The  Great-footed  Hawk  is  a heavy,  compact,  and  firmly  built  bird
for  its  size,  and  when  arrived  at  maturity,  extremely  muscular,  with  very
tough  flesh.  The  plumage  differs  greatly  according  to  age.  I have  seen
it  vary  in  different  individuals,  from  the  deepest  chocolate-brown  to  light
grey.  Their  grasp  is  so  firm,  that  should  one  be  hit  while  perched,  and
not  shot  quite  dead,  it  will  cling  to  the  branch  until  life  has  departed.


88


GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.


Like  most  other  Hawks,  this  is  a solitary  bird,  excepting  during  the
breeding  season,  at  the  beginning  of  which  it  is  seen  in  pairs.  Their  sea-
son of  breeding  is  so  very  early,  that  it  might  be  said  to  be  in  winter.  I
have  seen  the  male  caressing  the  female  as  early  as  the  first  days  of  De-
cember.

This  species  visits  Louisiana  during  the  winter  months  only  ; for  al-
though I have  observed  it  mating  then,  it  generally  disappears  a few
days  after,  and  in  a fortnight  later  none  can  be  seen.  It  is  scarce  in  the
Middle  States,  where,  as  well  as  in  the  Southern  Districts,  it  lives  along
water-courses,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  shores  of  the  sea  and
inland  lakes.  I should  think  that  they  breed  in  the  United  States,
having  shot  a pair  in  the  month  of  August  near  the  Falls  of  Niagara.
It  is  extremely  tenacious  of  life,  and  if  not  wounded  in  the  wings,  though
mortally  so  in  the  body,  it  flies  to  the  last  gasp,  and  does  not  fall  until
life  is  extinct.  I never  saw  one  of  them  attack  a quadruped,  although
I have  frequently  seen  them  perched  within  sight  of  squirrels,  which  I
thought  they  might  easily  have  secured,  had  they  been  so  inclined.

Once  when  nearing  the  coast  of  England,  being  then  about  a hundred
and  fifty  miles  distant  from  it,  in  the  month  of  July,  I obtained  a pair  of
these  birds,  which  had  come  on  board  our  vessel,  and  had  been  shot
there.  I examined  them  with  care,  and  found  no  difference  between
them  and  those  which  I had  shot  in  America.  They  are  at  present
scarce  in  England,  where  I have  seen  only  a few.  In  London,  some  in-
dividuals of  the  species  resort  to  the  cupola  of  St  Paul’s  Cathedral,  and
the  towers  of  Westminster  Abbey,  to  roost,  and  probably  to  breed.
I have  seen  them  depart  from  these  places  at  day  dawn,  and  return  in
the  evening.

The  achievements  of  this  species  are  well  known  in  Europe,  where  it
is  even  at  the  present  day  trained  for  the  chase.  Whilst  on  a visit  at
Dalmahoy,  the  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Morton,  near  Edinburgh,  I had  the
pleasure  of  seeing  a pair  of  these  birds  hooded,  and  with  small  brass  bells
on  their  legs,  in  excellent  training.  They  were  the  property  of  that
nobleman.

These  birds  sometimes  roost  in  the  hollows  of  trees.  I saw  one  re-
sorting for  weeks  every  night  to  a hole  in  a dead  sycamore,  near  Louis-
ville in  Kentucky.  It  generally  came  to  the  place  a little  before  sunset,
alighted  on  the  dead  branches,  and  in  a short  time  after  flew  into  the  hol-
low, where  it  spent  the  night,  and  from  whence  I saw  it  issuing  at  dawn.


GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.


89


I have  known  them  also  retire  for  the  same  purpose  to  the  crevices  of
high  cliffs,  on  the  banks  of  Green  River  in  the  same  state.  One  winter,
when  I had  occasion  to  cross  the  Homochitta  River,  in  the  State  of  Mis-
sissippi, I observed  these  Hawks  in  greater  numbers  than  I had  ever  be-
fore seen.

Many  persons  believe  that  this  Hawk,  and  some  others,  never  drink
any  other  fluid  than  the  blood  of  their  victims  ; but  this  is  an  error.  T
have  seen  them  alight  on  sand  bars,  walk  to  the  edge  of  them,  immerse
their  bills  nearly  up  to  the  eyes  in  the  water,  and  drink  in  a continued
manner,  as  Pigeons  are  known  to  do.


Falco  peregrinus,  Qmel.  Syst.  vol.  i.  p.  272. — Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  voL  i.  p.  33

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  27.

Peregrine  Falcon,  Synopsis,  vol.  i.  p.  73,  and  Suppl.  p.  IS.

Great-footed  Hawk,  Wilsm,  Americ.  Omith.  voL  ix.  p.  120,  PI.  76.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shortish,  as  broad  as  deep,  the  sides  convex,  the  dorsal  outline
convex  from  the  base ; upper  mandible  cerate,  the  edges  blunt,  slightly
inflected,  with  a process  towards  the  curvature  on  either  side  with  a hol-
low, the  tip  trigonal,  descending  obliquely,  acute ; lower  mandible  invo-
lute at  the  edges,  truncate  at  the  end,  with  a notch  near  it,  corresponding
to  the  process  above.  Nostrils  round,  lateral,  with  a soft  papilla  in  the
centre,  connected  with  the  upper  edge.  Head  rather  large  and  round
Neck  shortish.  Body  ovate,  anteriorly  broad.  Legs  robust,  short
roundish  ; tarsi  covered  all  round  with  imbricated  scales,  the  anterior
largest,  broad,  and  subhexagonal,  the  posterior  small  and  rounded.
Toes  robust,  covered  above  with  broad  scutella,  scabrous  and  tubercular
below ; middle  and  outer  toes  connected  by  a membrane ; claws  round-
ish, strong  and  curved,  acute,  marginate  beneath.

Plumage  ordinary,  compact,  imbricated.  Feathers  of  the  back
rounded,  of  the  neck  and  breast  anteriorly  broad  and  rounded ; of  the
sides  long,  all  acuminate ; of  the  thighs  long  and  rounded.  Space  be-
tween the  bill  and  eye  covered  only  with  bristly  feathers.  Feathers  of
the  forehead  with  bristly  points.  Wings  long;  primary  quills  mode-
rately broad,  attenuated ; first  quill  notched  near  the  end ; secondaries


90


GREAT-FOOTED  HAWK.


curved  inwards,  broad,  obtuse,  with  an  acumen.  Tail-feathers  broadish,
rounded,  the  tail  rather  long,  and  nearly  even.

Bill  blackish-blue  at  the  tip,  pale  green  at  the  base,  cere  oil-green ;
bare  orbital  space  orange.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  lemon-yellow ; claws
brownish-black.  Head  and  hind  neck  greyish-black,  tinged  with  blue ;
the  rest  of  the  upper  parts  dark  bluish-grey,  indistinctly  barred  with
deep  brown.  Quills  blackish-brown,  the  inner  webs  marked  with  trans-
verse elliptical  spots  of  reddish-white.  Tail  greyish-brown,  marked  with
about  twelve  bars,  the  last  of  which  is  broad,  the  rest  diminishing  in  size
and  intensity  of  tint.  Throat  and  fore-neck  white ; a broad  band  of
blackish-blue  from  the  angle  of  the  mouth  downwards ; cheeks  whitish-
grey  ; sides,  breast  and  thighs  reddish-white,  transversely  marked  with
dark  brown  spots  in  longitudinal  series.  Under  wing  feathers  whitish,
transversely  barred.

Length  16^  inches,  extent  of  wings  30;  bill  along  the  ridge;
tarsus  1^,  middle  toe  2^.

The  figure  represents  a male  in  full  vigour.  When  the  bird  gets
older,  the  colours  of  the  upper  parts  acquire  a lighter  tint  in  the  male,
and  sometimes  the  back  is  ash-grey ; but  in  the  female,  they  gradually
assume  a deeper  hue.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XVI.  Fig.  %

The  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  more  brown  ; tips  of  the  secondary
quills  more  or  less  whitish,  tail  tipped  with  brownish- white  ; throat  and
fore  neck  yellowish- white  ; the  latter  longitudinally  marked  with  gutti-
form  spots ; general  colour  beneath  yellowish-white,  marked  with  longi-
tudinal broad  spots.  Vent-feathers  reddish ; under  tail-coverts  marked
with  narrow  bars.

Length  19  J inches,  extent  of  wings  36 ; beak  along  the  ridge ;
tarsus  2,  middle  toe  3|^.


( 91  )


THE  CAROLINA  TURTLE  DOVE.

COLUMBJ  CABOLINENSIS,  LiNN.

PLATE  XVII.  Male  and  Female.

I HAVE  tried,  kind  reader,  to  give  you  a faithful  representation  of  two
as  gentle  pairs  of  Turtles  as  ever  cooed  their  loves  in  the  green  woods.

I have  placed  them  on  a branch  of  Stuartia,  which  you  see  ornamented
with  a profusion  of  white  blossoms,  emblematic  of  purity  and  chastity.

Look  at  the  female,  as  she  assiduously  sits  on  her  eggs,  embosomed
among  the  thick  foliage,  receiving  food  from  the  bill  of  her  mate,  and
listening  with  delight  to  his  assurances  of  devoted  affection.  Nothing  is
wanting  to  render  the  moment  as  happy  as  could  be  desired  by  any  couple
on  a similar  occasion.

On  the  branch  above,  a love  scene  is  just  commencing.  The  female,
still  coy  and  undetermined,  seems  doubtful  of  the  truth  of  her  lover,  and
virgin-like  resolves  to  put  his  sincerity  to  the  test,  by  delaying  the  grati-
fication of  his  wishes.  She  has  reached  the  extremity  of  the  branch,  her
wings  and  tail  are  already  opening,  and  she  will  fly  off  to  some  more  se-
questered spot,  where,  if  her  lover  should  follow  her  with  the  same  assiduous
devotion,  they  will  doubtless  become  as  blessed  as  the  pair  beneath  them.

The  Dove  announces  the  approach  of  spring.  Nay,  she  does  more
she  forces  us  to  forget  the  chilling  blasts  of  winter,  by  the  soft  and  melan-
choly sound  of  her  cooing.  Her  heart  is  already  so  warmed  and  so  swelled
by  the  ardour  of  her  passion,  that  it  feels  as  ready  to  expand  as  the  buds
on  the  trees  are,  under  the  genial  influence  of  returning  heat.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  extremely  rapid,  and  of  long  duration.
Whenever  it  starts  from  a tree  or  the  ground,  on  being  unexpectedly  ap-
proached, its  wings  produce  a whistling  noise,  heard  at  a considerable  dis-
tance. On  such  occasions,  it  frequently  makes  several  curious  windings
through  the  air,  as  if  to  prove  its  capability  of  efficient  flight.  It  seldom
rises  far  above  the  trees,  and  as  seldom  passes  through  dense  woods  or
forests,  but  prefers  following  their  margins,  or  flying  about  the  fences  and
fields.  Yet,  during  spring,  and  particularly  whilst  the  female  is  sitting  on
her  eggs,  the  male  rises  as  if  about  to  ascend  to  a great  height  in  the  air,
flapping  his  wings,  but  all  of  a sudden  comes  downwards  again,  describing


92


CAROLINA  TURTLE  DOVE.


a large  circle,  and  sailing  smoothly  with  wings  and  tail  expanded,  until
in  this  manner  he  alights  on  the  tree  where  his  mate  is,  or  on  one  very  near
it.  These  manoeuvres  are  frequently  repeated  during  the  days  of  incuba-
tion, and  occasionally  when  the  male  bird  is  courting  the  female.  No
sooner  do  they  alight  than  they  jerk  out  their  tail  in  a very  graceful  man-
ner, and  balance  their  neck  and  head.  Their  migrations  are  not  so  ex-
tensive as  those  of  the  Wild  Pigeon  ( Columha  migratoria ) ; nor  are  they
performed  in  such  numbers,  two  hundred  and  fifty  or  three  hundred
doves  together  being  considered  a large  flock.

On  the  ground,  along  the  fences,  or  on  the  branches  of  trees,  the
Carolina  Turtle  walks  with  great  ease  and  grace,  frequently  jerking  its
tail.  It  is  able  to  run  with  some  swiftness  when  searching  for  food  in
places  where  it  is  scarce.  It  seldom  bathes,  but  drinks  by  swallowing
the  water  in  long  draughts,  with  the  bill  deeply  immersed,  frequently  up
to  the  eyes.

They  breed  in  every  portion  of  the  United  States  that  I have  visited,
and  according  to  the  temperature  of  different  localities,  rear  either  one  or
two  broods  in  the  season.  In  Louisiana,  they  lay  eggs  early  in  April,
and  sometimes  in  the  month  of  March,  and  have  there  two  broods.  In
the  State  of  Connecticut,  they  seldom  begin  to  lay  before  the  middle  of
May,  and  as  seldom  have  more  than  one  brood.  On  the  borders  of  Lake
Superior,  they  are  still  later.  They  lay  two  eggs  of  a pure  white  colour,
and  having  some  degree  of  translucency.  They  make  their  nest  in  any
kind  of  tree,  on  horizontal  branches  or  twigs.  It  is  formed  of  a few  dry
sticks,  so  loosely  put  together  as  to  appear  hardly  sufficient  to  keep  the
eggs  or  young  from  falling.

The  roosting  places  which  the  Carolina  Turtles  prefer  are  among  the
long  grasses  found  growing  in  abandoned  fields,  at  the  foot  of  dry  stalks
of  maize,  or  on  the  edges  of  meadows,  although  they  occasionally  resort  to
the  dead  foliage  of  trees,  as  well  as  that  of  different  species  of  evergreens.
But  in  all  these  places  they  rise  and  fly  at  the  approach  of  man,  however
dark  the  night  may  be,  which  proves  that  the  power  of  sight  which  they
then  possess  is  very  great.  They  seldom  place  themselves  very  near  each
other  when  roosting  on  the  ground,  but  sometimes  the  individuals  of  a
flock  appear  diffused  pretty  equally  over  a whole  field.  In  this  particu-
lar, they  greatly  differ  from  our  Common  Wild  Pigeon,  which  settles  in
compact  masses  on  the  limbs  of  trees  during  the  night.  The  Doves,  how-
ever, like  the  Pigeons,  are  fond  of  returning  to  the  same  roosting  grounds


CAROLINA  TURTLE  DOVE.


93


from  considerable  distances.  A few  individuals  sometimes  mix  with  the
Wild  Pigeons,  as  do  the  latter  sometimes  with  the  Doves.

The  Turtle  Dove  may  with  propriety  be  considered  more  as  a gleaner
than  as  a reaper  of  the  husbandman’s  fields,  scarcely  ever  committing  any
greater  depredation  than  the  picking  up  a few  grains  in  seed-time,  after
which  it  prefers  resorting  to  those  fields  from  which  the  grain  has  been
cut  and  removed.  It  is  a hardy  bird,  and  stands  the  severest  winters  of
our  Middle  States,  where  some  remain  the  whole  year.

The  flesh  of  these  birds  is  remarkably  fine,  when  they  are  obtained
young  and  in  the  proper  season.  Such  birds  become  extremely  fat,  are
tender  and  juicy,  and  in  flavour  equal  in  the  estimation  of  some  of  my
friends,  as  well  as  in  my  own,  to  that  of  the  Snipe  or  even  the  Woodcock ;
but  as  taste  in  such  matters  depends  much  on  circumstances,  and  perhaps-
on  the  whim  of  individuals,  I would  advise  you,  reader,  to  try  for  your-
self. These  birds  require  good  shooting  to  bring  them  down,  when  on
wing,  for  they  fly  with  great  swiftness,  and  not  always  in  a direct  manner.
It  is  seldom  that  more  than  one  can  be  killed  at  a shot  when  they  are  fly-
ing, and  rarely  more  than  two  or  three  when  on  the  ground,  on  account/
of  their  natural  propensity  to  keep  apart.

In  winter,  they  approach  the  farm-houses,  feed  among  the  Poultry,
Sparrows,  Grakles,  and  many  other  birds,  and  appear  very  gentle  ; but  no
sooner  are  they  frequently  disturbed  or  shot  at^  than  they  become  ex-
tremely shy.  When  raised  from  the  nest,  they  are  easily  tamed.  I have
even  known  some  instances  of  their  breeding  in  confinement.  When'
caught  in  traps  and  cooped,  they  feed  freely,  and  soon  become  fat,  when
they  are  excellent  for  the  table.

When  shot,  or  taken  alive  in  the  hand,  this  and  our  other  species  of
Pigeon,  lose  the  feathers  on  the  slightest  touch,  a circumstance  peculiar
to  the  genus,  and  to  certain  gallinaceous  birds.

The  Stuartia  Malacodendron,  on  which  I have  placed  the  two  pairs
alluded  to  at  the  commencement  of  this  article,  is  a tree  of  small  height,
which  grows  in  rich  grounds  at  the  foot  of  hills  not  far  from  water-courses.
The  wood  is  brittle  and  useless,  the  flower  destitute  of  scent,  but  extreme-
ly agreeable  to  the  eye.  Little  clusters  of  twenty  or  thirty  of  these  trees
are  dispersed  over  the  southernmost  of  the  United  States.  I have  never
met  with  it  in  the  Middle,  Western  or  Northern  Districts.  _ '


94


CAROLINA  TURTLE  DOVE.


CoLUMBA  cAROLiNENsis,  Llrm.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  286 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  613 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  119.

Carolina  Pigeon,  Lath.  Syn.  vol.  iv.  p.  663.

Carolina  Pigeon,  or  Turtle  Dove,  Columba  carolinensis,  WUs.  Amer.  Or-
nith.  vol.  V.  p.  91.  PI.  xliii.  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XVII.  Fig.  1,  1.  ^

Bill  straight,  of  ordinary  length,  rather  slender,  broader  than  deep  at
the  base,  with  a tumid  fleshy  covering,  compressed  towards  the  end,
rather  obtuse ; upper  mandible  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip ; edges  in-
volute. Head  small.  Neck  slender.  Body  rather  full.  Legs  short  and
strong ; tarsus  covered  anteriorly  with  scutella,  rather  rounded ; toes
scutellate,  slightly  webbed  at  the  base ; claws  short,  depressed,  obtuse.

Plumage  compact  on  the  back,  blended  and  soft  on  the  head,  neck
and  under  parts.  Wings  long,  second  quill  longest.  Tail  wedge-shaped,
long,  of  fourteen  feathers,  the  middle  ones  tapering,  the  rest  obtuse.

Bill  blackish,  at  the  base  carmine-purple.  Iris  hazel ; orbit  greenish-
blue.  Feet  carmine-purple ; claws  dusky.  Crown  of  the  head,  and  up-
per part  of  the  neck,  bright  greenish-blue  ; the  rest  of  the  upper  parts,
including  the  wing-coverts,  light  yellowish-brown,  tinged  with  light  blue,
of  which  colour  are  the  edges  of  the  wings,  and  the  outer  webs  of  the
quills  towards  the  base.  Some  of  the  proximal  wing-coverts  spotted  with
black.  Forehead,  and  sides  of  the  head  brownish-yellow,  which  colour
predominates  on  the  under  parts,  the  breast  and  neck  tinged  with  blue,
and  the  abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts  paler.  Quills  dusky,  margined
externally  with  whitish,  the  last  secondaries  light  brown  and  spotted  with
black.  The  two  middle  tail-feathers,  and  the  outer  webs  of  the  next  five
on  each  side  like  the  back ; all  the  feathers,  excepting  the  middle  ones,
have  a spot  of  black  about  an  inch  from  their  extremity,  the  space  be-
tween which  and  the  base  is  bright  greenish-blue,  that  beyond  it  being
paler  and  tinged  with  brown,  excepting  in  the  three  outer  feathers,  where
it  is  white,  as  is  the  outer  web  of  the  outermost.

Length  12  inches,  extent  of  wings  17 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XVII.  Fig.  2,  2.

The  female  is  somewhat  duller  in  the  tints  of  the  plumage  ; the  bright


CAROLINA  TURTLE  DOVE.


95


blue  of  the  head  is  wanting,  that  part  being  coloured  like  the  back  ; the
neck  and  breast  have  less  blue,  and  the  white  of  the  tail  is  less  pure.
Length  11  inches,  extent  of  wings  15^;  bill  as  in  the  male.


The  White-flowered  Stuartia.

Stuautia  Malacodendron,  Willd.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iii.  p.  840.  Stuartia  virginica,
Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  451. — Monadelpkia  Polyakdria,  Linn.

A small  tree,  with  smooth  spreading  branches ; ovate-acute  leaves,
generally  entire  at  the  margins ; axillar  flowers^  which  are  solitary,  or
two  together ; large  white  corollas,  of  five  rounded  petals,  and  reddish-
purple  stamina.  The  leaves  vary  in  being  sometimes  serrated,  and  more
or  less  downy.  It  flowers  from  June  to  September.


( 96  )


BEWICK’S  WREN.

Troglodytes  Bewickii,

PLATE  XVIII.  Male.

The  bird  represented  under  the  name  of  Bewick’s  Wren  I shot  on
the  19th  October  1821,  about  five  miles  from  St  Francisville,  in  the  State
of  Louisiana.  It  was  standing  as  nearly  as  can  be  represented  in  the  po-
sition in  which  you  now  see  it,  and  upon  the  prostrate  trunk  of  a tree  not
far  from  a fence.  My  drawing  of  it  was  made  on  the  spot.  Another  in-
dividual was  shot  a few  days  after,  by  a young  friend,  Joseph  R.  Mason,
who  accompanied  me  on  my  rambles.  In  the  month  of  November  1829,
I had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  with  another  of  the  same  species,  about  fif-
teen miles  from  the  place  above  mentioned,  and  as  it  was  near  the  house
at  which  I was  then  on  a visit,  I refrained  from  killing  it,  in  order  to
observe  its  habits.  For  several  days,  during  which  I occasionally  saw  it,
it  moved  along  the  bars  of  the  fences,  with  its  tail  generally  erect,  look-
ing from  the  bar  on  which  it  stood  towards  the  one  next  above,  and
caught  spiders  and  other  insects,  as  it  ran  along  from  one  pannel  of  the
fence  to  another  in  quick  succession,  now  and  then  uttering  a low  twitter,
the  only  sound  which  I heard  it  emit.  It  occasionally  hopped  sidewise,
now  with  its  head  towards  me,  and  again  in  the  contrary  direction,  at
times  descending  to  the  ground,  to  inspect  the  lowest  bar,  but  only  for
a few  moments.  At  other  times,  it  would  fly  to  a peach  or  apple-tree
close  to  the  fence,  ascend  to  its  top  branches,  always  with  hopping  move-
ments, and,  as  if  about  to  sing,  would  for  an  instant  raise  its  head,  and
lower  its  tail,  but  without  giving  utterance  to  any  musical  notes.  It
would  then  return  to  the  fence,  and  continue  its  avocations  as  already  de-
scribed. I shot  the  bird,  and  have  it  preserved  in  spirits.

In  shape,  colour  and  movements,  it  nearly  resembles  the  Great  Ca-
rolina Wren,  and  forms  a kind  of  link  between  that  bird  and  the  House
Wren,  an  account  of  which  you  will  find  in  this  volume.  It  has  not  the
quickness  of  motion,  nor  the  liveliness,  of  either  of  these  birds.  Where
it  comes  from,  and  whither  it  goes  to  breed,  are  quite  unknown  to  me.

I have  honoured  this  species  with  tfie  name  of  Bewick,  a person  too

1


BEWICK’S  WREN.


97


well  known  for  his  admirable  talents  as  an  engraver  on  wood,  and  for  his
beautiful  work  on  the  Birds  of  Great  Britain,  to  need  any  eulogy  of
mine.  I enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  a personal  acquaintance  with  that  gen-
tleman, andfound  him  at  all  times  a most  agreeable,  kind,  and  benevolent
friend.

The  little  twig  on  which  the  Wren  is  perched,  is  from  the  tree  com-
monly called  the  Iron-wood  Tree,  a species  of  Elm,  the  wood  of  which
is  very  hard  and  of  close  texture.  The  branches,  and  sometimes  the
stem,  are  ornamented  with  longitudinal  expansions,  resembling  cork  in
their  nature,  but  much  harder.


Troglodytes  Bewickii.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XVIII.

Bill  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  subulato-conical,  acute,  slightly
arched,  compressed.  Mandibles  of  equal  breadth,  with  acute  margins,
the  gap  line  a little  arched,  and  slightly  deflected  at  the  base.  Nostrils
basal,  oval,  half  closed  by  a membrane.  Feet  longish,  proportionally
rather  robust ; tarsus  anteriorly  scutellate,  compressed,  acute  behind,
longer  than  the  middle  toe ; toes  free,  scutellate  above,  the  lateral  ones
nearly  equal,  the  posterior  long ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arch-
ed, that  of  the  hind  toe  much  larger.

Plumage  rather  compact  above,  blended  beneath.  Wings  short,  very
convex,  rounded  ; first  quill  short,  third  and  fourth  longest.  Tail  erect,
long,  of  ten  feathers,  much  rounded,  the  outer  feather  not  more  than
half  the  length  of  the  middle  one,  all  rounded  at  the  end.

Bill  blackish-brown  above,  pale  blue  beneath.  Iris  brown.  Feet  and
claws  pale  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  rusty  brown,
that  of  the  lower  greyish-blue.  Quills  and  wing-coverts  barred  with
rusty  brown  and  black,  as  are  the  two  middle  tail-feathers.  Outer  web
of  the  lateral  tail-feather,  and  the  terminal  portion  of  that  of  the  others,
whitish,  barred  with  black,  their  middle  parts  black,  toward  the  base
barred  with  rusty  brown.  A line  of  pale  brownish-yellow  extending
from  the  upper  mandible,  over  the  eye,  to  half  way  down  the  neck.  The
rump  feathers  white  towards  their  base,  with  central  spots.

Length  5 inches,  extent  of  wings  6^  ; beak  along  the  ridge  J,  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  middle  toe  hind  toe


98


BEWICK’S  WREN.


The  Iron- wood  Tree,  or  Wahoo.

Ulmus  alata,  Pursh.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  200.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.

Sept.  vol.  vi.  p.  275.  PI.  5 Pentandria  Digynia,  Lin7i.  Ament ach m^Juss.

Twigs  winged  on  two  opposite  sides  with  a corky  substance  ; leaves
oblongo-oval,  acute,  nearly  equal  at  the  base ; fruit  downy  and  ciliated.
This  species  of  Elm  occurs  only  in  the  Southern  States,  where  it  grows
by  the  sides  of  rivers  and  in  marshes.  It  attains  a height  of  from  thirty
to  forty  feet.


( 99  )


THE  LOUISIANA  WATER  THRUSH.

Tub  DUS  ludovicianus.

PLATE  XIX.  Male.

Much  and  justly  as  the  song  of  the  Nightingale  is  admired,  I am  in-
clined, after  having  often  listened  to  it,  to  pronounce  it  in  no  degree  su-
perior to  that  of  the  Louisiana  Water  Thrush.  The  notes  of  the  latter
bird  are  as  powerful  and  mellow,  and  at  times  as  varied.

This  bird  is  a resident  of  the  low  lands  of  the  States  of  Louisiana  and
Mississippi,  and  is  to  be  found  at  all  seasons  in  the  deepest  and  most
swampy  of  our  cane  brakes,  from  which  its  melodies  are  heard  to  a con-
siderable distance,  its  voice  being  nearly  as  loud  as  that  of  the  Wood
Thrush.  The  bird  may  be  observed  perched  on  a low  bough  scarcely
higher  than  the  tops  of  the  canes,  in  an  erect  attitude,  swelling  its
throat,  and  repeating  several  times  in  succession  sounds  so  approaching
the  whole  two  octaves  of  a good  piano-forte,  as  almost  to  induce  the  hearer
to  imagine  that  the  keys  of  that  instrument  are  used  on  the  occasion.
The  bird  begins  on  the  upper  key,  and  progressively  passes  from  one  to
another,  until  it  reaches  the  base  note,  this  last  frequently  being  lost
when  there  is  the  least  agitation  in  the  air.  Its  song  is  heard  even  in  the
winter,  when  the  weather  is  calm  and  warm.

I have  taken  the  liberty  of  naming  this  first  songster  of  our  groves
after  the  country  which  has  afforded  me  my  greatest  pleasures,  not,  haw-
ever,  as  I trust  I shall  prove  in  the  sequel,  without  having  assured  my-
self that  in  habits,  and  somewhat  in  colour,  it  differs  from  its  kinsman
the  Common  Water  Thrush.

The  Common  Water  Thrush  is  at  all  times,  and  in  every  situation,
shy  even  to  wildness.  The  Louisiana  Water  Thrush  is  so  gentle  and
unsuspicious  as  to  allow  a person  to  approach  within  a few  yards  of  it.
The  species  met  with  in  the  Eastern  and  Northern  Districts  during  the
spring  months  only,  has  its  feet  of  a clear  and  transparent  flesh-colour,
and  its  tail  even.  The  Southern  bird,  on  the  contrary,  has  the  feet  of  a
deep  bluish-brown,  and  the  tail  forked.  Never  have  I seen  it  wade
through  water,  although  it  is  always  near  and  over  it ; while  in  the  bird
of  the  Northern  Districts  this  is  a prominent  habit.  I may  add,  that  I never

G 2


100


LOUISIANA  WATER  THRUSH.


heard  the  latter  species  sing,  but  merely  utter  a single  smart  twit^  when
started  by  surprise.  It  moreover  frequently  feeds  on  minute  water-in-
sects, none  of  which  I have  ever  been  able  to  discover  on  dissecting  the
present  species.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  easy,  and  continued  amongst  the  trees,  just
above  the  canes,  or  closer  over  the  ground,  when  it  is  passing  along  their
skirts,  gliding  smoothly  through  the  air.  When  alighted,  its  body  is
continually  vibrating,  the  tail  being  at  the  same  time  alternately  jerked
out  and  closed  again.  It  walks  prettily  along  the  branches,  or  on  the
ground,  but  never  lioj)s.  It  feeds  on  insects  and  larvae,  often  pursuing
the  former  on  wing,  as  well  as  on  the  ground,  yet  in  seizing  them  it  does
not  produce  the  clicking  sound  heard  from  the  bill  of  Flycatchers.

I think  its  proper  station  in  a general  system  would  be  between  the
Golden-crowned  Thrush  and  the  Water  Thrush.  Its  location,  however,
I leave  to  the  consideration  of  better  ornithologists  than  myself.

The  nest  of  this  species  is  commenced  in  the  first  days  of  April.  I
may  here  remark,  that  I am  not  aware  that  the  Common  Water  Thrush
breeds  in  the  United  States.  It  is  placed  at  the  foot  and  amongst  the
roots  of  a tree,  or  by  the  side  of  a decayed  log,  and  is  so  easily  discovered
at  times  that  my  eyes  have  once  or  twice  been  attracted  by  it,  whilst
walking  about  in  search  of  something  else.  The  outer  parts  are  formed
of  dry  leaves  and  mosses,  the  inner  of  fine  grasses,  with  a few  hairs,  or
the  dried  fibres  of  the  Spanish  Moss,  which  so  much  resemble  horse-hair
as  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from  it.  The  female  lays  four  or  five
eggs,  and  takes  fourteen  days  to  hatch  them.  When  disturbed  on  her
nest  at  an  early  period  of  incubation,  she  merely  flies  off ; but  if  discovered
towards  the  conclusion  of  that  period,  she  is  seen  tumbling  and  rolling
about,  spreading  her  wings  and  tail,  as  if  in  the  last  agonies  of  despair,  ut-
tering all  the  while  a most  piteous  tone,  to  entice  the  intruder  to  follow  her.

The  young  leave  the  nest  in  about  ten  days,  and  follow  the  parent
from  place  to  place,  on  the  ground,  where  they  are  fed  until  able  to  fly.
I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  this  bird  rears  more  than  one
brood  in  a season,  but  am  inclined  to  believe  that  it  does  not.  The  eggs
are  flesh-coloured,  sprinkled  with  darker  red  on  the  large  end.

During  winter,  this  bird  becomes  so  plump  as  to  be  a pure  mass  of
fat,  and  furnishes  extremely  delicate  eating.  I have  never  seen  this
species  farther  eastward  than  Georgia,  nor  higher  on  the  Ohio  than  the
cane  brakes  about  Henderson.


LOUISIANA  WATER  THRUSH.


101


The  plant  on  which  I have  placed  a male  (the  sexes  being  so  nearly
alike  as  to  offer  no  external  distinctive  characters)  is  commonly  called  the
Indian  Turnip.  It  grows  abundantly  in  the  places  frequented  by  this
bird.  The  root,  which  is  like  a small  potato,  is  extremely  pungent.

Tubdus  Ludovicianus.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XIX.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  straight,  slender,  tapering  to  a point,  broadish
at  the  base,  compressed  toward  the  end ; upper  mandible  with  the  edges
sharp,  and  destitute  of  a notch.  Nostrils  basal,  rounded,  half  closed  by
a membrane.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather  slender ; tarsus  a little
longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; toes  free ; claws  slender,  much  compressed,
arched,  acute,  the  hind  one  not  much  larger  than  that  of  the  middle  toe.

Plumage  ordinary,  soft,  slightly  glossy ; a few  bristles  at  the  base  of
the  upper  mandible.  Wings  of  ordinary  length ; first  quill  longest.
Tail  shortish,  a little  notched,  the  feathers  rather  obtuse.

Bill  deep  brown  above,  black  at  the  tip,  flesh-coloured  beneath.  Iris
deep  brown.  Feet  and  claws  brown,  tinged  with  blue.  The  general  co-
lour of  the  upper  parts  is  dull  greenish-brown,  that  of  the  under  parts
yellowish- white.  A streak  of  the  latter  colour  over  the  eye,  from  the
base  of  the  upper  mandible,  and  another  from  the  base  of  the  lower,  curv-
ing upwards  behind  the  ear-coverts.  Fore-neck  and  breast  marked  with
sagittiform  spots  of  blackish-brown  ; sides  under  the  wings  streaked  with
the  same  colour.

Length  5J  inches,  extent  of  wings  9|  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  |.

The  female,  as  has  been  said,  hardly  differs  from  the  male  in  appear-
ance.


The  Indian  Turnip.

Arum  triphyllum,  Wil/d.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  480.  rursh,  Flor*  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  399.
— PoLYANDBiA  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn,  Aroidea:,  Juss.

Somewhat  caulescent ; leaves  ternate,  with  ovate  acuminate  leaflets ;
spadix  clavate ; flowers  monoecious.  The  flowers  are  green  and  purple,
and  the  roots  are  used  by  the  Indians  as  a remedy  for  colic.


( 102  )


THE  BLUE-WINGEJD  YELLOW  WARBLER.
Sylvia  sol j tabu,  Wils.

PLATE  XX.  Male  and  Female.

This  pretty  little  Warbler  is  migratory,  and  arrives  in  Louisiana
from  the  south,  in  the  beginning  of  spring.  It  is  found  in  open  woods,
as  well  as  in  the  vicinity  of  ponds  overgrown  with  low  bushes  and  rank
weeds.  Along  with  a pair  of  Blue- winged  Yellow  Warblers,  I have  re-
presented a species  of  Hibiscus,  which  grows  on  the  edges  of  these  ponds.
Its  flowers  are  handsome,  but  unfortunately  have  no  pleasant  odour.

The  species  which  now  occupies  our  attention  is  a busy,  active  bird,
and  is  seen  diligently  searching  among  the  foliage  and  grasses  for  the  small
insects  on  which  it  feeds,  mounting  now  and  then  towards  the  tops  of  the
bushes,  to  utter  a few  weak  notes,  which  are  in  no  way  interesting.

Its  nest,  which  is  singularly  constructed,  and  of  an  elongated  inverse-
ly conical  form,  is  attached  to  several  stalks  or  blades  of  tall  grass  by  its
upper  edge.  The  materials  of  which  it  is  formed  are  placed  obliquely
from  its  mouth  to  the  bottom.  The  latter  part  is  composed  of  dried
leaves,  and  is  finished  within  with  fine  grass  and  lichens.  The  female
lays  from  four  to  six  eggs,  of  a pure  white  colour,  with  a few  pale  red
spots  at  the  larger  end.  The  first  brood  is  out  about  the  middle  of  May,
the  second  in  the  middle  of  July.'  The  young  disperse  as  soon  as  they
are  able  to  provide  for  themselves,  this  bird  being  of  solitary  habits.

It  leaves  Louisiana  in  the  beginning  of  October.  I have  never  seen
the  species  farther  eastward  than  the  State  of  Jersey,  where  I killed  se-
veral within  a few  miles  of  Philadelphia,  not  however  until  my  last  visit
to  that  State  in  1829.  It  is  frequent  in  the  barrens  of  Kentucky,  and  up
the  Mississippi,  as  far  at  least  as  St  Genevieve,  where  I shot  two  indivi-
duals many  years  ago.

Its  flight  is  short,  undetermined,  and  is  performed  in  zig-zag  lines,  as
in  most  of  its  tribe.  It  sometimes  ascends  twenty  or  thirty  yards  in  the
air,  as  if  with  an  intention  of  going  to  a great  distance,  but  still  moving
in  a zig-zag  manner^  when  it  suddenly  turns  about,  and  comes  down  near
the  place  from  which  it  set  out.  It  does  not  chase  insects  on  wing,  but
feeds  in  a great  measure  on  the  smaller  kinds  of  spiders,  not  neglecting.


BLUE- WINGED  YELLOW  WARBLER.


103


however,  to  seize  other  insects  when  they  come  within  reach.  It  remains
almost  constantly  among  the  bushes,  and  is  seldom  seen  on  trees  of  any
size.

Sylvia  solitaria,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  87.

Blue-winged  Yellow  Warbler,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii,  p.  109.  Pi.  15.  Fig.4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  straightish,  subulato-conical,  acute,
as  deep  as  broad  at  the  base,  the  edges  acute,  the  gap  line  a little  de-
flected at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical, -half-closed  by  a
membrane.  Head  rather  small.  Neck,  short.  Body  slender.  Feet  of
ordinary  length,  slender ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  an-
teriorly by  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long  ; toes  scutellate  above,  the
inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size ; claws  slender,  compressed,
acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  longish,  rounded  when  expanded,  slightly
forked  when  closed.

Bill  black,  with  a pale  margin.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  and  claws
flesh-colour,  tinged  with  yellow.  Forehead,  crown,  and  under  parts  of  a
rich  bright-yellow.  Back  of  the  head  and  neck,  the  back  and  upper  tail
coverts  bright  grass-green.  Lore  black.  Wings  greyish-blue,  slightly
margined  with  paler,  the  first  two  rows  of  coverts  tipped  with  whitish.
Four  middle  tail-feathers  greyish-blue,  the  outer  webs  of  the  rest,  and  an
oblique  portion  of  the  outer  feather  at  the  end,  of  the  same  colour,  their
inner  webs  white..

Length  4|  inches,  extent  of  wings  7 ; bill  along  the  ridge  J,  along
the  gap  1.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  scarcely  differs  from  the  male  in  appearance,  and  is  of  near-
ly the  same  dimensions.


104


BLUE-WINGED  YELLOW  WARBLER.


Large-flowered  Hibiscus,  Cotton  Rose,  or  Wild  Althea.

Hibiscus  grandiflorus,  Mich.  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  46.  Pursh.  FI.  Amer.  p.  435 — »
Monadelphia  Polyandria,  Linn.  Malvacea:,  Juss.

This  beautiful  species  of  Hibiscus,  which  does  not  precisely  agree  with
any  that  I have  seen  described,  although  it  is  probably  the  above,  is  cha-
racterised by  its  ovato-cordate,  obtusely  and  irregularly  serrated,  acute,
venous  tough  leaves,  and  its  large  rose-coloured  flowers,  which  are  deep-
red  at  the  base,  and  streaked  with  the  same  colour.  The  corolla  is  about
five  inches  in  diameter,  the  anthers  yellow.  The  stem  and  leaves  are
smooth.  It  grows  in  salt  marshes,  and  by  the  edges  of  pools.


( 105  )


THE  REGULATORS.

The  population  of  many  parts  of  America  is  derived  from  the  refuse
of  every  other  country.  I hope  I shall  elsewhere  prove  to  you,  kind
reader,  that  even  in  this  we  have  reason  to  feel  a certain  degree  of  pride,
as  we  often  see  our  worst  denizens  becoming  gradually  freed  from  error,
and  at  length  changing  to  useful  and  respectable  citizens.  The  most  de-
praved of  these  emigrants  are  forced  to  retreat  farther  and  farther  from
the  society  of  the  virtuous,  the  restraints  imposed  by  which  they  find  in-
compatible with  their  habits  and  the  gratification  of  their  unbridled  pas-
sions. On  the  extreme  verge  of  civilization,  however,  their  evil  propen-
sities find  more  free  scope,  and  the  dread  of  punishment  for  their  deeds,
or  the  infliction  of  that  punishment,  are  the  only  means  that  prove  effec-
tual in  reforming  them.

In  those  remote  parts,  no  sooner  is  it  discovered  that  an  individual  has
conducted  himself  in  a notoriously  vicious  manner,  or  has  committed
some  outrage  upon  society,  than  a conclave  of  the  honest  citizens  takes
place,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  case,  with  a rigour  without
which  no  good  result  could  be  expected.  These  honest  citizens,  selected
from  among  the  most  respectable  persons  in  the  district,  and  vested  with
powers  suited  to  the  necessity  of  preserving  order  on  the  frontiers,  are
named  Regulators.  The  accused  person  is  arrested,  his  conduct  laid
open,  and  if  he  is  found  guilty  of  a first  crime,  he  is  warned  to  leave  the
country,  and  go  farther  from  society,  within  an  appointed  time.  Should
the  individual  prove  so  callous  as  to  disregard  the  sentence,  and  remain
in  the  same  neighbourhood,  to  commit  new  crimes,  then  wo  be  to  him ;
for  the  Regulators,  after  proving  him  guilty  a second  time,  pass  and  exe-
cute a sentence,  which,  if  not  enough  to  make  him  perish  under  the  in-
fliction, is  at  least  for  ever  impressed  upon  his  memory.  The  punishment
inflicted  is  generally  a severe  castigation,  and  the  destruction  by  fire  of
his  cabin.  Sometimes,  in  cases  of  reiterated  theft  or  murder,  death  is
considered  necessary ; and,  in  some  instances,  delinquents  of  the  worst
species  have  been  shot,  after  which  their  heads  have  been  stuck  on  poles,
to  deter  others  from  following  their  example.  I shall  give  you  an  account
of  one  of  these  desperadoes,  as  I received  it  from  a person  who  had  been
instrumental  in  bringing  him  to  punishment.


106


THE  REGULATORS.


The  name  of  Mason  is  still  familiar  to  many  of  the  navigators  of  the
Lower  Ohio  and  Mississippi.  By  dint  of  industry  in  bad  deeds  he  be-
came a notorious  horse-stealer,  formed  a line  of  worthless  associates  from
the  eastern  parts  of  Virginia  (a  State  greatly  celebrated  for  its  fine  breed
of  horses)  to  New  Orleans,  and  had  a settlement  on  Wolf  Island,  not  far
from  the  confluence  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi,  from  which  he  issued  to
stop  the  flat-boats,  and  rifle  them  of  such  provisions  and  other  articles  as
he  and  his  party  needed.  His  depredations  became  the  talk  of  the  whole
Western  Country;  and  to  pass  Wolf  Island  was  not  less  to  be  dreaded
than  to  anchor  under  the  walls  of  Algiers.  The  horses,  the  negroes,  and
the  cargoes,  his  gang  carried  off  and  sold.  At  last,  a body  of  Regulators
undertook,  at  great  peril,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  country,  to  bring  the
villain  to  punishment.

Mason  was  as  cunning  and  watchful  as  he  was  active  and  daring.
Many  of  his  haunts  were  successively  found  ouCand  searched,  but  the
numerous  spies  in  his  employ  enabled  him  to  escape  in  time.  One  day,
however,  as  he  was  riding  a beautiful  horse  in  the  woods,  he  was  met  by
one  of  the  Regulators,  who  immediately  recognised  him,  but  passed  him
as  if  an  utter  stranger.  Mason,  not  dreaming  of  danger,  pursued  his  way
leisurely,  as  if  he  had  met  no  one.  But  he  was  dogged  by  the  Regula/-
tor,  and  in  such  a manner  as  proved  fatal  to  him.  At  dusk.  Mason  hav-
ing reached  the  lowest  part  of  a ravine,  no  doubt  well  known  to  him,
hoppled  (tied  together  the  fore-legs  of)  his  stolen  horse,  to  enable  it  to
feed  during  the  night  without  chance  of  straying  far,  and  concealed  him-
self in  a hollow  log  to  spend  the  night.  The  plan  was  good,  but  proved
his  ruin.

The  Regulator,  who  knew  every  hill  and  hollow  of  the  woods,  marked
the  place  and  the  log  with  the  eye  of  an  experienced  hunter,  and  as  he
remarked  that  Mason  was  most  efficiently  armed,  he  galloped  off*  to  the
nearest  house,  where  he  knew  he  should  find  assistance.  This  was  easily
procured,  and  the  party  proceeded  to  the  spot.  Mason,  on  being  attacked,
defended  himself  with  desperate  valour ; and  as  it  proved  impossible  to  se-
cure him  alive,  he  was  brought  to  the  ground  with  a rifle  ball.  His  head
was  cut  off,  and  stuck  on  the  end  of  a broken  branch  of  a tree,  by  the
nearest  road  to  the  place  where  the  affray  happened.  The  gang  soon  dis-
persed, in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  their  leader,  and  this  infliction  of
merited  punishment  proved  beneficial  in  deterring  others  from  following
a similar  predatory  life.


THE  REGULATORS.


107


The  punishment  by  castigation  is  performed  in  the^following  manner.
The  individual  convicted  of  an  offence  is  led  to  some  remote  part  of  the
woods,  under  the  escort  of  sometimes  forty  or  fifty  Regulators.  When
arrived  at  the  chosen  spot,  the  criminal  is  made  fast  to  a tree,  and  a few
of  the  Regulators  remain  with  him,  whilst  the  rest  scour  the  forest,  to  as-
sure themselves  that  no  strangers  are  within  reach,  after  which  they  form
an  extensive  ring,  arranging  themselves  on  their  horses,  well  armed  with
rifles  and  pistols,  at  equal  distances  and  in  each  other’s  sight.  At  a given
signal  that  ‘‘all’s  ready,”  those  about  the  culprit,  having  provided  them-
selves with  young  twigs  of  hickory,  administer  the  number  of  lashes  pre-
scribed by  the  sentence,  untie  the  sufferer,  and  order  him  to  leave  the
country  immediately.

One  of  these  castigations  which  took  place  more  within  my  immediate
knowledge,  was  performed  on  a fellow  who  was  neither  a thief  nor  a mur-
derer, but  who  had  misbehaved  otherwise  sufficiently  to  bring  himself  un-
der the  sentence  with  mitigation.  He  was  taken  to  a place  where  nettles
were  known  to  grow  in  great  luxuriance,  completely  stripped,  and  so
lashed  with  them,  that  although  not  materially  hurt,  he  took  it  as  a hint
not  to  be  neglected,  left  the  country,  and  was  never  again  heard  of  by
any  of  the  party  concerned.

Probably  at  the  moment  when  I am  copying  these  notes  respecting
the  early  laws  of  our  frontier  people,  few  or  no  Regulating  Parties  exist,
the  terrible  examples  that  were  made  having  impressed  upon  the  new  set-
tlers a salutary  dread,  which  restrains  them  from  the  commission  of  fla-
grant crimes.


( 108  )


THE  MOCKING  BIRD.

Tubdus  bolyglottus,  Linn.

PLATE  XXI.  Male  and  Female.

It  is  where  the  Great  Magnolia  shoots  up  its  majestic  trunk,  crowned
with  evergreen  leaves,  and  decorated  with  a thousand  beautiful  flowers,
that  perfume  the  air  around ; where  the  forests  and  fields  are  adorned
with  blossoms  of  every  hue ; where  the  golden  Orange  ornaments  the  gar-
dens and  groves  ; where  Bignonias  of  various  kinds  interlace  their  climb-
ing stems  around  the  White-flowered  Stuartia,  and  mounting  still  higher,
cover  the  summits  of  the  lofty  trees  around,  accompanied  with  innumer-
able Vines,  that  here  and  there  festoon  the  dense  foliage  of  the  magnifi-
cent woods,  lending  to  the  vernal  breeze  a slight  portion  of  the  perfume
of  their  clustered  flowers ; where  a genial  warmth  seldom  forsakes  the  at-
mosphere ; where  berries  and  fruits  of  all  descriptions  are  met  with  at
every  step ; — in  a word,  kind  reader,  it  is  where  Nature  seems  to  have
paused,  as  she  passed  over  the  Earth,  and  opening  her  stores,  to  have
strewed  with  unsparing  hand  the  diversified  seeds  from  which  have
sprung  all  the  beautiful  and  splendid  forms  which  I should  in  vain  at-
tempt to  describe,  that  the  Mocking  Bird  should  have  fixed  its  abode,
there  only  that  its  wondrous  song  should  be  heard.

But  where  is  that  favoured  land  ? — It  is  in  that  great  continent  to
whose  distant  shores  Europe  has  sent  forth  her  adventurous  sons,  to
wrest  for  themselves  a habitation  from  the  wild  inhabitants  of  the  forest,
and  to  convert  the  neglected  soil  into  fields  of  exuberant  fertility.  It  is,
reader,  in  Louisiana  that  these  bounties  of  nature  are  in  the  greatest  per-
fection. It  is  there  that  you  should  listen  to  the  love-song  of  the  Mock-
ing Bird,  as  I at  this  moment  do.  See  how  he  flies  round  his  mate,  with
motions  as  light  as  those  of  the  butterfly  ! His  tail  is  widely  expanded,
he  mounts  in  the  air  to  a small  distance,  describes  a circle,  and,  again
alighting,  approaches  his  beloved  one,  his  eyes  gleaming  with  delight,
for  she  has  already  promised  to  be  his  and  his  only.  His  beautiful  wings
are  gently  raised,  he  bows  to  his  love,  and  again  bouncing  upwards,  opens
his  bill,  and  pours  forth  his  melody,  full  of  exultation  at  the  conquest
which  he  has  made.


MOCKING  BIRD.


109


They  are  not  the  soft  sounds  of  the  flute  or  of  the  hautboy  that  I
hear,  but  the  sweeter  notes  of  Nature’s  own  music.  The  mellowness  of
the  song,  the  varied  modulations  and  gradations,  the  extent  of  its  com-
pass, the  great  brilliancy  of  execution,  are  unrivalled.  There  is  proba-
bly no  bird  in  the  world  that  possesses  all  the  musical  qualifications  of
this  king  of  song,  who  has  derived  all  from  Nature’s  self.  Yes,  reader,
all !

No  sooner  has  he  again  alighted,  and  the  conjugal  contract  has  been
sealed,  than,  as  if  his  breast  was  about  to  be  rent  with  delight,  he  again
pours  forth  his  notes  with  more  softness  and  richness  than  before.  He
now  soars  higher,  glancing  around  with  a vigilant  eye,  to  assure  himself
that  none  has  witnessed  his  bliss.  When  these  love-scenes,  visible  only
to  the  ardent  lover  of  nature,  are  over,  he  dances  through  the  air,  full  of
animation  and  delight,  and,  as  if  to  convince  his  lovely  mate  that  to  en-
rich her  hopes  he  has  much  more  love  in  store,  he  that  moment  begins
anew,  and  imitates  all  the  notes  which  nature  has  imparted  to  the  other
songsters  of  the  grove.

For  a while,  each  long  day  and  pleasant  night  are  thus  spent;  but
at  a peculiar  note  of  the  female  he  ceases  his  song,  and  attends  to  her
wishes.  A nest  is  to  be  prepared,  and  the  choice  of  a place  in  which  to
lay  it  is  to  become  a matter  of  mutual  consideration.  The  Orange,  the
Fig,  the  Pear-tree  of  the  gardens  are  inspected  ; the  thick  briar  patches
,are  also  visited.  They  appear  all  so  well  suited  for  the  purpose  in  view,
and  so  well  does  the  bird  know  that  man  is  not  his  most  dangerous
enemy,  that  instead  of  retiring  from  him,  they  at  length  fix  their  abode
in  his  vicinity,  perhaps  in  the  nearest  tree  to  his  window.  Dried  twigs,
leaves,  grasses,  cotton,  flax,  and  other  substances,  are  picked  up,  carried
to  a forked  branch,  and  there  arranged.  The  female  has  laid  an  egg,
and  the  male  redoubles  his  caresses.  Five  eggs  are  deposited  in  due
time,  when  the  male  having  little  more  to  do  than  to  sing  his  mate  to  re-
pose, attunes  his  pipe  anew.  Every  now  and  then  he  spies  an  insect  on
the  ground,  the  taste  of  which  he  is  sure  will  please  his  beloved  one.  He
drops  upon  it,  takes  it  in  his  bill,  beats  it  against  the  earth,  and  flies
to  the  nest  to  feed  and  receive  the  warm  thanks  of  his  devoted  female.

When  a fortnight  has  elapsed,  the  young  brood  demand  all  their
care  and  attention.  No  cat,  no  vile  snake,  no  dreaded  hawk,  is  likely  to
visit  their  habitation.  Indeed  the  inmates  of  the  next  house  have  by  this
time  become  quite  attached  to  the  lovely  pair  of  Mocking  Birds,  and


liO


MOCKING  BIRD.


take  pleasure  in  contributing  to  their  safety.  The  dew-berries  from  the
fields,  and  many  kinds  of  fruit  from  the  gardens,  mixed  with  insects,  sup-
ply the  young  as  well  as  the  parents  with  food.  The  brood  is  soon  seen
emerging  from  the  nest,  and  in  another  fortnight,  being  now  able  to  fly
with  vigour,  and  to  provide  for  themselves,  they  leave  the  parent  birds,
as  many  other  species  do.

The  above  account  does  not  contain  all  that  I wish  you  to  know  of
the  habits  of  this  remarkable  songster ; so,  I shall  shift  the  scene  to  the
woods  and  wilds,  where  we  shall  examine  it  more  particularly.

The  Mocking  Bird  remains  in  Louisiana  the  whole  year.  I have  ob-
served with  astonishment,  that  towards  the  end  of  October,  when  those
which  had  gone  to  the  Eastern  States,  some  as  far  as  Boston,  have  re-
turned, they  are  instantly  known  by  the  “ southrons,”  who  attack  them
on  all  occasions.  I have  ascertained  this  by  observing  the  greater  shy-
ness exhibited  by  the  strangers  for  weeks  after  their  arrival.  This  shy-
ness, however,  is  shortly  over,  as  well  as  the  animosity  displayed  by  the
resident  birds,  and  during  the  winter  there  exists  a great  appearance  of
sociality  among  the  united  tribes.

In  the  beginning  of  April,  sometimes  a fortnight  earlier,  the  Mock-
ing Birds  pair,  and  construct  their  nests.  In  some  instances  they  are  so
careless  as  to  place  the  nest  between  the  rails  of  a fence  directly  by  the
road.  I have  frequently  found  it  in  such  places,  or  in  the  fields,  as  well
as  in  briars,  but  always  so  easily  discoverable  that  any  person  desirous  of
procuring  one,  might  do  so  in  a very  short  time.  It  is  coarsely  con-
structed on  the  outside,  being  there  composed  of  dried  sticks  of  briars,
withered  leaves  of  trees,  and  grasses,  mixed  with  wool.  Internally  it  is
finished  with  fibrous  roots  disposed  in  a circular  form,  but  carelessly  ar-
ranged. The  female  lays  from  four  to  six  eggs  the  first  time,  four  or
five  the  next,  and  when  there  is  a third  brood,  which  is  sometimes  the
case,  seldom  more  than  three,  of  which  I have  rarely  found  more  than
two  hatched.  The  eggs  are  of  a short  oval  form,  light  green,  blotched
and  spotted  with  umber.  The  young  of  the  last  brood  not  being  able  to
support  themselves  until  late  in  the  season,  when  many  of  the  berries  and
insects  have  become  scarce,  are  stunted  in  growth  ; — a circumstance  which
has  induced  some  persons  to  imagine  the  existence  in  the  United  States  of
two  species  of  Mocking  Bird,  a larger  and  a smaller.  This,  however,  in
as  far  as  my  observation  goes,  is  not  correct.  The  first  brood  is  fre-
quently brought  to  the  bird-market  in  New  Orleans  as  early  as  the  middle


MOCKING  BIRD.


Ill


of  April.  A little  farther  up  the  country,  they  are  out  by  the  fifteenth  of
May.  The  second  brood  is  hatched  in  July,  and  the  third  in  the  latter
part  of  September.

The  nearer  you  approach  to  the  sea-shores,  the  more  plentiful  do  you
find  these  birds.  They  are  naturally  fond  of  loose  sands,  and  of  districts
scantily  furnished  with  small  trees,  or  patches  of  briars,  and  low  bushes.

During  incubation,  the  female  pays  such  precise  attention  to  the  posi-
tion in  which  she  leaves  her  eggs,  when  she  goes  to  a short  distance  for
exercise  and  refreshment,  to  pick  up  gravel,  or  roll  herself  in  the  dust,
that,  on  her  return,  should  she  find  that  any  of  them  has  been  displaced,
or  touched  by  the  hand  of  man,  she  utters  a low  mournful  note,  at  the
sound  of  which  the  male  immediately  joins  her,  and  they  are  both  seen  to
condole  together.  Some  people  imagine  that,  on  such  occasions,  the
female  abandons  the  nest ; but  this  idea  is  incorrect.  On  the  contrary,
she  redoubles  her  assiduity  and  care,  and  scarcely  leaves  the  nest  for  a
moment ; nor  is  it  until  she  has  been  repeatedly  forced  from  the  dear
spot,  and  has  been  much  alarmed  by  frequent  intrusions,  that  she  finally
and  reluctantly  leaves  it.  Nay,  if  the  eggs  are  on  the  eve  of  being  hatch-
ed, she  will  almost  suflFer  a person  to  lay  hold  of  her.

Different  species  of  snakes  ascend  to  their  nests,  and  generally  suck
the  eggs  or  swallow  the  young ; but  on  aU  such  occasions,  not  only  the
pair  to  which  the  nest  belongs,  but  many  other  Mocking  Birds  from  the
vicinity,  fly  to  the  spot,  attack  the  reptiles,  and,  in  some  cases,  are  so  for-
tunate as  either  to  force  them  to  retreat,  or  deprive  them  of  life.  Cats
that  have  abandoned  the  houses  to  prowl  about  the  fields,  in  a half  wild
state,  are  also  dangerous  enemies,  as  they  frequently  approach  the  nest
unnoticed,  and  at  a pounce  secure  the  mother,  or  at  least  destroy  the  eggs
or  young,  and  overturn  the  nest.  Children  seldom  destroy  the  nests  of
these  birds,  and  the  planters  generally  protect  them.  So  much  does  this
feeling  prevail  throughout  Louisiana,  that  they  will  not  willingly  permit
a Mocking  Bird  to  be  shot  at  any  time.

In  winter,  nearly  all  the  Mocking  Birds  approach  the  farm-houses
and  plantations,  living  about  the  gardens  or  outhouses.  They  are  then
frequently  seen  on  the  roofs,  and  perched  on  the  chimney-tops ; yet  they
always  appear  full  of  animation.  Whilst  searching  for  food  on  the
ground,  their  motions  are  light  and  elegant,  and  they  frequently  open
their  wings  as  butterflies  do  when  basking  in  the  sun,  moving  a step  or
two,  and  again  throwing  out  their  wings.  When  the  weather  is  mild,


112


MOCKING  BIRD.


the  old  males  are  heard  singing  with  as  much  spirit  as  during  the  spring
or  summer,  while  the  younger  birds  are  busily  engaged  in  practising,
preparatory  to  the  love  season.  They  seldom  resort  to  the  interior  of
the  forest  either  during  the  day  or  by  night,  but  usually  roost  among
the  foliage  of  evergreens,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  houses  in  Louisi-
ana, although  in  the  Eastern  States  they  prefer  low  fir  trees.

The  flight  of  the  Mocking  Bird  is  performed  by  short  jerks  of  the
body  and  wings,  at  every  one  of  which  a strong  twitching  motion  of  the
tail  is  perceived.  This  motion  is  still  more  apparent  while  the  bird  is
walking,  when  it  opens  its  tail  like  a fan  and  instantly  closes  it  again.
The  common  cry  or  call  of  this  bird  is  a very  mournful  note,  resembling
that  uttered  on  similar  occasions  by  its  first  cousin  the  Turdus  rufus^  or,
as  it  is  commonly  called,  the  “ French  Mochmg  Bird^  When  travel-
ling, this  flight  is  only  a little  prolonged,  as  the  bird  goes  from  tree  to
tree,  or  at  most  across  a field,  scarcely,  if  ever,  rising  higher  than  the  top
of  the  forest.  During  this  migration,  it  generally  resorts  to  the  highest
parts  of  the  woods  near  water-courses,  utters  its  usual  mournful  note,  and
roosts  in  these  places.  It  travels  mostly  by  day.

Few  hawks  attack  the  Mocking  Birds,  as  on  their  approach,  however
sudden  it  may  be,  they  are  always  ready  not  only  to  defend  themselves
vigorously  and  with  undaunted  courage,  but  to  meet  the  aggressor  half
way,  and  force  him  to  abandon  his  intention.  The  only  hawk  that  occa-
sionally surprises  it  is  the  Falco  Stanleii,  which  flies  low  with  great
swiftness,  and  carries  the  bird  oflp  without  any  apparent  stoppage.
Should  it  happen  that  the  ruffian  misses  his  prey,  the  Mocking  Bird  in
turn  becomes  the  assailant,  and  pursues  the  Hawk  with  great  courage,
calling  in  the  mean  time  all  the  birds  of  its  species  to  its  assistance  ; and
although  it  cannot  overtake  the  marauder,  the  alarm  created  by  their
cries,  which  are  propagated  in  succession  among  all  the  birds  in  the  vici-
nity, like  the  watchwords  of  sentinels  on  duty,  prevents  him  from  suc-
ceeding in  his  attempts.

The  musical  powers  of  this  bird  have  often  been  taken  notice  of  by
European  naturalists,  and  persons  who  find  pleasure  in  listening  to  the
song  of  different  birds  whilst  in  confinement  or  at  large.  Some  of  these
persons  have  described  the  notes  of  the  Nightingale  as  occasionally  fully
equal  to  those  of  our  bird.  I have  frequently  heard  both  species  in  con-
finement, and  in  the  wild  state,  and  without  prejudice,  have  no  hesitation
in  pronouncing  the  notes  of  the  European  Philomel  equal  to  those  of  a


MOCKING  BIRD.


113


souhrette  of  taste,  which,  could  she  study  under  a Mozart,  might  per-
haps in  time  become  very  interesting  in  her  way.  But  to  compare  her
essays  to  the  finished  talent  of  the  Mocking  Bird,  is,  in  my  opinion,  quite
absurd.

The  Mocking  Bird  is  easily  reared  by  hand  from  the  nest,  from
which  it  ought  to  be  removed  when  eight  or  ten  days  old.  It  becomes  so
very  familiar  and  affectionate,  that  it  will  often  follow  its  owner  about  the
house.  I have  known  one  raised  from  the  nest  kept  by  a gentleman  at
Natchez,  that  frequently  flew  out  of  the  house,  poured  forth  its  melodies,
and  returned  at  sight  of  its  keeper.  But  notwithstanding  all  the  care
and  management  bestowed  upon  the  improvement  of  the  vocal  powers  of
this  bird  in  confinement,  I never  heard  one  in  that  state  produce  any
thing  at  all  approaching  in  melody  to  its  own  natural  song.

The  male  bird  is  easily  distinguished  in  the  nest,  as  soon  as  the  brood
is  a little  fledged,  it  being  larger  than  the  female,  and  shewing  more  pure
white.  It  does  not  shrink  so  deep  in  the  nest  as  the  female  does,  at  the
sight  of  the  hand  which  is  about  to  lift  it.  Good  singing  birds  of  this
species  often  bring  a high  price.  They  are  long-lived,  and  very  agree-
able companions.  Their  imitative  powers  are  amazing,  and  they  mimic
with  ease  all  their  brethren  of  the  forests  or  of  the  waters,  as  well  as
many  quadrupeds.  I have  heard  it  asserted  that  they  possess  the  power
of  imitating  the  human  voice,  but  have  never  met  with  an  instance  of  the
display  of  this  alleged  faculty.


Turdus  polyglottus,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  293. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.
p.  339.— CA.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  74.

Mimic  Thrush,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  hi.  p.  40.

Mocking  Bird,  Turdus  polyglottus,  Wils.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  14.
PI.  X.  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXI.  Fig.  1,  1.

Bill  of  moderate  length,  rather  weak,  compressed,  straightish  ; up-
per mandible  slightly  arched  in  its  dorsal  outline,  little  declinate  at  the
tip  ; lower  mandible  nearly  straight,  acute.  Nostrils  basal,  oblong,  half-
closed  by  a membrane.  Head  of  ordinary  size.  Neck  and  body  rather
slender.  Feet  longish,  rather  strong  ; tarsus  compressed,  acute  behind,
covered  anteriorly  with  a few  long  scutella ; toes  scutellate  above,  the

H


114


MOCKING  BIRD.


middle  one  hardly  shorter  than  the  tarsus ; inner  toe  free ; hind  toe
rather  robust ; claws  compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  rounded ;
third  and  fourth  primaries  longest,  first  short.  Tail  long,  much  round-
ed, of  twelve  nearly  straight,  rather  narrow,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  pale  yellow.  Feet  and  claws  dark  brown.
Upper  parts  of  the  head,  neck  and  body  dark  grey,  tinged  with  brown
on  the  forehead  and  sides  of  the  head.  Under  parts  brownish-white.
Quills  brownish-black ; primaries  white  in  their  proximal  part,  forming  a
large  spot  of  that  colour  on  the  wing,  concealed  on  the  first  three,  and
on  the  last  reaching  to  near  the  tip.  Large  primary  coverts  white,  with  a
line  of  black  at  the  tip.  Secondary  coverts  and  second  row  tipped  with
white.  Outer  tail-feather  white,  excepting  a light  streak  of  dusky  near
the  tip ; the  next  two  also  white,  but  with  a longitudinal  streak  of  black
on  the  outer  web,  larger  and  broader  on  the  third.  The  rest  brownish-
black  tinged  with  grey,  and,  excepting  the  middle  ones,  tipped  with  white.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  13^  ; bill  along  the  ridge
along  the  gap  1 ; tarsus  1^,  middle  toe  1 .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXI.  Fig.  2,  2.

The  female  differs  very  little  from  the  male.  The  plumage  is  slightly
duller,  with  more  brown,  the  lateral  tail-feathers  have  more  black,  and
the  white  parts  are  less  pure.  The  dimensions  are  nearly  the  same.


The  Florida  Jessamine.

Gelseminum  nitidum,  Mich.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  120.  Pursh.  Flor.  Amer.
vol.  i.  p.  184 — Pentakdria  Digynia,  Linn.  Apocinea:,  Juss.

A climbing  shrub,  with  smooth  lanceolate  leaves,  axillary  clusters  of
yellow  flowers,  which  are  funnel-shaped,  with  the  limb  spreading  and
nearly  equal,  the  calyx  five-toothed,  the  capsule  two-celled  and  two-
valved.  It  grows  along  the  sea-coast,  especially  near  rivers,  from  Vir-
ginia to  Florida,  flowering  through  the  summer.  The  flowers  are
fragrant.  It  is  also  named  Carolina  Jessamine  and  Yellow  Jessamine.


( 115  )


THE  PURPLE  MARTIN

Hirvndo  purpurea,  Linn.

PLATE  XXII.  Male  and  Female.

The  Purple  Martin  makes  its  appearance  in  the  City  of  New  Orleans
from  the  1st  to  the  9th  of  February,  occasionally  a few  days  earlier  than
the  first  of  these  dates,  and  is  then  to  be  seen  gambolling  through  the  air,
over  the  city  and  the  river,  feeding  on  many  sorts  of  insects,  which  are
there  found  in  abundance  at  that  period.

It  frequently  rears  three  broods  whilst  with  us.  I have  had  several
opportunities,  at  the  period  of  their  arrival,  of  seeing  prodigious  flocks
moving  over  that  city  or  its  vicinity,  at  a considerable  height,  each  bird
performing  circular  sweeps  as  it  proceeded,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring
footL  These  flocks  were  loose,  and  moved  either  eastward,  or  towards
the  north-west,  at  a rate  not  exceeding  four  miles  in  the  hour,  as  I walked
under  one  of  them  with  ease  for  upwards  of  two  miles,  at  that  rate,  on
the  4th  of  February  1821,  on  the  bank  of  the  river  below  the  city,  con-
stantly looking  up  at  the  birds,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  many  pas-
sengers, who  were  bent  on  far  different  pursuits.  My  Fahrenheit’s  ther-
mometer stood  at  68%  the  weather  being  calm  and  drizzly.  This  flock
extended  about  a mile  and  a half  in  length,  by  a quarter  of  a mile  in
breadth.  On  the  9th  of  the  same  month,  not  far  above  the  Battle-ground^
I enjoyed  another  sight  of  the  same  kind,  although  I did  not  think  the
flock  so  numerous.

At  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  I have  seen  Martins  as  early  as  the  15th  of
March,  arriving  in  small  detached  parties  of  only  five  or  six  individuals,
when  the  thermometer  was  as  low  as  28°,  the  next  day  at  45°,  and  again,
in  the  same  week,  so  low  as  to  cause  the  death  of  all  the  Martins,  or  ta
render  them  so  incapable  of  flying  as  to  suffer  children  to  catch  them.
By  the  25th  of  the  same  month,  they  are  generally  plentiful  about  that
neighbourhood.

At  St  Genevieve,  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  they  seldom  arrive  before
the  10th  or  15th  of  April,  and  sometimes  suffer  from  unexpected  returns
of  frost.  At  Philadelphia,  they  are  first  seen  about  the  10th  of  April.

H 2


116


PURPLE  MARTIN.


They  reach  Boston  about  the  25th,  and  continue  their  migration  much
farther  north,  as  the  spring  continues  to  open.

On  their  return  to  the  Southern  States,  they  do  not  require  to  wait
for  warmer  days,  as  in  spring,  to  enable  them  to  proceed,  and  they  all
leave  the  above-mentioned  districts  and  places  about  the  20th  of  August.
They  assemble  in  parties  6f  from  fifty  to  a hundred  and  fifty,  about  the
spires  of  churches  in  the  cities,  or  on  the  branches  of  some  large  dead  tree
about  the  farms,  for  several  days  before  their  final  departure.  From
these  places  they  are  seen  making  occasional  sorties,  uttering  a general
cry,  and  inclining  their  course  towards  the  west,  flying  swiftly  for  several
hundred  yards,  when  suddenly  checking  themselves  in  their  career,  they
return  in  easy  sailings  to  the  same  tree  or  steeple.  They  seem  to  act  thus
for  the  purpose  of  exercising  themselves,  as  well  as  to  ascertain  the  course
they  are  to  take,  and  to  form  the  necessary  arrangements  for  enabling  the
party  to  encounter  the  fatigues  of  their  long  journey.  Whilst  alighted,
during  these  days  of  preparation,  they  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  time
in  dressing  and  oiling  their  feathers,  cleaning  their  skins,  and  clearing,  as
it  were,  every  part  of  their  dress  and  body  from  the  numerous  insects
which  infest  them.  They  remain  on  their  roosts  exposed  to  the  night  air,
a few  only  resorting  to  the  boxes  where  they  have  been  reared,  and  do  not
leave  them  until  the  sun  has  travelled  an  hour  or  two  from  the  horizon,^
but  continue,  during  the  fore  part  of  the  morning,  to  plume  themselves
with  great  assiduity.  At  length,  on  the  dawn  of  a calm  morning,  they
start  with  one  accord,  and  are  seen  moving  due  west  or  south-west,  join-
ing other  parties  as  they  proceed,  until  there  is  formed  a flock  similar  to
that  which  I have  described  above.  Their  progress  is  now  much  more
rapid  than  in  spring,  and  they  keep  closer  together.

It  is  during  these  migrations,  reader,  that  the  power  of  flight  possess-
ed by  these  birds  can  be  best  ascertained,  and  more  especially  when  they
encounter  a violent  storm  of  wind.  They  meet  the  gust,  and  appear  to
slide  along  the  edges  of  it,  as  if  determined  not  to  lose  one  inch  of  what
they  have  gained.  The  foremost  front  the  storm  with  pertinacity,  as-
cending or  plunging  along  the  skirts  of  the  opposing  currents,  and  enter-
ing their  undulating  recesses,  as  if  determined  to  force  their  way  through,  ■
while  the  rest  follow  close  behind,  all  huddled  together  into  such  compact
masses  as  to  appear  like  a black  spot.  Not  a twitter  is  then  to  be  heard
from  them  by  the  spectator  below ; but  the  instant  the  farther  edge  of
the  current  is  doubled,  they  relax  their  efforts,  to  refresh  themselves,  and


PURPLE  MARTIN.


117


twitter  in  united  accord,  as  if  congratulating  eacli  other  on  the  successful
issue  of  the  contest.

The  usual  flight  of  this  bird  more  resembles  that  of  the  Hii'undo  ur^
hica  of  Linnaeus,  or  that  of  the  Hirundofulva  of  Vieillot,  than  the  flight
of  any  other  species  of  Swallow ; and,  although  graceful  and  easy,  cannot
be  compared  in  swiftness  with  that  of  the  Barn  Swallow.  Yet  the  Martin
is  fully  able  to  distance  any  bird  not  of  its  own  genus.  They  are  very
expert  at  bathing  and  drinking  while  on  the  wing,  when  over  a large  lake
or  river,  giving  a sudden  motion  to  the  hind  part  of  the  body,  as  it  comes
into  contact  with  the  water,  thus  dipping  themselves  in  it,  and  then  rising
and  shaking  their  body,  like  a water  spaniel,  to  throw  off  the  water.  When
intending  to  drink,  they  sail  close  over  the  water,  with  both  wings  greatly
raised,  and  forming  a very  acute  angle  with  each  other.  In  this  position,
they  lower  the  head,  dipping  their  bill  several  times  in  quick  succession,
and  swallowing  at  each  time  a little  water.

They  alight  with  comparative  ease  on  different  trees,  particularly  wil-
lows, making  frequent  movements  of  the  wings  and  tail  as  they  shift  their
place,  in  looking  for  leaves  to  convey  to  their  nests.  They  also  frequent-
ly alight  on  the  ground,  where,  notwithstanding  the  shortness  of  their
legs,  they  move  with  some  ease,  pick  up  a goldsmith  or  other  insect,  and
walk  to  the  edges  of  puddles  to  drink,  opening  their  wings,  which  they
also  do  when  on  trees,  feeling  as  if  not  perfectly  comfortable.

.)  These  birds  are  extremely  courageous,  persevering,  and  tenacious  of
what  they  consider  their  right.  They  exhibit  strong  antipathies  against
cats,  dogs,  and  such  other  quadrupeds  as  are  likely  to  prove  dangerous  to
them.  They  attack  and  chase  indiscriminately  every  species  of  Hawk,
Crow,  or  Vulture,  and  on  this  account  are  much  patronized  by  the  hus-
bandman. They  frequently  follow  and  tease  an  Eagle,  until  he  is  out  of
sight  of  the  Martin’s  box ; and  to  give  you  an  idea  of  their  tenacity,
when  they  have  made  choice  of  a place  in  which  to  rear  their  young,  I
shall  relate  to  you  the  following  occurrences.

1 had  a large  and  commodious  house  built  and  fixed  on  a pole,  for  the
reception  of  Martins,  in  an  enclosure  near  my  house,  where  for  some  years
several  pairs  had  reared  their  young.  One  winter  I also  put  up  several
small  boxes,  with  a view  to  invite  Blue-birds  to  build  nests  in  them.  The
Martins  arrived  in  the  spring,  and  imagining  these  smaller  apartments
more  agreeable  than  their  own  mansion,  took  possession  of  them,  after
forcing  the  lovely  Blue-birds  from  their  abode.  I witnessed  the  different


118


PURPLE  MARTIN.


conflicts,  and  observed  that  one  of  the  Blue-birds  was  possessed  of  as  much
courage  as  his  antagonist,  for  it  was  only  in  consequence  of  the  more
powerful  blows  of  the  Martin,  that  he  gave  up  his  house,  in  which  a nest
was  nearly  finished,  and  he  continued  on  all  occasions  to  annoy  the  usurp-
er as  much  as  lay  in  his  power.  The  Martin  shewed  his  head  at  the  en-
trance, and  merely  retorted  with  accents  of  exultation  and  insult.  I
thought  fit  to  interfere,  mounted  the  tree  on  the  trunk  of  which  the  Blue-
bird’s box  was  fastened,  caught  the  Martin,  and  clipped  his  tail  with  scis-
sars,  in  the  hope  that  such  mortifying  punishment  might  prove  effectual
in  inducing  him  to  remove  to  his  own  tenement.  No  such  thing ; for  no
sooner  had  I launched  him  into  the  air,  than  he  at  once  rushed  back  to
the  box.  I again  caught  him,  and  clipped  the  tip  of  each  wing  in  such  a
manner  that  he  still  could  fly  sufficiently  well  to  procure  food,  and  once
more  set  him  at  liberty.  The  desired  effect,  however,  was  not  produced,
and  as  I saw  the  pertinacious  Martin  keep  the  box  in  spite  of  all  my
wishes  that  he  should  give  it  up,  I seized  him  in  anger,  and  disposed  of
him  in  such  a way  that  he  never  returned  to  the  neighbourhood.

At  the  house  of  a friend  of  mine  in  Louisiana,  some  Martins  took  pos-
session of  sundry  holes  in  the  cornices,  and  there  reared  their  young  for
several  years,  until  the  insects  which  they  introduced  to  the  house  in-
duced the  owner  to  think  of  a reform.  Carpenters  were  employed  to  clean
the  place,  and  close  up  the  apertures  by  which  the  birds  entered  the  cor-
nice. This  was  soon  done.  The  Martins  seemed  in  despair ; they  brought
twigs  and  other  materials,  and  began  to  form  nests  wherever  a hole
could  be  found  in  any  part  of  the  building ; but  were  so  chased  off*  that
after  repeated  attempts,  the  season  being  in  the  mean  time  advanced,  they
were  forced  away,  and  betook  themselves  to  some  Woodpeckers’  holes  on
the  dead  trees  about  the  plantation.  The  next  spring,  a house  was  built
for  them.  The  erection  of  such  houses  is  a general  practice,  the  Purple
Martin  being  considered  as  a privileged  pilgrim,  and  the  harbinger  of
spring.

The  note  of  the  Martin  is  not  melodious,  but  is  nevertheless  very
pleasing.  The  twitterings  t)f  the  male  while  courting  the  female  are  more
interesting.  Its  notes  are  among  the  first  that  are  heard  in  the  morning,
and  are  welcome  to  the  sense  of  every  body.  The  industrious  farmer
rises  from  his  bed  as  he  hears  them.  They  are  soon  after  mingled  with
those  of  many  other  birds,  and  the  husbandman,  certain  of  a fine  day,
renews  his  peaceful  labours  with  an  elated  heart.  The  still  more  inde-


PURPLE  MARTIN.


119


pendent  Indian  is  also  fond  of  the  Martin’s  company.  He  frequently
hangs  up  a calabash  on  some  twig  near  his  camp,  and  in  this  cradle  the
bird  keeps  watch,  and  sallies  forth  to  drive  off  the  vulture  that  might
otherwise  commit  depredations  on  the  deer-skins  or  pieces  of  venison  ex-
posed to  the  air  to  be  dried.  The  humbled  slave  of  the  Southern  States
takes  more  pains  to  accommodate  this  favourite  bird.  The  calabash  is
neatly  scooped  out,  and  attached  to  the  flexible  top  of  a cane,  brought
from  the  swamp,  where  that  plant  usually  grows,  and  placed  close  to  his
hut.  It  is,  alas ! to  him  a mere  memento  of  the  freedom  which  he  once
enjoyed ; and,  at  the  sound  of  the  horn  which  calls  him  to  his  labour,  as
he  bids  farewell  to  the  Martin,  he  cannot  help  thinking  how  happy  he
should  be,  were  he  permitted  to  gambol  and  enjoy  himself  day  after  day,
with  as  much  hberty  as  that  bird.  Almost  every  country  tavern  has  a
Martin  box  on  the  upper  part  of  its  sign-board ; and  I have  observed  that
the  handsomer  the  box,  the  better  does  the  inn  generally  prove  to  be.

All  our  cities  are  furnished  with  houses  for  the  reception  of  these
birds  ; and  it  is  seldom  that  even  lads  bent  upon  mischief  disturb  the  fa-
voured Martin.  He  sweeps  along  the  streets,  here  and  there  seizing  a
fly,  hangs  to  the  eaves  of,  the  houses,  or  peeps  into  them,  as  he  poises  him-
self in  the  air  in  front  of  the  windows,  or  mounts  high  above  the  city,
soaring  into  the  clear  sky,  plays  with  the  string  of  the  child’s  kite,  snap-
ping at  it,  as  he  swiftly  passes,  with  unerring  precision,  or  suddenly
sweeps  along  the  roofs,  chasing  off  grimalkin,  who  is  probably  prowling
in  quest  of  his  young.

In  the  Middle  States,  the  nest  of  the  Martin  is  built,  or  that  of  the
preceding  year  repaired  and  augmented,  eight  or  ten  days  after  its  arri-
val, or  about  the  J^Oth  of  April.  It  is  composed  of  dry  sticks,  willow-
twigs,  grasses,  leaves,  green  and  dry,  feathers,  and  whatever  rags  he  meets
with.  The  eggs,  which  are  pure  white,  are  from  four  to  six.  Many
pairs  resort  to  the  same  box  to  breed,  and  the  little  fraternity  appear  to
live  in  perfect  harmony.  They  rear  two  broods  in  a season.  The  first
comes  forth  in  the  end  of  May,  the  second  about  the  middle  of  July.  In
Louisiana,  they  sometimes  have  three  broods.  The  male  takes  part  of
the  labour  of  incubation,  and  is  extremely  attentive  to  his  mate.  He  is
seen  twittering  on  the  box,  and  frequently  flying  past  the  hole.  His  notes
are  at  this  time  emphatical  and  prolonged,  low  and  less  musical  than  even
his  common  'pews.  Their  food  consists  entirely  of  insects,  among  which
are  large  beetles.  They  seldom  seize  the  honey-bee.


120


PURPLE  MARTIN.


The  circumstance  of  their  leaving  the  United  States  so  early  in  au-
tumn, has  inclined  me  to  think  that  they  must  go  farther  from  them  than
any  of  our  migratory  land  birds.  This,  however,  'is  only  conjecture,  of
which,  kind  reader,  you  may  better  judge  when  you  have  read  my  account
of  the  Cliff  Swallow.

Hirundo  purpurea,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  MA.^Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  578. — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  64.

Purple  Martin,  Hirundo  purpurea,  Wils.  Americ.  Ornith.  p.  58,  PI.  xxxix.
fig.  1.  Male  ; fig.  2.  Female.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXII.  Fig  1,  1.

Bill  short,  rather  robust,  much  depressed  and  very  broad  at  the  base ;
compressed  towards  the  tip  ; upper  mandible  notched  near  the  tip,  which
is  rather  obtuse  and  a little  declinate ; lower  mandible  nearly  straight  ;
gap  as  wide  as  the  head,  and  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  ba^
sal,  lateral,  roundish.  Head  large.  Neck  short.  Body  rather  elongated
and  depressed.  Feet  very  short ; tarsus  and  toes  scutellate  anteriorly,
lateral  toes  nearly  equal,  the  outer  united  to  the  second  joint ; claws  short,
weak,  arched,  rather  obtuse.

Plumage  silky,  shining,  and  blended.  Wings  very  long  and  slender,
sickle-shaped  when  closed,  the  first  primary  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary
length,  shorter  than  the  wings,  forked,  when  spread  even,  of  twelve  straight,
narrowish  feathers.

Bill  deep  brownish-black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  purplish-black.
The  plumage  is  generally  of  a deep  blackish-blue,  with  intense  purplish-
blue  reflections ; the  quills  and  tail-feathers  brownish-black.

Length  7^  inches,  extent  of  wings  16  ; bill  along  the  back  along
the  gap  1,  width  of  the  gap  f ; tarsus  f,  middle  toe  the  same.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXII.  Fig.  2,  2.

Fore  and  upper  part  of  the  head  brownish-grey,  mottled  with  black;
upper  parts  generally  of  the  same  tints  as  the  male,  with  more  grey.
Throat,  fore  neck,  and  upper  breast,  dark  grey,  transversely  lined  with
black.  The  rest  of  the  under  parts  lightish  grey,  longitudinally  streaked
with  blackish,  darker  and  transversely  streaked  on  the  sides,  and  under
the  tail  nearly  white,  with  slight  lines.


1


( 121  )


THE  YELLOW-BREASTED  WARBLER,  OR  MARYLAND
YELLOW-THROAT.

Sylvia  Tbichas,  Lath.

PLATE  XXIII.  Male  and  Female.

The  notes  of  this  little  bird  render  it  more  conspicuous  than  most  of
its  genus,  for  although  they  cannot  be  called  very  musical,  they  are  far
from  being  unpleasant,  and  are  uttered  so  frequently  during  the  day,  that
one,  in  walking  along  the  briary  ranges  of  the  fences,  is  almost  necessarily
brought  to  listen  to  its  whitititee^  repeated  three  or  four  times  every  five
or  six  minutes,  the  bird  seldom  stopping  expressly  to  perform  its  music,
but  merely  uttering  the  notes  after  it  has  picked  an  insect  from  amongst
the  leaves  of  the  low  bushes  which  it  usually  inhabits.  It  then  hops  a
step  or  two  up  or  down,  and  begins  again.

Although  timid,  it  seldom  flies  far  oiF  at  the  approach  of  man,  but  in-
stantly dives  into  the  thickest  parts  of  its  favourite  bushes  and  high  grass,
where  it  continues  searching  for  food  either  along  the  twigs,  or  among
the  dried  leaves  on  the  ground,  and  renews  its  little  song  when  only  a
few  feet  distant.

, Its  nest  is  one  of  those  which  the  Cow  Bunting  ( Icterus  pecoris )
selects,  in  which  to  deposit  one  of  its  eggs,  to  be  hatched  by  the  owners,
that  bird  being  similar  in  this  respect  to  the  European  Cuckoo;  The
nest,  which  is  placed  on  the  ground,  and  partly  sunk  in  it,  is  now  and
then  covered  over  in  the  form  of  an  oven,  from  which  circumstance
children  name  this  warbler  the  Oven-bird.  It  is  composed  externally  of
withered  leaves  and  grass,  and  is  lined  with  hair.  The  eggs  are  from
four  to  six,  of  a white  colour,  speckled  with  light  brown,  and  are  de-
posited about  the  middle  of  May.  Sometimes  two  broods  are  reared  in
a season.  I have  never  observed  the  egg  of  the  Cow  Bunting  in  the
nests  of  the  second  brood.  It  is  less  active  in  its  motions  than  most  of
the  Sylviae,  but  makes  up  this  deficiency  by  continued  application,  it
being,  to  appearance,  busily  employed  during  the  whole  of  the  day.  It
does  not  chase  insects  by  flying  after  them,  but  secures  them  by  surprise.
Caterpillars  and  spiders  form  its  principal  food.

Although  this  species  is  found  throughout  the  Union,  the  Middle


122


MARYLAND  YELLOW-THROAT.


States  seem  to  attract  and  detain  more  individuals,  during  the  breeding
season,  than  any  others.  Very  few  breed  in  Louisiana.  In  Kentucky,
however,  many  breed  in  the  barrens.  The  neighbourhood  of  swamps  and
such  places  is  their  favourite  ground,  but  every  field  provided  with  briar
patches  or  tall  weeds  harbours  some  of  them.  It  leaves  the  Central  Dis-
tricts about  the  middle  of  September.  The  male  bird  does  not  attain  its
full  colouring  until  the  first  spring,  being  for  several  months  of  the  same
tints  as  the  female.

The  twig  on  which  the  male  is  seen,  is  commonly  called  in  Louisiana
the  Wild  Olive.  The  tree  is  small,  brittle  and  useless.  It  bears  an  acid
fruit,  which  is  sometimes  employed  as  a pickle,  and  eaten  when  ripe  by
some  people.

The  female  is  perched  on  a twig  of  the  Bitter-wood  Tree,  the  wood
of  which  is  hard,  and  resembles  that  of  the  Crab.  This  is  also  a small
tree,  and  grows  along  fences,  amongst  the  briars,  where  the  birds  are
found.  Both  these  trees  I have  seen  in  Louisiana  only.

Sylvia  Trichas,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  519.

Turdus  Trichas,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  293.

Sylvia  Marilandica,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  85.

Yellow-breasted  Warbler,  Lath.  Synops,  vol.  iv.  p.  438.

Maryland  Yellow-throat,  Sylvia  Marilandica,  Wilson,  Americ.  Ornith.
vol.  i.  p.  88.  PI.  6.  fig.  1.  Male ; and  vol.  ii.  p.  163.  PI.  18.  fig.  4.  Female.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  tapering,  slender,  nearly  straight,  acute.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  by  a membrane.  Head  and
neck  of  ordinary  size,  the  latter  short.  Body  rather  short.  Feet  longish,
slender  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few
scutella,  the  uppermost  long ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the
hind  toe  of  moderate  size  ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  loose,  blended.  Wings  very  short,  the  first  quill  longest.
Tail  rounded.

Bill  dark  brown.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Feet  flesh  colour.  A broad
band  of  black  across  the  forehead,  including  the  eyes,  and  terminating
in  a pointed  form  half-way  down  the  neck ; behind  which  is  a nar-
rower band  of  very  pale  blue  ; a slender  white  streak  under  the  eye.  Fore
part  of  the  neck  bright  Qchre-yellow,  the  rest  of  the  under  parts  pale


MARYLAND  YELLOW-THROAT.


123


brownish-yellow,  fading  into  white  on  the  abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts.
Upper  parts  dull  greyish-olive,  on  the  head  tingedrwith  red.  Inner  webs
of  the  quills  deep  brown.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  65  ; bill  along  the  ridge  ; along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  ;

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  has  the  upper  parts  lighter,  the  under  parts  tinged  with
reddish-brown,  and  wants  the  two  bands  on  the  head,  which  is  of  a pale
brownish  red  colour.


The  Snow-drop  Tree,  Silver-bell  Tree,  or  Wild  Olive.

Halesia  tetraptera,  Willd.  Sp.  PL  vol.  ii.  p.  849.  Pursky  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  448. — Monadelphia  Decandria,  Linn.  Guaiacan^e,  Juss.

Leaves  ovate,  acuminate,  serrate ; flowers  with  twelve  stamina ; the
fruit  rhomboidal.  It  grows  in  shady  woods,  generally  near  rivers.

The  Bitter- wood  Tree.

Viburnum  prunifolium,  Wild.  Sp.  PL  vol.  i.  p.  1847.  Purshy  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  201. — Pentandria  Dygynia,  Linn.  Caprifolia,  Juss.

Glabrous ; the  branches  spreading ; the  leaves  roundish ; crenato-ser-
rate ; the  petioles  smooth ; the  cymes  sessile ; the  fruit  round.  The
flowers  are  white,  the  berries  dark  purplish-blue.


( 124  )


llOSCOE  S YELLOW-THROAT.

Sylvia  Roscoe.

PLATE  XXIV.  Male.

The  many  kind  attentions  which  I have  received  from  the  celebrated
author  of  the  Life  of  Leo  the  Tenth,  joined  to  the  valuable  advice  with
which  I have  been  favoured  by  that  excellent  gentleman,  has  induced
me  to  honour  the  little  bird  before  you  with  his  name.

I shot  it  in  a deep  swamp  not  far  from  the  River  Mississippi,  in  the
State  bearing  the  same  name,  in  September  1821.  It  was  flitting  amongst
the  top  branches  of  a high  Cypress,  when  I first  observed  it,  moving  side-
ways, searching  for  insects,  and  occasionally  following  one  on  the  wing.
It  uttered  a single  tzvH  repeated  at  short  intervals.  It  having  unexpect-
edly flown  to  a distant  tree  of  the  species  on  a branch  of  which  you  now
see  it,  I followed  it  and  shot  it.  It  was  the  only  one  of  the  kind  I have
ever  seen,  although  I went  to  the  same  swamp  for  several  days  in  succes-
sion. It  proved  a male,  and  was  to  all  appearance  in  perfect  plumage.
The  gizzard  was  nearly  filled  with  very  minute  red  insects,  found  on
Cypresses  and  Pines,  the  wings  of  different  flies,  and  the  heads  of  red
ants.

In  general  appearance,  this  species  so  much  resembles  the  preceding,
that  had  not  its  habits  differed  so  greatly  from  those  of  the  Maryland
Yellow-throat,  I might  have  been  induced  to  consider  it  as  merely  an  ac-
cidental variety.  On  examining  it  more  closely,  however,  and  on  com-
paring it  with  that  bird,  I felt,  as  I now  feel,  fully  confident  of  its  being
different.

The  species  of  Oak,  on  a twig  of  which  it  stands,  is  commonly  called
the  Swamp  Oak.  It  grows  to  a large  size,  always  near  the  edges  of  damp
or  watery  places.  The  height  is  from  fifty  to  sixty  feet,  its  diameter  from
two  to  three.  The  branches  come  off  from  the  trunk  at  a height  of  eight
feet  from  the  ground,  nearly  at  right  angles.  The  twigs  have  a similar
disposition.  The  wood  is  extremely  hard  and  close  in  the  texture,  heavier
than  that  of  either  the  Red  or  the  White  Oak,  and  sinks  when  thrown  in-
to water.  The  Southern  States  appear  to  be  those  in  which  it  thrives
best.


ROSCOE’S  YELLOW-THROAT.


125


Sylvia  Roscoe.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXIV.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  tapering,  slender,  nearly  straight,  acute.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  by  a membrane.  Head  and
neck  of  ordinary  size,  the  latter  short.  Body  rather  short.  Feet  of  or-
dinary length,  slender  ; tarsus  scarcely  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered
anteriorly  with  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long  ; toes  scutellate  above,
the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size ; claws  slender,  compressed,
acute,  arched.

Plumage  loose,  blended.  Wings  very  short,  the  first  quill  longest.
Tail  rounded.

Bill  dark  flesh-colour,  brown  at  the  tip.  Iris  light  brown.  Feet  flesh-
colour.  General  colour  of  the  upper  parts  very  dark  olive,  the  feathers
edged  with  lighter.  The  inner  webs  of  the  quills  dark  brown.  A
slender  white  streak  over  the  eye  and  close  to  it ; a broad  band  of  black
from  the  eye  downwards.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  6|  ; bill  along  the  ridge  A?  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus


The  Swamp  Oak.

Quercus  AQUATicA,  Water  Oak,  Arb.  Forest,  vol.  ii.  p.  90.  PI.  17. — Mo-

NOEciA  PoLYANDRiA,  Linn.  Amektacea:,  Juss.

Leaves  oblongo-cuneate,  tapering  at  the  base,  rounded  or  apiculate,
sometimes  three-lobed.


( 126  )


THE  SONG  SPARROW.

Fringilla  melodia,  Wils.

PLATE  XXV.  Male  and  Female.

The  Song  Sparrow  is  one  of  the  most  abundant  of  its  tribe  in  Loui-
siana, during  winter.  This  abundance  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  cir-
cumstance that  it  rears  three  broods  in  the  year : — six,  five,  and  three
young  at  each  time,  making  fourteen  per  annum  from  a single  pair.  Sup-
posing a couple  to  live  in  health,  and  enjoy  the  comforts  necessary  for  the
bringing  up  of  their  young  families,  for  a period  of  only  ten  years,  which
is  a moderate  ^estimate  for  birds  of  this  class,  you  will  readily  conceive
how  a whole  flock  of  Song  Sparrows  may  in  a very  short  time  be  produced
by  them.

Among  the  many  desiderata  connected  with  the  study  of  nature,  there
is  one  which,  long^  felt  by  me,  is  not  less  so  at  the  present  moment.  I
have  never  been  able  to  conceive  why  a bird  which  produces  more  than
one  brood  in  a season,  should  abandon  its  first  nest  to  construct  a new
one,  as  is  the  case  with  the  present  species ; while  other  birds,  such  as  the
Ospreys,  and  various  species  of  Swallows,  rear  many  broods  in  the  first
nest  which  they  have  made,  and  to  which  they  return,  after  their  long
annual  migrations,  to  repair  it,  and  render  it  fit  for  the  habitation  of  the
young  brood.  There  is  another  fact  which  renders  the  question  still
more  difficult  to  be  solved.  I have  generally  found  the  nests  of  this
Sparrow  cleaner  and  more  perfect  after  the  brood  raised  in  them  have
made  their  departure,  than  the  nests  of  the  other  species  of  birds  men-
tioned above  are  on  such  occasions ; a circumstance  which  would  render
it  unnecessary  for  the  Song  Sparrow  to  repair  its  nest.  You  are  aware
of  the  cleanliness  of  birds  with  respect  to  their  nests  during  the  whole
period  occupied  in  rearing  their  young.  You  know  that  the  parents  re-
move the  excrements  to  a distance  from  them,  so  long  as  these  excre-
ments are  contained  in  a filmy  kind  of  substance,  of  which  the  old  bird
lays  hold  with  its  bill  for  that  express  purpose,  frequently  carrying  them
off  to  a distance  of  forty  or  fifty  yards,  or  even  more.  Well,  the  Song
Sparrow  is  among  the  cleanest  of  the  clean.  I have  often  watched  the
young  birds  leaving  the  nest ; and  after  their  departure,  have  found  it  as


SONG  SPARROW.


127


well  6tted  for  the  reception  of  a fresh  set  of  eggs  as  the  new  nest  which
the  bird  constructs.  I am  unable  to  understand  the  reason  why  a new
nest  is  formed.  Can  you,  reader,  solve  the  question  ?

I have  at  all  times  been  very  partial  to  the  Song  Sparrow ; for  al-
though its  attire  is  exceedingly  plain,  it  is  pleasing  to  hear  it,  in  the
Middle  States,  singing  earlier  in  spring,  and  later  in  autumn,  than  almost
any  other  bird.  Its  song  is  sweet,  of  considerable  duration,  and  performed
at  all  hours  of  the  day.  It  nestles  sometimes  on  trees,  and  sometimes  on
the  ground.  I have  imagined  that  the  old  birds,  finding  by  experience
the  insecurity  of  their  ordinary  practice  of  nestling  on  the  ground,  where
the  eggs  are  often  devoured  by  Crows,  betake  themselves  to  the  bushes
to  conceal  their  nests  from  their  enemies.  But  whatever  may  be  the
reason,  the  fact  certainly  exists,  and  the  nests  of  the  Song  Sparrow  occur
in  both  kinds  of  situation.  The  nest  for  the  first  brood  is  prepared,  and
the  eggs  laid,  sometimes  as  early  as  the  15th  of  ApriL  The  young  are
out  by  the  first  week  of  May.  The  third  brood  is  seen  by  the  middle  of
September.  The  nest,  when  on  the  ground,  is  well  sunk  in  the  earth,  and
is  placed  at  the  roots  of  tall  grasses.  It  is  made  of  fine  grass,  and  lined
with  hair,  principally  horse  hair.  The  number  of  eggs  is  from  five  to
seven,  usually  from  four  to  six,  excepting  those  for  the  last  brood,  which
I have  seldom  found  to  exceed  three.  They  are  of  a very  broad  ovate
form,  light  greenish-white,  speckled  with  dark  umber,  the  specks  larger
toward  the  greater  end.  The  male  assists  in  the  process  of  incubation,
during  which  one  of  the  birds  feeds  the  other  in  succession.  At  this  time
the  male  is  often  to  be  observed  singing  on  the  top  of  a neighbouring
bush,  low  tree,  or  fence-rail.

The  flight  of  the  Song  Sparrow  is  short,  and  much  undulated,  when
the  bird  is  high  in  the  air,  but  swifter  and  more  level  when  it  is  near  the
ground.  They  migrate  by  night,  singly  or  in  straggling  troops.  Some
of  them  remain  the  whole  winter  in  the  Middle  Districts,  where  they  are
not  unfrequently  heard  to  sing,  if  the  weather  prove  at  all  pleasant.  The
greater  part,  however,  seek  the  Southern  States,  where  myriads  of  Sparrows
of  diflerent  kinds  are  everywhere  to  be  seen  in  low  swampy  situations,  such
as  they  at  all  periods  prefer.  It  is  a fine  plump  bird,  and  becomes  very
flat  and  juicy.  It  is  picked  up  in  great  numbers  by  the  Hen-harriers,
which  visit  us  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  on  the  different  kinds  of  Sparrows
that  resort  to  these  States  in  winter  from  the  Middle  Districts.  In  Louisi-
ana, they  are  frequently  seen  to  ascend  to  the  tops  of  large  trees,  and


128


SONG  SPARROW.


there  continue  for  some  time  singing  their  agreeable  chant,  after  which
they  dive  again  into  the  low  bushes,  or  amongst  the  rank  weeds  which
grow  wherever  a stream  is  to  be  found.  They  feed  on  grass  seeds,  some
berries  and  insects,  especially  grasshoppers,  and  now  and  then  pursue
flies  on  the  wing.  On  the  ground  their  motions  are  lively.  They  con-
tinue running  about  with  great  nimbleness  and  activity,  and  sometimes
cross  shallow  waters  leg-deep.  To  the  eastward,  they  often  frequent
orchards  and  large  gardens,  but  seldom  approach  houses.

I have  placed  a pair  of  them  on  a twig  of  the  Huckleberry  Bush  in
blossom.  This  species  sometimes  grows  to  the  height  of  six  or  seven
feet,  and  produces  a fine  berry  in  great  abundance.  Huckleberries  of
every  sort  are  picked  by  women  and  children,  and  sold  in  the  eastern
markets  in  great  profusion.  They  are  used  for  tarts,  but  in  my  opinion
are  better  when  eaten  fresh.

Fringilla  MELODiA,  Ch.  Bonapurte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  108.

Song  Sparrow,  Fringilla  melodia,  Wilson^  Americ.  Ornitli.  vol.  ii.  p.  125.

PI.  xvi.  fig.  4.


Adult  Male.  Plate  XXV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  conical,  a little  bulging,  straight,  acute ; upper
mandible  broader,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip ; gap  line  a little  declinate
at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  concealed  by  the  frontal  feathers.
Feet  of  moderate  length  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; toes  free,
the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  rather  compact  above,  soft  and  blended  beneath.  Wings
short,  rounded,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest.  Tail  longish,  even,
the  feathers  narrow  and  acute.

Bill  deep  brown  above,  bluish  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  and  claws
pale  brown.  Upper  part  of  the  head  reddish-brown,  mottled  with  dark
brown,  with  a broad  line  of  bluish-grey  down  the  middle.  Back  grey,
streaked  with  reddish-brown  and  dusky.  Lower  back  bluish-grey  ; tail-
coverts  tinged  with  light  brown.  Sides  of  the  head  bluish-grey  ; a broad
line  of  brown  from  the  eye  backwards,  and  another  from  the  commis-
sure of  the  mouth.  Under  parts  white,  tinged  on  the  sides  with  grey,
and  posteriorly  with  reddish-brown,  the  neck  and  breast  spotted  with
dark  brown,  and  the  lateral  under  tail-coverts  streaked  with  the  same.
Wings  dark  brown,  the  quills  margined  externally  with  reddish-brown,


r


SONG  SPARROW.  129

the  coverts  margined  and  tipped  with  whitish.  Tail-feathers  uniformly
dull  brown.

Length  6 inches,  extent  of  wings  8| ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  i ; tarsus  1,  middle  toe  hind  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXV.  Fig.  %

The  female  hardly  differs  in  colour  from  the  male.


The  Huckle-berry  or  Blue-tangles.

Vaccinium  frondosum,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  352.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  ,vol.  i.
p.  285.— Decandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Eric^,  Juss*

Leaves  deciduous,  ovato-oblong  or  lanceolate,  entire,  smooth,  glaucous
beneath,  resinous  ; racemes  lax,  bracteate  ; pedicels  long,  filiform,  brac-
teolate ; corollas  ovato-companulate,  with  acute  laciniae  and  included
anthers.  The  flower  is  white,  the  calyx  green,  the  berry  globular  and  of
a bluish-black  colour.  It  varies  greatly  in  the  form  of  the  leaves,  as  well
as  in  stature,  sometimes  attaining  a height  of  six  or  seven  feet.

Huckle-berries  form  a portion  of  the  food  of  many  birds,  as  well  as  of
various  quadrupeds.  Of  the  former,  I may  mention  in  particular  the
Wild  Turkey,  several  species  of  Grouse,  the  Wild  Pigeon,  the  Turtle
Dove,  some  Loxias,  and  several  Thrushes.  Among  the  latter,  the  Black
Bear  stands  pre-eminent,  although  Raccoons,  Foxes,  Oppossums,  and
others  destroy  great  quantities.  When  the  season  is  favourable,  these
berries  are  so  thickly  strewn  on  the  twigs,  that  they  may  be  gathered  in
large  quantities,  and  as  they  become  ripe,  numerous  parties  resort  to  the
grounds  in  which  they  are  found,  by  way  of  frolicking,  and  spend  the
time  in  a very  agreeable  manner,


I


( 130  )


IMPROVEMENTS  IN  THE  NAVIGATION  OF  THE
MISSISSIPPI.

I HAVE  SO  frequently  spoken  of  the  Mississippi,  that  an  account  of  the
progress  of  navigation  on  that  extraordinary  stream  may  be  interesting-
even  to  the  student  of  nature.  I shall  commence  with  the  year  1808,  at
which  time  a great  portion  of  the  western  country,  and  the  banks  of  the
Mississippi  River,  from  above  the  City  of  Natchez  particularly,  were  lit-
tle more  than  a waste,  or,  to  use  words  better  suited  to  my  feelings,  re-
mained in  their  natural  state.  To  ascend  the  great  stream  against  a
powerful  current,  rendered  still  stronger  wherever  islands  occurred,  toge-
gether  with  the  thousands  of  sand-banks,  as  liable  to  changes  and  shift-
ings  as  the  alluvial  shores  themselves,  which  at  every  deep  curve  or  bend
were  seen  giving  way,  as  if  crushed  down  by  the  weight  of  the  great
forests  that  everywhere  reached  to  the  very  edge  of  the  water,  and  falling
and  sinking  in  the  muddy  stream,  by  acres  at  a time,  was  an  adventure
of  no  small  difficulty  and  risk,  and  which  was  rendered  more  so  by  the
innumerable  logs,  called  saxvyers  and  planters^  that  everywhere  raised
their  heads  above  the  water,  as  if  bidding  defiance  to  all  intruders.  Few
white  inhabitants  had  yet  marched  towards  its  shores,  and  these  few  were
of  a class  little  able  to  assist  the  navigator.  Here  and  there  a solitary
encampment  of  native  Indians  might  be  seen,  but  its  inmates  were  as
likely  to  prove  foes  as  friends,  having  from  their  birth  been  made  keenly
sensible  of  the  encroachments  of  the  white  men  upon  their  lands.

Such  was  then  the  nature  of  the  Mississippi  and  its  shores.  That
river  was  navigated  principally  in  the  direction  of  the  current,  in  small
canoes,  pirogues,  keel-boats,  some  flat-boats,  and  a few  barges.  The  canoes
and  pirogues  being  generally  laden  with  furs  from  the  different  heads  of
streams  that  feed  the  great  river,  were  of  little  worth  after  reaching  the  mar-
ket of  New  Orleans,  and  seldom  reascended,  the  owners  making  their  way
home  through  the  woods,  amidst  innumerable  difficulties.  The  flat-boats
were  demolished  and  used  as  fire- wood.  The  keel-boats  and  barges  were  em-
ployed in  conveying  produce  of  different  kinds  besides  furs,  such  as  lead,
flour,  pork,  and  other  articles.  These  returned  laden  with  sugar,  coffee,
and  dry  goods  suited  for  the  markets  of  St  Genevieve  and  St  Louis  on
the  Upper  Mississippi,  or  branched  off  and  ascended  the  Ohio  to  the


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


131


foot  of  the  Falls  near  Louisville  in  Kentucky.  But,  reader,  follow  their
movements,  and  judge  for  yourself  of  the  fatigues,  troubles  and  risks  of
the  men  employed  in  that  navigation.  A keel-boat  was  generally  manned
by  ten  hands,  principally  Canadian  French,  and  a patroon  or  master.
These  boats  seldom  carried  more  than  from  twenty  to  thirty  tons.  The
barges  frequently  had  forty  or  fifty  men,  with  a patroon,  and  carried  fifty
or  sixty  tons.  Both  these  kinds  of  vessels  were  provided  with  a mast,  a
square-sail,  and  coils  of  cordage,  known  by  the  name  of  cordelles.  Each
boat  or  barge  carried  its  own  provisions.  We  shall  suppose'  one  of  these
boats  under  way,  and,  having  passed  Natchez,  entering  upon  what  were
called  the  difficulties  of  their  ascent.  Wherever  a point  projected,  so  as  to
render  the  course  or  bend  below  it  of  some  magnitude,  there  was  an  eddy,
the  returning  current  of  which  was  sometimes  as  strong  as  that  of  the
middle  of  the  great  stream.  The  bargemen  therefore  rowed  up  pretty
close  under  the  bank,  and  had  merely  to  keep  watch  in  the  bow,  lest  the
boat  should  run  against  a planter  or  sawyer.  But  the  boat  has  reached
the  point,  and  there  the  current  is  to  all  appearance  of  double  strength,
and  right  against  it.  The  men,  who  have  all  rested  a few  minutes,  are
ordered  to  take  their  stations,  and  lay  hold  of  their  oars,  for  the  river
must  be  crossed,  it  being  seldom  possible  to  double  such  a point  and  pro-
ceed along  the  same  shore.  The  boat  is  crossing,  its  head  slanting  to
the  current,  which  is  however  too  strong  for  the  rowers,  and  when  the
other  side  of  the  river  has  been  reached,  it  has  drifted  perhaps  a quarter
of  a mile.  The  men  are  by  this  time  exhausted,  and,  as  we  shall  suppose
it  to  be  twelve  o’clock,  fasten  the  boat  to  the  shore  or  to  a tree.  A
small  glass  of  whisky  is  given  to  each,  when  they  cook  and  eat  their
dinner,  and  after  repairing  their  fatigue  by  an  hour’s  repose,  recom-
mence their  labours.  The  boat  is  again  seen  slowly  advancing  against
the  stream.  It  has  reached  the  lower  end  of  a large  sand-bar,  along  the
edge  of  which  it  is  propelled  by  means  of  long  poles,  if  the  bottom  be
hard.  Two  men  called  bowsmen  remain  at  the  prow,  to  assist,  in  concert
with  the  steers-man,  in  managing  the  boat,  and  keeping  its  head  right
against  the  current.  The  rest  ^place  themselves  on  the  land  side  of  the
footway  of  the  vessel,  put  one  end  of  their  poles  on  the  ground,  the  other
against  their  shoulders,  and  push  with  all  their  might.  As  each  of  the
men  reaches  the  stern,  he  crosses  to  the  other  side,  runs  along  it,  and
comes  again  to  the  landward  side  of  the  bow,  when  he  recommences  ope-

I 2


132


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


rations.  The  barge  in  the  mean  time  is  ascending  at  a rate  not  exceed-
injy  one  mile  in  the  hour.

The  bar  is  at  length  passed,  and  as  the  shore  in  sight  is  straight  on
both  sides  of  the  river,  and  the  current  uniformly  strong,  the  poles  are
laid  aside,  and  the  men  being  equally  divided,  those  on  the  river  side
take  to  their  oars,  whilst  those  on  the  land  side  lay  hold  of  the  branches
of  willows,  or  other  trees,  and  thus  slowly  propel  the  boat.  Here  and
there,  however,  the  trunk  of  a fallen  tree,  partly  lying  on  the  bank,  and
partly  projecting  beyond  it,  impedes  their  progress,  and  requires  to  be
doubled.  This  is  performed  by  striking  it  with  the  iron  points  of  the
poles  and  gaff-hooks.  The  sun  is  now  quite  low,  and  the  barge  is  again
secured  in  the  best  harbour  within  reach.  The  navigators  cook  their
supper,  and  betake  themselves  to  their  blankets  or  bear-skins  to  rest,  or
perhaps  light  a large  fire  on  the  shore,  under  the  smoke  of  which  they
repose,  in  order  to  avoid  the  persecutions  of  the  myriads  of  moschettoes
which  occur  during  the  whole  summer  along  the  river.  Perhaps,  from
dawn  to  sunset,  the  boat  may  have  advanced  fifteen  miles.  If  so,  it  has
done  well.  The  next  day,  the  wind  proves  favourable,  the  sail  is  set,
the  boat  takes  all  advantages,  and  meeting  with  no  accident,  has  ascended
thirty  miles,  perhaps  double  that  distance.  The  next  day  comes  with  a
very  different  aspect.  The  wind  is  right  a-head,  the  shores  are  without
trees  of  any  kind,  and  the  canes  on  the  banks  are  so  thick  and  stout,
that  not  even  the  cordelles  can  be  used.  This  occasions  a halt.  The
time  is  not  altogether  lost,  as  most  of  the  men,  being  provided  with  rifles,
betake  themselves  to  the  woods,  and  search  for  the  deer,  the  bears,  or  the
turkeys,  that  are  generally  abundant  there.  Three  days  may  pass  before
the  wind  changes,  and  the  advantages  gained  on  the  previous  fine  day
are  forgotten.  Again  the  boat  proceeds,  but  in  passing  over  a shallow
place  runs  on  a log,  swings  with  the  current,  but  hangs  fast,  with  her  lea-
side  almost  under  water.  Now  for  the  poles  ! All  hands  are  on  deck,
bustling  and  pushing.  At  length  towards  sunset,  the  boat  is  once  more
afloat,  and  is  again  taken  to  the  shore,  where  the  wearied  crew  pass  ano-
ther night.

I shall  not  continue  this  account  of  difficulties,  it  having  already  be-
come painful  in  the  extreme.  I could  tell  you  of  the  crew  abandoning
the  boat  and  cargo,  and  of  numberless  accidents  and  perils ; but  be
it  enough  to  say,  that,  advancing  in  this  tardy  manner,  the  boat  that  left
New  Orleans  on  the  first  of  March,  often  did  not  reach  the  Falls  of  the


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


133


Ohio  until  the  month  of  July, — nay,  sometimes  not  until  October ; and
after  all  this  immense  trouble,  it  brought  only  a few  bags  of  coffee,  and
at  most  100  hogsheads  of  sugar.  Such  was  the  state  of  things  in  1808.
The  number  of  barges  at  that  period  did  not  amount  to  more  than  25  or  30,
and  the  largest  probably  did  not  exceed  1 00  tons  burden.  T o make  the  best
of  this  fatiguing  navigation,  I may  conclude  by  saying,  that  a barge  which
came  up  in  three  months  had  done  wonders,  for  I believe,  few  voyages
were  performed  in  that  time.

If  I am  not  mistaken,  the  first  steam-boat  that  went  down  out  of  the
Ohio  to  New  Orleans  was  named  the  Orleans,”  and  if  I remember  right,
was  commanded  by  Captain  Ogden.  This  voyage,  I believe  was  per-
formed in  the  spring  of  1810.  It  was,  as  you  may  suppose,  looked  upon
as  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  enterprise.  Soon  after,  another  vessel  came  from
Pittsburg,  and  before  many  years  elapsed,  to  see  a vessel  so  propelled
became  a common  occurrence.  In  1826,  after  a lapse  of  time  that  pro-
ved sufficient  to  double  the  population  of  the  United  States  of  America,
the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  had  so  improved  both  in  respect  to  fa-
cility and  quickness,  that  I know  no  better  way  of  giving  you  an  idea  of
it,  than  by  presenting  you  with  an  extract  of  a letter  from  my  eldest  son,
which  was  taken  from  the  books  of  N.  Berthoud,  Esq.  with  whom  he  at
that  time  resided.

“ You  ask  me  in  your  last  letter  for  a list  of  the  arrivals  and  depart-
ures here.  I give  you  an  abstract  from  our  list  of  1826,  shewing  the
number  of  boats  which  plied  each  year,  their  tonnage,  the  trips  which
they  performed,  and  the  quantity  of  goods  landed  here  from  New  Orleans
and  intermediate  places.


1823,  from  Jan.  1.  to  Dec.  31.

42  boats,  measuring  7,860  tons.

98  trips.

19,453  tons.

1824,

do.  1.

Nov.  25.

36

do.

6,393  do.

118

do.

20,291

do.

1825,

do.  1.

Aug.  15.

42

do.

7,484  do.

140

do.

24,102

do.

1826,

do.  1.

Dec.  31.

51

do.

9,388  do.

182

do.

28,914

do.

The  amount  for  the  present  year  will  be  much  greater  than  any  of  the
above.  The  number  of  flat-boats  and  keels  is  beyond  calculation.  The
number  of  steam-boats  above  the  Falls  I cannot  say  much  about,  except
that  one  or  two  arrive  at  and  leave  Louisville  every  day.  Their  passage
from  Cincinnati  is  commonly  14  or  16  hours.  The  Tecumseh,  a boat
which  runs  between  this  place  and  New  Orleans,  and  which  measures
210  tons,  arrived  here  on  the  10th  instant,  in  9 days  7 hours,  from  port


134


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.


to  port ; and  the  Philadelphia,  of  300  tons,  made  the  passage  in  9 days
hours,  the  computed  distance  being  1650  miles.  These  are  the  quickest
trips  made.  There  are  now  in  operation  on  the  waters  west  of  the  Al-
leghany Mountains  140  or  145  boats.  We  had  last  spring  (1826),  a very
high  freshet,  which  came  4g  feet  deep  in  the  counting-room.  The  rise  was
57  feet  3 inches  perpendicular.'”

The  whole  of  the  steam-boats  of  which  you  have  an  account  did  not
perform  voyages  to  New  Orleans  only,  but  to  all  points  on  the  Missis-
sippi, and  other  rivers  which  fall  into  it.  I am  certain  that  since  the
above  date  the  number  has  increased,  but  to  what  extent  I cannot  at
present  say.

When  steam-boats  first  plied  between  Shippingport  and  New  Orleans,
the  cabin  passage  was  a hundred  dollars,  and  a hundred  and  fifty  dollars
on  the  upward  voyage.  In  1829,  I went  down  to  Natchez  from  Shipping-
port  for  twenty-five  dollars,  and  ascended  from  New  Orleans  on  board
the  Philadelphia,  in  the  beginning  of  January  1830,  for  sixty  dollars,
having  taken  two  state-rooms  for  my  wife  and  myself.  On  that  voyage
we  met  with  a trifling  accident,  which  protracted  it  to  fourteen  days ;
the  computed  distance  being,  as  mentioned  above,  1650  miles,  although
the  real  distance  is  probably  less.  I do  not  remember  to  have  spent  a
day  without  meeting  with  a steam-boat,  and  some  days  we  met  several.  I
might  here  be  tempted  to  give  you  a description  of  one  of  these  steamers
of  the  western  waters,  but  the  picture  having  been  often  drawn  by  abler
hands,  I shall  desist.


< 135  )


THE  CAROLINA  PARROT.

PSITTACCUS  CAROLINENSIS,  LiNN.

PLATE  XXVI.  Male,  Female  and  Young.

Doubtless,  kind  reader,  you  will  say,  while  looking  at  the  seven
figures  of  Parakeets  represented  in  the  plate,  that  I spared  not  my  la-
bour. I never  do,  so  anxious  am  I to  promote  your  pleasure.

These  birds  are  represented  feeding  on  the  plant  commonly  named
the  CocMe-biir.  It  is  found  much  too  plentifully  in  every  State  west  of
the  Alleghanies,  and  in  still  greater  profusion  as  you  advance  towards
the  Southern  Districts.  It  grows  in  every  field  where  the  soil  is  good.
The  low  alluvial  lands  along  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  are  all  supplied
with  it.  Its  growth  is  so  measured  that  it  ripens  after  the  crops  of  grain
are  usually  secured,  and  in  some  rich  old  fields  it  grows  so  exceedingly
close,  that  to  make  one’s  way  through  the  patches  of  it,  at  this  late  pe-
riod, is  no  pleasant  task.  The  burs  stick  so  thickly  to  the  clothes,  as  to
prevent  a person  from  walking  with  any  kind  of  ease.  The  wool  of
sheep  is  also  much  injured  by  them  ; the  tails  and  manes  of  horses  are
converted  into  such  tangled  masses,  that  the  hair  has  to  be  cut  close  off,
by  which  the  natural  beauty  of  these  valuable  animals  is  impaired.  To
this  day,  no  useful  property  has  been  discovered  in  the  Cockle-bur,  al-
though in  time  it  may  prove  as  valuable  either  in  medicine  or  chemistry  as
many  other  plants  that  had  long  been  considered  of  no  importance.

Well,  reader,  you  have  before  you  one  of  these  plants,  on  the  seeds
of  which  the  parrot  feeds.  It  alights  upon  it,  plucks  the  bur  from  the
stem  with  its  bill,  takes  it  from  the  latter  with  one  foot,  in  which  it  turns
it  over  until  the  joint  is  properly  placed  to  meet  the  attacks  of  the  bill,
when  it  bursts  it  open,  takes  out  the  fruit,  and  allows  the  shell  to  drop.
In  this  manner,  a flock  of  these  birds,  having  discovered  a field  ever  so
well  filled  with  these  plants,  will  eat  or  pluck  off  all  their  seeds,  return-
ing to  the  place  day  after  day  until  hardly  any  are  left.  The  plant
might  thus  be  extirpated,  but  it  so  happens  that  it  is  reproduced  from
the  ground,  being  perennial,  and  our  farmers  have  too  much  to  do  in  se-
curing their  crops,  to  attend  to  the  pulling  up  the  cockle-burs  by  the
roots,  the  only  effectual  way  of  getting  rid  of  them.


136


CAROLINA  PARROT.


The  Parrot  does  not  satisfy  himself  with  Cockle-burs,  but  eats  or  de-
stroys almost  every  kind  of  fruit  indiscriminately,  and  on  this  account  is
always  an  unwelcome  visitor  to  the  planter,  the  farmer,  or  the  gardener.
The  stacks  of  grain  put  up  in  the  field  are  resorted  to  by  flocks  of  these
birds,  which  frequently  cover  them  so  entirely,  that  they  present  to  the
eye  the  same  effect  as  if  a brilliantly  coloured  carpet  had  been  thrown  over
them.  They  cling  around  the  whole  stack,  pull  out  the  straws,  and  destroy
twice  as  much  of  the  grain  as  would  suffice  to  satisfy  their  hunger.  They
assail  the  Pear  and  Apple-trees,  when  the  fruit  is  yet  very  small  and  far
from  being  ripe,  and  this  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  seeds.  As  on  the  stalks
of  Corn,  they  alight  on  the  Apple-trees  of  our  orchards,  or  the  Pear-trees
in  the  gardens,  in  great  numbers  ; and,  as  if  through  mere  mischief,  pluck
off  the  fruits,  open  them  up  to  the  core,  and,  disappointed  at  the  sight  of
the  seeds,  which  are  yet  soft  and  of  a milky  consistence,  drop  the  apple
or  pear,  and  pluck  another,  passing  from  branch  to  branch,  until  the
trees  which  were  before  so  promising,  are  left  completely  stripped,  like
the  ship  water-logged  and  abandoned  by  its  crew,  floating  on  the  yet
agitated  waves,  after  the  tempest  has  ceased.  They  visit  the  Mulberries,
Pecan-nuts,  Grapes,  and  even  the  seeds  of  the  Dog- wood,  before  they  are
ripe,  and  on  all  commit  similar  depredations.  The  Maize  alone  never
attracts  their  notice.

Do  not  imagine,  reader,  that  all  these  outrages  are  borne  without  se-
vere retaliation  on  the  part  of  the  planters.  So  far  from  this,  the  Para-
keets are  destroyed  in  great  numbers,  for  whilst  busily  engaged  in  pluck-
ing off  the  fruits  or  tearing  the  grain  from  the  stacks,  the  husbandman
approaches  them  with  perfect  ease,  and  commits  great  slaughter  among
them.  All  the  survivors  rise,  shriek,  fly  round  about  for  a few  mi-
nutes, and  again  alight  on  the  very  place  of  most  imminent  danger.
The  gun  is  kept  at  work ; eight  or  ten,  or  even  twenty,  are  killed  at
every  discharge.  The  living  birds,  as  if  conscious  of  the  death  of  their
companions,  sweep  over  their  bodies,  screaming  as  loud  as  ever,  but  still
return  to  the  stack  to  be  shot  at,  until  so  few  remain  alive,  that  the  far-
mer does  not  consider  it  worth  his  while  to  spend  more  of  his  ammuni-
tion. I have  seen  several  hundreds  destroyed  in  this  manner  in  the  course
of  a few  hours,  and  have  procured  a basketful  of  these  birds  at  a few
shots,  in  order  to  make  choice  of  good  specimens  for  drawing  the  figures
by  which  this  species  is  represented  in  the  plate  now  under  your  conside-
ration.


CAROLINA  PARROT.


137


The  flight  of  the  Parakeet  is  rapid,  straight,  and  continued  through
the  forests,  or  over  fields  and  rivers,  and  is  accompanied  by  inclina-
tions of  the  body  which  enable  the  observer  to  see  alternately  their
upper  and  und^  parts.  They  deviate  from  a direct  course  only  when
impediments  occur,  such  as  the  trunks  of  trees  or  houses,  in  which
case  they  glance  aside  in  a very  graceful  manner,  merely  as  much  as
may  be  necessary,  A general  cry  is  kept  up  by  the  party,  and  it  is
seldom  that  one  of  these  birds  is  on  wing  for  ever  so  short  a space
without  uttering  its  cry.  On  reaching  a spot  which  afibrds  a supply
of  food,  instead  of  alighting  at  once,  as  many  other  birds  do,  the
Parakeets  take  a good  survey  of  the  neighbourhood,  passing  over  it
in  circles  of  great  extent,  first  above  the  trees,  and  then  gradually  low-
ering until  they  almost  touch  the  ground,  when  suddenly  re-ascending
they  all  settle  on  the  tree  that  bears  the  fruit  of  which  they  are  in
quest,  or  on  one  close  to  the  field  in  which  they  expect  to  regale  them-
selves. ^

They  are  quite  at  ease  on  trees  or  any  kind  of  plant,  moving  side-
wise,  climbing  or  hanging  in  every  imaginable  posture,  assisting  them-
selves very  dexterously  in  all  their  motions  with  their  bills.  They  usu-
ally alight  extremely  close  together.  I have  seen  branches  of  trees  as
completely  covered  by  them  as  they  could  possibly  be.  If  approached
before  they  begin  their  plundering,  they  appear  shy  and  distrustful,  and
often  at  a single  cry  from  one  of  them,  the  whole  take  wing,  and  proba-
bly may  not  return  to  the  same  place  that  day.  Should  a person  shoot
at  them,  as  they  go,  and  wound  an  individual,  its  cries  are  sufficient  to
bring  back  the  whole  flock,  when  the  sportsman  may  kill  as  many  as  he
pleases.  If  the  bird  falls  dead,  they  make  a short  round,  and  then  fly
off.

On  the  ground  these  birds  walk  slowly  and  awkwardly,  as  if  their
tail  incommoded  them.  They  do  not  even  attempt  to  run  off  when  ap-
proached by  the  sportsman,  should  he  come  upon  them  unawares ; but
when  he  is  seen  at  a distance,  they  lose  no  time  in  trying  to  hide,  or  in
scrambling  up  the  trunk  of  the  nearest  tree,  in  doing  which  they  are
greatly  aided  by  their  bill.

Their  roosting-place  is  in  hollow  trees,  and  the  holes  excavated
by  the  larger  species  of  Woodpeckers,  as  far  as  these  can  be  filled  by
them.  At  dusk,  a flock  of  Parakeets  may  be  seen  alighting  against  the
trunk  of  a large  Sycamore  or  any  otlier  tree,  when  a considerable  excava-
tion exists  within  it.  Immediately  below  the  entrance  the  birds  all  cling


138


CAROLINA  PARROT.


to  the  bark,  and  crawl  into  the  hole  to  pass  the  night.  When  such  a hole
does  not  prove  sufficient  to  hold  the  whole  flock,  those  around  the  en-
trance hook  themselves  on  by  their  claws,  and  the  tip  of  the  upper  man-
dible, and  look  as  if  hanging  by  the  bill.  I have  frequently  seen  them
in  such  positions  by  means  of  a glass,  and  am  satisfied  that  the  bill  is
not  the  only  support  used  in  such  cases.

When  wounded  and  laid  hold  of,  the  Parakeet  opens  its  bill,  turns
its  head  to  seize  and  bite,  and,  if  it  succeed,  is  capable  of  inflicting
a severe  wound.  It  is  easily  tamed  by  being  frequently  immersed  in
water,  and  eats  as  soon  as  it  is  placed  in  confinement.  Nature  seems  to
have  implanted  in  these  birds  a propensity  to  destroy,  in  consequence  of
which  they  cut  to  atoms  pieces  of  wood,  books,  and,  in  short,  every  thing
that  comes  in  their  way.  They  are  incapable  of  articulating  words,  how-
ever much  care  and  attention  may  be  bestowed  upon  their  education ;
and  their  screams  are  so  disagreeable  as  to  render  them  at  best  very  in-
different companions.  The  woods  are  the  habitation  best  fitted  for  them,
and  there  the  richness  of  their  plumage,  their  beautiful  mode  of  flight,
and  even  their  screams,  afford  welcome  intimation  that  our  darkest  forests
and  most  sequestered  swamps  are  not  destitute  of  charms.

They  are  fond  of  sand  in  a surprising  degree,  and  on  that  account
are  frequently  seen  to  alight  in  flocks  along  the  gravelly  banks  about  the
creeks  and  rivers,  or  in  the  ravines  of  old  fields  in  the  plantations,  when
they  scratch  with  bill  and  claws,  flutter  and  roll  themselves  in  the  sand,
and  pick  up  and  swallow  a certain  quantity  of  it.  For  the  same  pur-
pose, they  also  enter  the  holes  dug  by  our  Kingsfisher.  They  are  fond
of  saline  earth,  for  which  they  visit  the  different  Licks  interspersed  in
our  woods.

Our  Parakeets  are  very  rapidly  diminishing  in  number ; and  in  some
districts,  where  twenty-five  years  ago  they  were  plentiful,  scarcely  any
are  now  to  be  seen.  At  that  period,  they  could  be  procured  as  far  up
the  tributary  waters  of  the  Ohio  as  the  Great  Kenhawa,  the  Scioto,  the
heads  of  the  Miami,  the  mouth  of  the  Manimee  at  its  junction  with  Lake
Erie,  on  the  Illinois  River,  and  sometimes  as  far  north-east  as  Lake
Ontario,  and  along  the  eastern  districts  as  far  as  the  boundary  line  be-
tween Virginia  and  Maryland.  At  the  present  day,  very  few  are  to  be
found  higher  than  Cincinnati,  nor  is  it  until  you  reach  the  mouth  of
the  Ohio  that  Parakeets  are  met  with  in  considerable  numbers.  I should
think  that  along  the  Mississippi  there  is  not  now  half  the  number  that
existed  fifteen  years  ago.


CAROLINA  PARROT.


139


Their  flesh  is  tolerable  food,  when  they  are  young,  on  which  account
many  of  them  are  shot.  The  skin  of  their  body  is  usually  much  covered
with  the  mealy  substances  detached  from  the  roots  of  the  feathers.  The
head  especially  is  infested  by  numerous  minute  insects,  all  of  which  shift
from  the  skin  to  the  surface  of  the  plumage,  immediately  after  the  bird’s
death.  Their  nest,  or  the  place  in  which  they  deposit  their  eggs,  is  simply
the  bottom  of  such  cavities  in  trees  as  those  to  which  they  usually  retire
at  night.  Many  females  deposit  their  eggs  together,  I am  of  opinion
that  the  number  of  eggs  which  each  individual  lays  is  two,  although  I
have  not  been  able  absolutely  to  assure  myself  of  this.  They  are  nearly
round,  and  of  a light  greenish  white.  The  young  are  at  first  covered
with  soft  down,  such  as  is  seen  on  young  Owls.  During  the  first  season,
the  whole  plumage  is  green ; but  towards  autumn  a frontlet  of  carmine
appears.  Two  years,  however,  are  passed  before  the  male  or  female  are
in  full  plums^ge.  The  only  material  differences  which  the  sexes  present
externally  are,  that  the  male  is  rather  larger,  with  more  brilliant  plum-
age. I have  represented  a female  with  two  supernumerary  feathers  in.
the  tail.  This,  however,  is  merely  an  accidental  variety.


PsiTTACus  CAROLiNENSis,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  141. — Lath.  Ind.  Orn.  vol.  i.
p.  93 — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  41.

Carolina  Parrot,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  227 — Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  89.
PI.  26.  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXVI.  Fig.  1,  1,  1.

Bill  short,  bulging,  very  strong  and  hard,  deeper  than  broad,  convex
above  and  below,  with  a cere  at  the  base ; upper  mandible  curved  from
the  base,  convex  on  the  sides,  the  margin  overlapping,  with  an  angular
process,  the  tip  trigonal,  acute,  declinate,  much  exceeding  the  under  man-
dible, which  is  very  short,  broadly  convex  on  the  back,  truncate  at  the
extremity.  Nostrils  basal,  round,  open,  placed  in  the  cere.  Head  very
large.  Neck  robust.  Body  rather  elongated.  Feet  short  and  robust ;
tarsus  scaly  all  round;  toes  scutellate  above^  flat  beneath, two  "behind
and  two  before,  the  latter  united  at  the  base  ; claws  curved/  acute.

Plumage  compact  and  imbricated  on  the  back,  blended  on  the  head,
neck,  and  under  parts.  Orbital  space  bare.  Wings  long,  second  and
third  quills  longest.  Tail  long,  wedge-shaped,  of  twelve,  narrow,  taper-
ing feathers.


140


CAROLINA  PARROT.


Bill  white.  Iris  hazel.  Bare  orbital  space  whitish.  Feet  pale
flesh-colour,  claws  dusky.  Fore  part  of  the  head  and  the  cheeks  bright
scarlet,  that  colour  extending  over  and  behind  the  eye,  the  rest  of  the
head  and  the  neck  pure  bright  yellow ; the  edge  of  the  wing  bright
yellow,  spotted  with  orange.  The  general  colour  of  the  other  parts  is
emerald-green,  with  light  blue  reflections,  lighter  beneath.  Primary
coverts  deep  bluish-green ; secondary  coverts  greenish-yellow.  Quills
bluish-green  on  the  outer  web,  brownish-red  on  the  inner,  the  primaries
bright  yellow  at  the  base  of  the  outer  web.  Two  middle  tail-feathers
deep  green,  the  rest  of  the  same  colour  externally,  their  inner  webs
brownish-red.  Tibial  feathers  yellow,  the  lowest  deep  orange.

Length  14  inches,  extent  of  wings  22  ; bill  along  the  ridge
measured  from  the  tip  of  the  lower  mandible,  ^ ; tarsus  f , middle  toe  1^.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXVI.  Fig.  2,  2,  2.

The  female  is  similar  to  the  male  in  colour.  The  upper  figure  repre-
sents a kind  of  occasional  variety,  with  fourteen  tail-feathers.  The  spe-
cimen from  which  the  drawing  was  taken  was  shot  at  Bayou  Sara,  in
Louisiana.

Young  Bird.  Plate  XXVI.  Fig.  3.

The  young  bird  is  known  by  the  comparative  shortness  of  the  tail,
and  the  uniform  green  colour  of  the  head.


The  Cockle-bur.

Xanthium  Strumauium,  JVilld.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iv.  p.  373.  Pursh.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  581.  Smith,  Engl.  FI.  vol.  iv.  p.  136. — Moncecia  Pentandria,  Linn,  Co-

RYMBIFER.ffi,  JuSS.

Root  fibrous ; stem  solitary,  erect,  branched,  from  three  to  six  feet
high,  furrowed,  downy ; leaves  on  long  petioles,  cordate,  lobed,  serrate,
scabrous,  three-nerved  at  the  base ; clusters  axillar,  of  four  or  five  fertile,
and  one  or  two  barren  flowers,  which  are  green ; nuts  densely  armed,
and  furnished  with  two  beaks.


( 141  )


THE  RED-HEADED  WOODPECKER.

PiCUS  ERYTHROCEPHALUS,  LiNN.

PLATE  XXVII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

You  have  now,  kind  reader,  under  consideration  a family  of  Wood-
peckers, the  general  habits  of  which  are  so  well  known  in  our  United
States,  that,  were  I assured  of  your  having  traversed  the  woods  of  Ame-
rica, I should  feel  disposed  to  say  little  about  them.

The  RedJieads  (by  which  name  this  species  is  usually  designated)  may
be  considered  as  residents  of  the  United  States,  inasmuch  as  many  of  them
remain  in  the  Southern  Districts  during  the  whole  winter,  and  breed  there
in  summer.  The  greater  number,  however,  pass  to  countries  farther  south.
Their  migration  takes  place  under  night,  is  commenced  in  the  middle  of
September,  and  continues  for  a month  or  six  weeks.  They  then  fly  very
high  above  the  trees,  far  apart,  like  a disbanded  army,  propelling  them-
selves by  reiterated  flaps  of  the  wings,  at  the  end  of  each  successive  curve
which  they  describe  in  their  flight.  The  note  which  they  emit  at  this  time
is  different  from  the  usual  one,  sharp  and  easily  heard  from  the  ground,
although  the  birds  may  be  out  of  sight.  This  note  is  continued,  as  if  it
were  necessary  for  keeping  the  straggling  party  in  good  humour.  At
dawn  of  day,  the  whole  alight  on  the  tops  of  the  dead  trees  about  the
plantations,  and  remain  in  search  of  food  until  the  approach  of  sunset,
when  they  again,  one  after  another,  mount  the  air,  and  continue  their
journey.

With  the  exception  of  the  Mocking  Bird,  I know  no  species  so  gay
and  frolicksome.  Indeed,  their  whole  life  is  one  of  pleasure.  They  find  a
superabundance  of  food  everywhere,  as  well  as  the  best  facilities  for  raising
their  broods.  The  little  labour  which  they  perform  is  itself  a source  of
enjoyment,  for  it  is  undertaken  either  with  an  assurance  of  procuring  the
nicest  dainties,  or  for  the  purpose  of  excavating  a hole  for  the  reception
of  themselves,  their  eggs,  or  their  families.  They  do  not  seem  to  be  much
afraid  of  man,  although  they  have  scarcely  a more  dangerous  enemy.
When  alighted  on  a fence-stake  by  the  road,  or  in  a field,  and  one  ap-
proaches them,  they  gradually  move  sidewise  out  of  sight,  peeping  now
and  then  to  discover  your  intention ; and  when  you  are  quite  close  and


142


RED  BEADED  WOODPECKER.


opposite,  lie  still  until  you  are  past,  when  they  hop  to  the  top  of  the
stake,  and  rattle  upon  it  with  their  bill,  as  if  to  congratulate  themselves
on  the  success  of  their  cunning.  Should  you  approach  within  arm’s  length,
which  may  frecjuently  be  done,  the  Woodpecker  flies  to  the  next  stake  or
the  second  from  you,  bends  his  head  to  peep,  and  rattles  again,  as  if  to
provoke  you  to  a continuance  of  what  seems  to  him  excellent  sport.  He
alights  on  the  roof  of  the  house,  hops  along  it,  beats  the  shingles,  utters  a
cry,  and  dives  into  your  garden  to  pick  the  finest  strawberries  which  he
can  discover.

I would  not  recommend  to  any  one  to  trust  their  fruit  to  the  Red-
heads ; for  they  not  only  feed  on  all  kinds  as  they  ripen,  but  destroy  an
immense  quantity  besides.  No  sooner  are  the  cherries  seen  to  redden,
than  these  birds  attack  them.  They  arrive  on  all  sides,  coming  from
a distance  of  miles,  and  seem  the  while  to  care  little  about  the  satisfaction
you  might  feel  in  eating  some  also.  Trees  of  this  kind  are  stripped  clean
by  them.  When  one  has  alighted  and  tasted  the  first  cherry,  he  utters
his  call-note,  jerks  his  tail,  nods  his  head,  and  at  it  again  in  an  instant.
When  fatigued,  he  loads  his  bill  with  one  or  two,  and  away  to  his  nest,
to  supply  his  young.

It  is  impossible  to  form  any  estimate  of  the  number  of  these  birds  seen
in  the  United  States  during  the  summer  months;  but  this  much  I may
safely  assert,  that  an  hundred  have  been  shot  upon  a single  cherry-tree  in
one  day.  Pears,  Peaches,  Apples,  Pigs,  Mulberries,  and  even  Pease,  are
thus  attacked.  I am  not  disposed  to  add  to  these  depredations  those
which  they  commit  upon  the  Corn,  either  when  young  and  juicy,  or  when
approaching  maturity,  lest  I should  seem  too  anxious  to  heap  accusations
upon  individuals,  who,  although  culprits,  are  possessed  of  many  undeni-
ably valuable  qualities.

But  to  return : — They’  feed  on  apples  as  well  as  on  other  fruit,  and
carry  them  off  by  thrusting  into  them  their  sharp  bills  when  open,  with
all  their  force,  when  they  fly  away  to  a fence-stake  or  a tree,  and  devour
them  at  leisure.  They  have  another  bad  habit,  which  is  that  of  sucking
the  eggs  of  small  birds.  For  this  purpose,  they  frequently  try  to  enter
the  boxes  of  the  Martins  or  Blue-birds,  as  well  as  the  pigeon-houses,  and
are  often  successful.  The  corn,  as  it  ripens,  is  laid  bare  by  their  bill,
when  they  feed  on  the  top  parts  of  the  ear,  and  leave  the  rest  either  to  the
Grakles  or  the  Squirrels,  or  still  worse,  to  decay,  after  a shower  has  fallen
upon  it.


RED-HEADED  WOODPECKER.


143


All  this  while  the  Red-heads  are  full  of  gaiety.  No  sooner  have  they
satisfied  their  hunger,  than  small  parties  of  them  assemble  on  the  tops  and
branches  of  decayed  trees,  from  which  they  chase  different  insects  that  are
passing  through  the  air,  launching  after  them  for  eight  or  ten  yards,  at
times  performing  the  most  singular  manoeuvres,  and,  on  securing  their  vic-
tim, return  to  the  tree,  where,  immediately  after,  a continued  cry  of  exulta-
tion is  uttered.  They  chase  each  other  on  wing  in  a very  amicable  manner,
in  long,  beautifully  curved  sweeps,  during  which  the  remarkable  variety  of
their  plumage  becomes  conspicuous,  and  is  highly  pleasing  to  the  eye.
When  passing  from  one  tree  to  another,  their  flight  resembles  the  motion
of  a great  swing,  and  is  performed  by  a single  opening  of  the  wings^  de-
scending at  first,  and  rising  towards  the  spot  on  which  they  are  going  to
alight  with  ease,  and  in  the  most  graceful  manner.  They  move  upwards,
sidewise,  or  backwards,  without  apparent  effort,  but  seldom  with  the  head
downwards,  as  Nuthatches  and  some  smaller  specfes  of  Woodpeckers  are
wont  to  do.

Their  curving  from  one  tree  to  another,  in  the  manner  just  described,
is  frequently  performed  as  if  they  intended  to  attack  a bird  of  their  own  spe-
cies; and  it  is  amusing  to  see  the  activity  with  which  the  latter  baffles  his  an-
tagonist, as  he  scrambles  sidewise  round  the  tree  with  astonishing  celerity,  in
the  same  manner  in  which  one  of  these  birds,  suspecting  a man  armed  with
a gun,  will  keep  winding  round  the  trunk  of  a tree,  until  a good  oppor-
tunity presents  itself  of  sailing  off  to  another.  In  this  manner  a man  may
follow  from  one  tree  to  another  over  a whole  field,  without  procuring  a
shot,  unless  he  watches  his  opportunity  and  fires  while  the  bird  is  on  wing.
On  the  ground,  this  species  is  by  no  means  awkward,  as  it  hops  there  with
ease,  and  secures  beetles  which  it  had  espied  whilst  on  the  fence  or  a tree.

It  is  seldom  that  a nest  newly  perforated  by  these  birds  is  to  be  found,
as  they  generally  resort  to  those  of  preceding  years,  contenting  themselves
with  working  them  a little  deeper.  These  holes  are  found  not  only  in
every  decaying  tree,  but  often  to  the  number  of  ten  or  a dozen  in  a single
trunk,  some  just  begun,  others  far  advanced,  and  others  ready  to  receive
the  eggs.  ' The  great  number  of  these  holes,  thusileft  in  different  stages,
depends  upon  the  difficulties  which  the  bird  may  expenence  in  finishing
them ; for  whenever  it  finds  the  wood  hard  and  difficult  to  be  bored,  it
tries  another  spot.  So  few  green  or  living  trees  are  perforated  by  this
species,  that  I cannot  at  the  present  moment  recollect  having  seen  a single
instance  of  such  an  occurrence.


144


RED-HEADED  WOODPECKER.


All  Woodpeckers  are  extremely  expert  at  discovering  insects  as  they
lie  under  the  bark  of  trees.  No  sooner  have  they  alighted,  than  they
stand  for  a few  moments  motionless  and  listening.  If  no  motion  is  ob-
served in  the  bark,  the  Woodpecker  gives  a smart  rap  with  its  bill,  and
bending  its  neck  sidewise  lays  its  head  close  to  it,  when  the  least  crawling
motion  of  a beetle  or  even  a larva  is  instantly  discovered,  and  the  bird
forthwith  attacks  the  tree,  removes  the  bark,  and  continues  to  dig  until  it
reaches  its  prey,  when  it  secures  and  swallows  it.  This  manner  of  obtain-
ing food  is  observed  particularly  during  the  winter,  when  few  forest  fruits
are  to  be  found.  Should  they,  at  this  season,  discover  a vine  loaded  with
grapes,  they  are  seen  hanging  to  the  branches  by  their  feet,  and  helping
themselves  with  their  bill.  At  this  time  they  also  resort  to  the  corn-cribs,
and  feed  on  the  corn  gathered  and  laid  up  by  the  farmers.

In  Louisiana  and  Kentucky,  the  Red-headed  Woodpecker  rears  two
broods  each  year  ; in  the  Middle  Districts  more  usually  only  one.  The
female  lays  from  two  to  six  eggs,  which  are  pure  white  and  translucent,
sometimes  in  holes  not  more  than  six  feet  from  the  ground,  at  other  times
as  high  as  possible.  The  young  birds  have  at  first  the  upper  part  of  the
head  grey  ; but  towards  autumn  the  red  begins  to  appear.  During  the
first  winter,  the  red  is  seen  richly  intermixed  with  the  grey  feathers,  and,
at  the  approach  of  spring,  scarcely  any  difference  is  perceptible  between
the  sexes.

The  Red-headed  Woodpecker  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  United
States.  Its  flesh  is  tough,  and  smells  strongly  of  ants  and  other  insects,
so  as  to  be  scarcely  eatable.

A European  friend  of  mine,  on  seeing  some  of  these  birds  for  the  first
time,  as  he  was  crossing  the  Alleghanies,  wrote  me,  on  reaching  Pittsburg,
that  he  had  met  with  a beautiful  species  of  Jay,  the  plumage  of  which
was  red,  black  and  white,  and  its  manners  so  gentle,  that  it  suffered  him
to  approach  so  near  as  the  foot  of  a low  tree  on  which  it  was.

On  being  wounded  in  the  wing,  they  cry  as  they  fall,  and  continue
to  do  so  for  many  minutes  after  being  taken,  pecking  at  their  foe  with
great  vigour.  If  not  picked  up,  they  make  to  the  nearest  tree,  and  are
soon  out  of  reach,  as  they  can  climb  by  leaps  of  considerable  length  faster
than  can  be  imagined.  The  number  of  insects  of  all  sorts  destroyed  by
this  bird  alone  is  incalculable,  and  it  thus  affords  to  the  husbandman  a
full  return  for  the  mischief  which  it  commits  in  his  garden  and  fields.

In  Kentucky  and  the  Southern  States,  many  of  these  birds  are  killed

2


RED-HEADED  WOODPECKER.


145


in  the  following  manner.  As  soon  as  the  Red-heads  have  begun  to  visit
a Cherry  or  Apple  tree,  a pole  is  placed  along  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  pass-
ing up  amongst  the  central  branches,  and  extending  six  or  seven  feet  be-
yond the  highest  twigs.  The  Woodpeckers  alight  by  preference  on  the
pole,  and  while  their  body  is  close  to  it,  a man  standing  at  the  foot  of  the
pole  gives  it  a smart  blow  with  the  head  of  an  axe,  on  the  opposite  side
to  that  on  which  the  Woodpecker  is,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  sudden
and  violent  vibration  produced  in  the  upper  part,  the  bird  is  thrown  off
dead.

Pictrs  ERVTHROCEPHALUS,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  174 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.
vol.  i.  p.  227. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  45.

Red-headed  Woodpecker,  Picus  erythrocephalus,  Wilson,  Araer.  Ornith.
voL  L p.  142.  PI.  ix.  fig.  i. — Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iL  p.  561.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longish,  straight,  strong,  compressed  toward  the  tip,  which  is
vertically  acute ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  nearly  straight,
the  edges  acute  and  overlapping ; under  mandible  with  acute,  slightly
inflected  edges.  Nostrils  basal,  elliptical,  direct,  open.  Head  rather
large  ; neck  short ; body  robust.  Feet  short ; tarsus  and  toes  scutellate ;
two  toes  before  and  two  behind,  the  inner  hind  toe  shortest ; claws  strong,
arched,  acute.

Plumage  glossy,  generally  blended,  on  the  back  and  wings  compact.
Wings  longish,  third  and  fourth  quills  longest.  Tail  much  rounded,  of
twelve  decurved  stiff  feathers,  worn  by  rubbing  to  an  acute,  ragged  point.
Palpebral  region  bare.

Bill  light  blue,  dark  at  the  tip.  Feet  of  the  same  colour.  Iris  dark
hazel,  palpebral  region  bluish.  Head  and  neck  bright  crimson.  Back-
wing-coverts,  primaries  and  tail-feathers  black,  with  blue  reflections ;
rump  and  secondaries  white,  the  shafts  of  the  latter  black.  Breast  and
abdomen  white,  tinged  with  yellowish-brown ; an  irregular  transverse
narrow  band  of  black  at  the  junction  of  the  red  of  the  fore-neck  and  the
white  of  the  breast.

Length  9 inches,  extent  of  wings  17;  bill  along  the  ridge  1,  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  I.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXVII.  Fig.  9,.

K


146


RED-HEADED  WOODPECKER.


The  female  differs  from  the  male  only  in  being  smaller,  and  in  having
the  tints  of  the  plumage  somewhat  less  vivid.

Length  inches.

Young  Birds.  Plate  XXVII.  Fig.  3,  3,  3.

The  young  when  fully  fledged  have  the  bill  and  iris  dark  brown,  the
feet  bluish.  The  head  and  neck  are  dark  brownish-grey,  mottled  with
small  streaks  of  dark  brown ; the  back  and  wing-coverts  of  the  same
colour,  spotted  with  darker  ; the  primaries  brownish-black,  margined
with  whitish,  the  secondaries  yellowish- white,  barred  with  black ; the  tail
brownish-black,  tipped  with  white ; the  rump  and  under  parts  greyish-
white.


( 147  )


THE  SOLITARY  FLY-CATCHER,  OR  VIREO.

VlSEO  SOLIT-AMIUS,  ViEILL.

PLATE  XXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

This,  reader,  is  one  of  the  scarce  birds  that  visit  the  United  States  from
the  south,  and  I have  much  pleasure  in  being  able  to  give  you  an  account
of  it,  as  hitherto  little  or  nothing  has  been  known  of  its  history.

It  is  an  inhabitant  of  Louisiana  during  the  spring  and  summer  months,
when  it  resorts  to  the  thick  cane-brakes  of  the  alluvial  lands  near  the
Mississippi,  and  the  borders  of  the  numberless  swamps  that  lie  in  a di-
rection parallel  to  that  river.  It  is  many  years  since  I discovered  ii,  but
as  I am  not  .at  all  anxious  respecting  priority  of  names,  I shall  not  insist
upon  this  circumstance.  In  the  month  of  May  1809, 1 killed  a male  and
a female  of  this  species,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  while  on  a shooting
expedition  after  young  swans.  The  following  spring,  I killed  a female
near  Henderson  in  Kentucky.  In  1821,  I again  procured  a pair,  with
their  nest  and  eggs,  near  the  mouth  of  Bayou  La  Fourche,  on  the  Mis-
sissippi, and  since  that  period  have  killed  eight  or  ten  pairs.  .

' The  nest  is  prettily  constructed,  and  fixed  in  a partially  pensile  man-
ner between  two  twigs  of  a low  bush,  on  a branch  running  horizontally
from  the  main  stem.  It  is  formed  externally  of  grey  lichens,  slightly  put
together,  and  lined  with  hair,  chiefly  from  the  deer  and  raccoon.  The
female  lays  four  or  five  eggs,  which  are  white,  with  a strong  tinge  of
flesh-colour,  and  sprinkled  with  brownish-red  dots  at  the  larger  end.  I
am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  bird  raises  only  one  brood  in  a season.

The  manners  of  this  bird  are  not  those  of  the  Titmouse,  Fly-catcher,
or  Warbler,  but  partake  of  those  of  all  three.  It  has  the  want  of  shyness
exhibited  in  the  Red-eyed  and  Yellow-throated  Fly-catchers.  It  hangs
to  bunches  of  small  berries,  feeding  upon  them  as  a Titmouse  does  on
buds  of  trees ; and  again  searches  amongst  the  leaves  and  along  the  twigs
of  low  bushes,  like  most  of  the  Warblers.  On  the  other  hand,  it  differs
from  all  these  in  their  principal  habits.  Thus,  it  never  snaps  at  insects
on  the  wing,  although  it  pursues  them ; it  never  attacks  small  birds  and
kills  them  by  breaking  in  their  skulls,  as  the  Titmouse  does  ; nor  does  it

K 2


148


SOLITARY  FLY-CATCHER.


V(

hold  its  prey  under  its  foot  in  the  way  of  the  Yellow-throated  Fly-catcher
or  Vireo,  a habit  which  allies  the  latter  to  the  Shrikes.  On  account  of  all
these  circumstances,  I look  upon  this  bird  as  deserving  the  attention  of
systematic  writers,  who  probably  will  find  its  proper  place  in  the  general
arrangement.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  performed  by  a continued  tremor  of  the
wings,  as  if  it  were  at  all  times  angry.  It  seldom  rises  high  above  its  fa-
vourite cane-brakes,  but  is  seen  hopping  up  and  down  about  the  stems  of
low  bushes  and  the  stalks  of  the  canes,  silently  searching  for  food,  more  in
the  manner  of  the  Worm-eating  Warbler  than  in  that  of  any  other  bird
known  to  me.  Their  confidence  at  the  approach  of  man  is  very  remark-
able. They  look  on  without  moving  until  you  are  within  a few  feet,  and
retire  only  in  proportion  as  you  advance  towards  them.  In  this  respect
it  resembles  the  White-eyed  Fly-catcher.

When  wounded  by  a shot,  it  remains  quite  still  on  the  ground,  opens
its  bill  when  you  approach  it,  and  bites  with  all  its  might  when  laid  hold
of,  although  its  strength  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  it  to  inflict  a wound.
I have  never  heard  it  utter  a note  beyond  that  of  a querulous  low  mur-
muring sound,  when  chasing  another  bird  from  the  vicinity  of  its  nest.
The  young  all  leave  the  nest,  if  once  touched,  and  hide  among  the  grass
and  weeds,  where  the  parents  continue  to  feed  them.  I once  attempted
to  feed  some  young  birds  of  this  species,  but  they  rejected  the  food,  which
consisted  of  flies,  worms,  and  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  died  in  three  days  with-
out ever  uttering  a note.  In  1 829,  I shot  one  of  these  birds,  a fine  male,
in  the  Great  Pine  Swamp.  This  was  the  only  individual  I ever  saw  to  the
eastward  of  Henderson  on  the  Ohio.  As  this  happened  in  the  beginning
of  September,  it  is  probable  that  some  migrate  to  a considerable  distance
north-east ; but  I am  at  the  same  time  of  opinion  that  very  few  of  these
birds  enter  the  United  States.

I have  represented  a pair  of  them  killed  near  a nest  in  a cane-brake.
A general  description  of  the  American  Cane  will  be  found  in  the  present
volume.

Vireo  solitaries,  Ch.  Bonaparte.  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  70.

Solitary  Fly-catcher,  Muscicapa  solitaria,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  1 43.  PI.  xvii.  fig.  6.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  short,  broad  and  depressed  at  the  base,  strong,  nearly


SOLITARY  FLY-CATCHER.


149


straight ; upper  mandible  with  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  overlapping
and  notched  near  the  tip,  which  is  suddenly  decurved  ; lower  mandible  a
little  shorter,  convex  on  the  sides  and  back.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish.
Head  and  neck  large.  Body  ovate.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather
strong ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  transverse  scutella ;
toes  free,  scutellate  above,  the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  arched,
compressed,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  tufty.  Bristle-pointed  feathers  at  the  base  of  the
bill.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  third  quill  longest.  Tail  slightly
forked,  of  twelve  feathers.

Bill  black  above,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  and
claws  light  blue.  Head  and  back  light  olive-green  ; cheeks  of  the  same
colour.  A band  of  white  on  the  forehead,  passing  over  the  eye,  and
nearly  encircling  it,  leaving  the  loral  space  dark  green.  Rump  and  up-
per tail-coverts  greenish-brown.  Quills  blackish-brown,  margined  exter-
nally with  brownish-yellow ; two  first  rows  of  coverts  blackish-brown,
largely  tipped  with  white,  forming  two  bands  on  the  wing.  Tail  brown-
ish-black, margined  externally  with  yellowish-white.  Under  parts  brown-
ish-grey, fading  posteriorly  into  white.

Length  5J  inches,  extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  i ; tarsus  f .

' Adult  Female.  Plate  XXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  considerably  duller.  The  colouring  is  generally  simi-
lar, but  the  head  is  brownish-grey,  and  the  band  on  the  forehead  and
round  the  eyes  narrower  and  tinged  with  grey.

Length  5^.


The  American  Cane.

Miegia  macrosperma,  Pursh.  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  69.  Arundinaria  macros-
PERMA,  Mich,  FI.  Amer.  voL  i.  p.  74. — Triandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Gra-
MINEAS,  Juss.

As  the  Cane  is  elsewhere  described,  it  is  unnecessary  to  speak  parti-
cularly of  it  here.


( 150  )


THE  TOWHE  BUNTING.

Fsingilla  erythrophthalma,  Linn.

PLATE  XXIX.  Male  and  Female.

The  flight  of  the  Towhe  Bunting  is  short,  low,  and  performed  from
one  bush  or  spot  to  another,  in  a hurried  manner,  with  repeated  strong
jerks  of  the  tail,  and  such  quick  motions  of  the  wings,  that  one  may  hear
their  sound,  although  the  bird  should  happen  to  be  out  of  sight.  On  the
ground,  where  it  is  more  usually  to  be  seen,  it  hops  lightly,  without  mov-
ing the  tail  more  than  the  Common  Sparrow  of  Europe.  It  is  a diligent
bird,  spending  its  days  in  searching  for  food  and  gravel,  amongst  the
dried  leaves  and  in  the  earth,  scratching  with  great  assiduity,  and  every
now  and  then  uttering  the  notes  tow-hee,  from  which  it  has  obtained  its
name.  At  other  times,  it  ascends  to  the  top  of  a small  tree,  or  its  fa-
vourite low  bushes  and  briars,  on  which  it  sings  very  sweetly  a few  con-
tinued mellow  notes.

This  species  constructs  a larger  nest  than  birds  of  its  size  usually  do,
and  scoops  out  a place  for  its  foundation  in  the  earth,  sometimes  in  an
open  spot,  more  commonly  at  the  foot  of  a small  sapling  or  large  bunch
of  tall  grass.  The  nest  is  sunk  into  the  ground,  so  as  to  be  level  with  it
at  top,  and  is  composed  of  dried  leaves  and  the  bark  of  vines,  lined  with
grasses  of  fine  texture,  as  well  as  fibrous  roots.  The  female  lays  from
four  to  six  eggs,  and  rears  two,  sometimes  three,  broods  each  season.  If
disturbed  while  sitting,  she  moves  off  apparently  in  great  agony,  but  with
more  celerity  than  most  other  birds,  by  which  means  she  generally  pre-
vents her  nest  being  discovered.  Snakes,  however,  suck  the  eggs,  as  does
the  Crow.  The  young  leave  the  nest  long  before  they  are  able  to  fly,  and
follow  the  mother  about  on  the  ground  for  several  days.  Some  of  the
nests  of  this  species  are  so  well  concealed,  that  in  order  to  discover  them,
one  requires  to  stand  quite  still  on  the  first  appearance  of  the  mother.  I
have  myself  several  times  had  to  regret  not  taking  this  precaution.

The  favourite  haunts  of  the  Towhe  Buntings  are  dry  barren  tracts,
but  not,  as  others  have  said,  low  and  swampy  grounds,  at  least  during
the  season  of  incubation.  In  the  Barrens  of  Kentucky  they  are  found
in  the  greatest  abundance.


" TOWHE  BUNTING.


151


Their  migrations  are  performed  by  day,  from  bush  to  bush,  and  they
seem  to  be  much  at  a loss  when  a large  extent  of  forest  is  to  be  traversed
by  them.  They  perform  these  journeys  almost  singly.  The  females  set
out  before  the  males  in  autumn,  and  the  males  before  the  females  in
spring,  the  latter  not  appearing  in  the  Middle  Districts  until  the  end  of
April,  a fortnight  after  the  males  have  arrived.  Many  of  them  pass  the
confines  of  the  United  States  in  their  migrations  southward  and  north-
ward.

Although  these  birds  are  abundant  in  all  parts  of  the  Union,  they  ne-
ver associate  in  flocks,  but  mingle  during*  winter  with  several  species  of
Sparrow-  They  generally  rest  on  the  ground  at  night,  when  many  are
caught  by  weasels  and  other  small  quadrupeds.  None  of  them  breed  in
Louisiana,  nor  indeed  in  the  State  of  Mississippi,  until  they  reach  the
open  woods  of  the  Choctaw  Indian  Nation.

I have  represented  tlie  male  and  female  moving  through  the  twigs  of
the  Common  Briar,  usually  called  the  Black  Briar.  It  is  a plump  bird,
and  becomes  very  fat  in  winter,  in  consequence  of  which  it  is  named
Grasset  in  Louisiana,  where  many  are  shot  for  the  table  by  the  French
planters.  ^

Frixgilla  erythrophthalma,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  318. — Ch.  Bonaparte^

^ Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  112.

Emberjza  erythrophthalma,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  413.

Towhe  Bunting,  Emberiza  erythrophthalma,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iL
p.  35.  PI.  10.  fig.  5,  Male ; vol.  vi.  p.  90.  PI.  63.  fig.  6.  Female. — Lath.  Synops.
vol.  iii.  p.  199.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  narrower  than  the  head,  regularly  conical,  acute  ;
upper  mandible  almost  straight  in  its  dorsal  outline,  as  is  the  lower,  both
having  inflected  edges  ; the  gap  line  nearly  straight,  a little  deflected  at
the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  open,  partially  concealed  by  the
feathers.  Head  rather  large,  neck  shortish,  body  robust.  Legs  of  mo-
derate length,  rather  robust ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered
anteriorly  with  a few  longish  scutella  ; toes  scutellate  above,  free,  the  la-
teral ones  nearly  equal ; claws  slender,  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of
the  hind  toe  long.

Plumage  rather  compact  above,  soft  and  blended  beneath.  Wings  of


TOWHE  BUNTING.


152

ordinary  length,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  the  first  much  shorter,
the  secondaries  short.  Tail  long,  rounded,  the  lateral  feathers  slightly
curved  outwards  towards  the  tip.

Bill  black.  Iris  bright  red.  Legs  and  claws  pale  yellowish-brown.
Head,  neck,  and  upper  parts  generally,  deep  black.  A white  band
across  the  primaries,  partly  concealed  by  their  coverts ; outer  edge  of
first  quill  white ; margins  of  the  last  secondaries  brownish- white.  La-
teral tail-feathers  white,  excepting  at  the  base,  and  a longitudinal  streak
towards  the  tip,  on  the  outer  web ; the  next  two  white  on  the  inner  web,
towards  the  end.  Breast  white,  abdomen  pale  red ; sides  and  lateral
parts  of  the  breast  brownish-red.

Length  8|  inches,  extent  of  wings  12 ; beak  along  the  ridge
along  the  gap  | ; tarsus  1 J,  middle  toe  1,  hind  toe  f.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  scarcely  smaller,  and  differs  from  the  male  in  having
the  parts  which  in  him  are  of  a deep  black,  reddish-brown,  excepting  the
bill,  which  is  almost  entirely  light  blue,  the  ridge  of  the  upper  mandible
only  being  dark  brown.

Length  inches.

In  the  adult  bird  the  iris  is  bright  red,  but  in  the  young  it  is  fre-
quently brown,  and  sometimes  yellowish-white.  In  some  instances,  one
eye  is  brown  and  the  other  red.


The  Blackberry.

Rubus  villosus,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1085.  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  voL  i.  p.  346. —
IcosANDRiA  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn.  Rosacea;,  Juss.

Pubescent,  prickly,  with  angular  twigs ; the  leaves  ternate  or  qui-
nate,  with  ovato-oblong,  serrate,  acuminate  leaflets,  downy  on  both  sides  ;
the  calycine  leaves  short,  acuminate  ; and  a loose  raceme  of  white  flowers.
The  berry  is  black.  This  species  grows  abundantly  in  old  fields  and  by
fences.


( 153  )


VIGORS’S  WARBLER.

Sylvia  Vigorsii.

PLATE  XXX.  Male.

I REGRET  that  I am  unable  to  give  any  account  of  the  habits  of  a
species  which  I have  honoured  with  the  name  of  a naturalist  whose  merits
are  so  well  known  to  the  learned  world.  The  individual  represented  in  the
plate  I shot  upwards  of  twenty  years  ago,  and  have  never  met  with  ano-
ther of  its  kind.  It  was  in  the  month  of  May,  on  a small  island  of  the
Perkioming  Creek,  forming  part  of  my  farm  of  Mill  Grove,  in  the  State
of  Pennsylvania.  The  bird  was  flittering  amongst  grasses,  uttering  an
often  repeated  cheep.

The  plant  on  which  it  is  represented  is  that  on  which  it  was  perched
when  I shot  it,  and  is  usually  called  Spider-wort.  It  grows  in  damp  and
shady  places,  as  well  as  sometimes  in  barren  lands,  near  the  banks  of
brooks.


Sylvia  Vigorsii.

Male.  Plate  XXX.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  rather  robust,  depressed  at  the  base,  straight,
acute ; upper  mandible  notched,  slightly  deflected  at  the  tip ; lower
shorter.  Head  of  ordinary  size,  neck  short,  body  ovate.  Legs  of  ordi-
nary length,  slender  ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  covered  with  a few
long  scutella,  toes  free,  the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal,  the  middle  toe  much
longer ; claws  weak,  much  compressed,  acute,  slightly  arched.

Plumage  soft,  tufty,  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  size,  the  second
quill  longest.  Tail  longish,  a little  forked,  of  twelve  feathers.  A few
small  basirostral  bristles.

Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Peet  flesh-coloured.  Head
and  back  light  greenish-brown.  Wings  blackish-brown,  the  first  two
rows  of  coverts  tipped  with  white.  Tail  of  the  some  colour,  the  outer
feather  white.  Throat  pale  grey,  lower  neck  and  breast  ochre-yellow,
abdomen  yellowish-white.


154


VIGORS’S  WARBLER.


Length  6 inches,  extent  of  wings  9 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  middle  toe  f .


The  Virginian  Spider- wort.

Tradescantia  virginica,  Wind.  Sp.  PL  vol.  ii.  p.  16.  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  218 — Hexandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Juxci,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  erect,  succulent  stem ; elongated,
lanceolate,  smooth  leaves ; and  umbellate,  subsessile  flowers,  which  are  of
a deep  purple  colour,  with  yellow  anthers.


( 155  )


A FLOOD.

Many  of  our  larger  streams,  such  as  the  Mississippi,  the  Ohio,  the
lUinois,  the  Arkansas  and  the  Red  River,  exhibit  at  certain  seasons  the
most  extensive  overflowings  of  their  waters,  to  which  the  name  of  Jloods
is  more  appropriate  than  the  term  freshets  y usually  applied  to  the  sudden
risings  of  smaller  streams.  If  we  consider  the  vast  extent  of  country
through  which  an  inland  navigation  is  afforded  by  the  never-failing  sup-
ply of  water  furnished  by  these  wonderful  rivers,  we  cannot  suppose  them
exceeded  in  magnitude  by  any  other  in  the  known  world.  It  will  easily
be  imagined  what  a wonderful  spectacle  must  present  itself  to  the  eye  of
the  traveller,  who  for  the  first  time  views  the  enormous  mass  of  waters,
collected  from  the  vast  central  regions  of  our  continent,  booming  along,
turbid  and  swollen  to  overflowing,  in  the  broad  channels  of  the  Missis-
sippi and  Ohio,  the  latter  of  which  has  a course  of  more  than  a thousand
miles,  and  the  former  of  several  thousands.

To  give  you  some  idea  of  a Booming  Flood  of  these  gigantic  streams,
it  is  necessary  to  state  the  causes  which  give  rise  to  it.  These  are,  the
sudden  melting  of  the  snows  on  the  mountains,  and  heavy  rains  continued
for  several  weeks.  When  it  happens  that,  during  a severe  winter,  the
Alleghany  Mountains  have  been  covered  with  snow  to  the  depth  of  seve-
ral feet,  and  the  accumulated  mass  has  remained  unmelted  for  a length  of
time,  the  materials  of  a flood  are  thus  prepared.  It  now  and  then  hap-
pens that  the  winter  is  hurried  off  by  a sudden  increase  of  temperature,
when  the  accumulated  snows  melt  away  simultaneously  over  the  whole
country,  and  the  south-easterly  wind  which  then  usually  blows,  brings
along  with  it  a continued  fall  of  heavy  rain,  which,  mingling  with  the  dis-
solving snow,  deluges  the  alluvial  portions  of  the  western  country,  filling
up  the  rivulets,  ravines,  creeks  and  small  rivers.  These  delivering  their
waters  to  the  great  streams,  cause  the  latter  not  merely  to  rise  to  a sur-
prising height,  but  to  overflow  their  banks, ‘ wherever  the  land  is  low.  On
such  occasions,  the  Ohio  itself  presents  a splendid,  and  at  the  same  time  an
appalling  spectacle  ; but  when  its  waters  mingle  with  those  of  the  Missis-
sippi, then,  kind  reader,  is  the  time  to  view  an  American  flood  in  all  its
astonishing  magnificence.

At  the  foot  of  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,  the  water  has  been  known  to  rise


15()


A FLOOD.


upwards  of  sixty  feet  above  its  lowest  level.  The  river,  at  this  point,  has
already  run  a course  of  nearly  seven  hundred  miles,  from  its  origin  at  Pitts-
burg, in  Pennsylvania,  during  which  it  has  received  the  waters  of  its  num-
berless tributaries,  and  overflowing  all  the  bottom  lands  or  valleys,  has
swept  along  the  fences  and  dwellings  which  have  been  unable  to  resist  its
violence.  I could  relate  hundreds  of  incidents  which  might  prove  to  you
the  dreadful  effects  of  such  an  inundation,  and  which  have  been  witnessed
by  thousands  besides  myself.  I have  known,  for  example,  of  a cow
swimming  through  a window,  elevated  at  least  seven  feet  from  the
ground,  and  sixty-two  feet  above  low-water  mark.  The  house  was  then
surrounded  by  water  from  the  Ohio,  which  runs  in  front  of  it,  while  the
neighbouring  country  was  overflowed ; yet  the  family  did  not  remove
from  it,  but  remained  in  its  upper  portion,  having  previously  taken  off
the  sashes  of  the  lower  windows,  and  opened  the  doors.  But  let  us  re-
turn to  the  Mississippi.

There  the  overflow  is  astonishing ; for  no  sooner  has  the  water  reach-
ed the  upper  part  of  the  banks,  than  it  rushes  out  and  overspreads  the
whole  of  the  neighbouring  swamps,  presenting  an  ocean  overgrown  with
stupendous  forest- trees.  So  sudden  is  the  calamity,  that  every  indivi-
dual, whether  man  or  beast,  has  to  exert  his  utmost  ingenuity  to  enable
him  to  escape  from  the  dreaded  element.  The  Indian  quickly  removes
to  the  hills  of  the  interior,  the  cattle  and  game  swim  to  the  different
stripes  of  land  that  remain  uncovered  in  the  midst  of  the  floods  or  at-
tempt to  force  their  way  through  the  waters  until  they  perish  from
fatigue.  Along  the  banks  of  the  river,  the  inhabitants  have  rafts  ready
made,  on  which  they  remove  themselves,  their  cattle  and  their  provisions,
and  which  they  then  fasten  with  ropes  or  grape-vines  to  the  larger  trees,
while  they  contemplate  the  melancholy  spectacle  presented  by  the  current,
as  it  carries  off  their  houses  and  wood-yards  piece  by  piece.  Some  who
have  nothing  to  lose,  and  are  usually  known  by  the  name  of  Squatters,
take  this  opportunity  of  traversing  the  woods  in  canoes,  for  the  purpose
of  procuring  game,  and  particularly  the  skins  of  animals,  such  as  the
deer  and  bear,  which  may  be  converted  into  money.  They  resort  to  the
low  ridges  surrounded  by  the  waters,  and  destroy  thousands  of  deer,
merely  for  their  skins,  leaving  the  flesh  to  putrefy.

The  river  itself,  rolling  its  swollen  waters  along,  presents  a spectacle
of  the  most  imposing  nature.  Although  no  large  vessel,  unless  propelled
by  steam,  can  now  make  its  way  against  the  current,  it  is  seen  covered


A FLOOD.


157


by  boats,  laden  with  produce,  which  running  out  from  all  the  smaller
streams,  float  silently  towards  the  City  of  New  Orleans,  their  owners
meanwhile  not  very  well  assured  of  finding  a landing-place  even  there.
The  water  is  covered  with  yellow  foam  and  pumice,  the  latter  having
floated  from  the  Rocky  Mountains  of  the  north-west.  The  eddies  are
larger  and  more  powerful  than  ever.  Here  and  there  tracts  of  forest  are
observed  undermined,  the  trees  gradually  giving  way,  and  falling  into
the  stream.  Cattle,  horses,  bears  and  deer  are  seen  at  times  attempting
to  swim  across  the  impetuous  mass  of  foaming  and  boiling  water  ; whilst
here  and  there  a Vulture  or  an  Eagle  is  observed  perched  on  a bloated
carcass,  tearing  it  up  in  pieces,  as  regardless  of  the  flood,  as  on  former
occasions  it  would  have  been  of  the  numerous  sawyers  and  planters^  with
which  the  surface  of  the  river  is  covered,  when  the  water  is  low.  Even
the  steamer  is  frequently  distressed.  The  numberless  trees  and  logs  that
float  along  break  its  paddles  and  retard  its  progress.  Besides,  it  is  on
such  occasions  difficult  to  procure  fuel  to  maintain  its  fires ; and  it  is
only  at  very  distant  intervals  that  a wood-yard  can  be  found  which  the
water  has  not  carried  off.

Following  the  river  in  your  canoe,  you  reach  those  parts  of  the  shores
that  are  protected  against  the  overflowing  of  the  waters,  and  are  called
Levees.  There  you  find  the  whole  population  of  the  district  at  work  re-
pairing and  augmenting  those  artificial  barriers,  which  are  several  feet
above  the  level  of  the  fields.  Every  person  appears  to  dread  the
opening  of  a crevasse^  by  which  the  waters  may  rush  into  his  fields.  In
spite  of  all  exertions,  however,  the  crevasse  opens,  the  water  bursts  impe-
tuously over  the  plantations,  and  lays  waste  the  crops  which  so  lately  were
blooming  in  all  the  luxuriance  of  spring.  It  opens  up  a new  channel,
which,  for  aught  I know  to  the  contrary,  may  carry  its  waters  even  to
the  Mexican  Gulf.

I have  floated  on  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  when  thus  swollen,  and
have  in  different  places  visited  the  submersed  lands  of  the  interior,  pro-
pelling a light  canoe  by  the  aid  of  a paddle.  In  this  manner  I have  tra-
versed immense  portions  of  the  country  overflowed  by  the  waters  of
these  rivers,  and,  particularly  whilst  floating  over  the  Mississippi  bottom-
lands, I have  been  struck  with  awe  at  the  sight.  Little  or  no  current  is
met  with,  unless  when  the  canoe  passes  over  the  bed  of  a bayou.  All  is
silent  and  melancholy,  unless  when  the  mournful  Meeting  of  the  hem-
med in  Deer  reaches  your  ear,  or  the  dismal  scream  of  an  Eagle  or  a


158


A FLOOD.


Raven  is  heard,  as  the  foul  bird  rises,  disturbed  by  your  approach,  from
the  carcass  on  which  it  was  allaying  its  craving  appetite.  Bears,  Cou-
gars, Lynxes,  and  all  other  quadrupeds  that  can  ascend  the  trees,  are  ob-
served crouched  among  their  top  branches.  Hungry  in  the  midst  of
abundance,  although  they  see  floating  around  them  the  animals  on  which
they  usually  prey,  they  dare  not  venture  to  swim  to  them.  Fatigued
by  the  exertions  which  they  have  made  in  reaching  the  dry  land,  they
will  there  stand  the  hunter’s  fire,  as  if  to  die  by  a ball  were  better  than
to  perish  amid  the  waste  of  waters.  On  occasions  like  this,  all  these  ani-
mals are  shot  by  hundreds.

Opposite  the  City  of  Natchez,  which  stands  on  a bluff  bank  of  consi-
derable elevation,  the  extent  of  inundated  land  is  immense,  the  greater
portion  of  the  tract  lying  between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Red  River,
which  is  more  than  thirty  miles  in  breadth,  being  under  water.  The
mail-bag  has  often  been  carried  through  the  immersed  forests,  in  a canoe,
for  even  a greater  distance,  in  order  to  be  forwarded  to  Natchitochez.

But  now,  kind  reader,  observe  this  great  flood  gradually  subsiding,
and  again  see  the  mighty  changes  which  it  has  effected.  The  waters
have  now  been  carried  into  the  distant  ocean.  The  earth  is  everywhere
covered  by  a deep  deposit  of  muddy  loam,  which  in  drying  splits  into
deep  and  narrow  chasms,  presenting  a reticulated  appearance,  and  from
which,  as  the  weather  becomes  warmer,  disagreeable,  and  at  times  noxious,
exhalations  arise,  and  fill  the  lower  stratum  of  the  atmosphere  as  with  a
dense  fog.  The  banks  of  the  river  have  almost  everywhere  been  broken
down  in  a greater  or  less  degree.  Large  streams  are  now  found  to  exist,
where  none  were  formerly  to  be  seen,  having  forced  their  way  in  direct
lines  from  the  upper  parts  of  the  bends.  These  are  by  the  navigator
called  short-cuts.  Some  of  them  have  proved  large  enough  to  produce  a
change  in  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.  If  I mistake  not,  one  of
these,  known  by  the  name  of  the  Grand  Cut-off^  and  only  a few  miles  in
length,  has  diverted  the  river  from  its  natural  course,  and  has  shortened
it  by  fifty  miles.  The  upper  parts  of  the  islands  present  a bulwark  con-
sisting of  an  enormous  mass  of  floated  trees  of  all  kinds,  which  have
lodged  there.  Large  sand-banks  have  been  completely  removed  by  the
impetuous  whirls  of  the  waters,  and  have  been  deposited  in  other  places.
Some  appear  quite  new  to  the  eye  of  the  navigator,  who  has  to  mark
their  situation  and  bearings  in  his  log-book.  The  trees  on  the  margins  of
the  banks  have  in  many  parts  given  way.  They  are  seen  bending  over


A FLOOD.


159


the  stream,  like  the  grounded  arms  of  an  overwhelmed  army  of  giants.
Everywhere  are  heard  the  lamentations  of  the  farmer  and  planter,  whilst
their  servants  and  themselves  are  busily  employed  in  repairing  the
damages  occasioned  by  the  floods.  At  one  crevasse  an  old  ship  or  two,
dismantled  for  the  purpose,  are  sunk,  to  obstruct  the  passage  opened  by
the  still  rushing  waters,  while  new  earth  is  brought  to  fill  up  the  chasms.
The  squatter  is  seen  shouldering  his  rifle,  and  making  his  way  through
the  morass,  in  search  of  his  lost  stock,  to  drive  the  survivors  home,  and
save  the  skins  of  the  drowned.  New  fences  have  everywhere  to  be  form-
ed ; even  new  houses  must  be  erected,  to  save  which  from  a like  disas-
ter, the  settler  places  them  on  an  elevated  platform  supported  by  pillars
made  of  the  trunks  of  trees.  The  lands  must  be  ploughed  anew,  and  if
the  season  is  not  too  far  advanced,  a crop  of  corn  and  potatoes  may  yet
be  raised.  But  the  rich  prospects  of  the  planter  are  blasted.  The  tra-
veller is  impeded  in  his  journey,  the  creeks  and  smaller  streams  having
broken  up  their  banks  in  a degree  proportionate  to  their  size.  A bank
of  sand,  which  seems  firm  and  secure,  suddenly  gives  way  beneath  the
traveller’s  horse,  and  the  next  moment  the  animal  has  sunk  in  the  quick-
sand, either  to  the  chest  in  front,  or  over  the  crupper  behind,  leaving  its
master  in  a situation  not  to  be  envied.

Unlike  the  mountain- torrents  and  small  rivers  of  other  parts  of  the
world,  the  Mississippi  rises  but  slowly  during  these  floods,  continuing  for
several  weeks  to  increase  at  the  rate  of  about  an  inch  in  the  day.  When
at  its  height,  it  undergoes  little  fluctuation  for  some  days,  and  after  this
subsides  as  slowly  as  it  rose.  The  usual  duration  of  a flood  is  from  four
to  six  weeks,  although,  on  some  occasions,  it  is  protracted  to  two  months.

Every  one  knows  how  largely  the  idea  of  floods  and  cataclysms  enters
into  the  speculations  of  the  geologist.  If  the  streamlets  of  the  European
Continent  afford  illustrations  of  the  formation  of  strata,  how  much  more
must  the  Mississippi,  with  its  ever-shifting  sand-banks,  its  crumbling
shores,  its  enormous  masses  of  drift  timber,  the  source  of  future  beds  of
coal,  its  extensive  and  varied  alluvial  deposits,  and  its  mighty  mass  of
waters  rolling  sullenly  along,  like  the  flood  of  eternity  !


( 160  )


THE  WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.

Falco  leucocephalus^  Linn.

PLATE  XXXI.  Male.

The  figure  of  this  noble  bird  is  well  known  throughout  the  civilized
world,  emblazoned  as  it  is  on  our  national  standard,  which  waves  in  the
breeze  of  every  clime,  bearing  to  distant  lands  the  remembrance  of  a
great  people  living  in  a state  of  peaceful  freedom.  ^lay  that  peaceful
freedom  last  for  ever  !

The  great  strength,  daring,  and  cool  courage  of  the  White-headed
Eagle,  joined  to  his  unequalled  power  of  flight,  render  him  highly  conspi-
cuous among  his  brethren.  To  these  qualities  did  he  add  a generous  dis-
position towards  others,  he  might  be  looked  up  to  as  a model  of  nobility.
The  ferocious,  overbearing,  and  tyrannical  temper  which  is  ever  and
anon  displaying  itself  in  his  actions,  is,  nevertheless,  best  adapted  to  his
state,  and  was  wisely  given  him  by  the  Creator  to  enable  him  to  perform
the  ofiice  assigned  to  him.

To  give  you,  kind  reader,  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  this  bird,  per-
mit me  to  place  you  on  the  Mississippi,  on  which  you  may  float  gently
along,  while  approaching  winter  brings  millions  of  water-fowl  on  whistl-
ing wings,  from  the  countries  of  the  north,  to  seek  a milder  climate  in
which  to  sojourn  for  a season.  The  Eagle  is  seen  perched,  in  an  erect
attitude,  on  the  highest  summit  of  the  tallest  tree  by  the  margin  of  the
broad  stream.  His  glistening  but  stern  eye  looks  over  the  vast  expanse.
He  listens  attentively  to  every  sound  that  comes  to  his  quick  ear  from
afar,  glancing  now  and  then  on  the  earth  beneath,  lest  even  the  light
tread  of  the  fawn  may  pass  unheard.  His  mate  is  perched  on  the  oppo-
site side,  and  should  all  be  tranquil  and  silent,  warns  him  by  a cry  to
continue  patient.  At  this  well  known  call,  the  male  partly  opens  his
broad  wings,  inclines  his  body  a little  downwards,  and  answers  to  her
voice  in  tones  not  unlike  the  laugh  of  a maniac.  The  next  moment,
he  resumes  his  erect  attitude,  and  again  all  around  is  silent.  Ducks
of  many  species,  the  Teal,  the  Wigeon,  the  Mallard  and  others,  are
seen  passing  with  great  rapidity,  and  following  the  course  of  the  cur-
rent ; but  the  Eagle  heeds  them  not : they  are  at  that  time  beneath


1


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


161

his  attention.  The  next  moment,  however,  the  wild  trumpet-like  sound
of  a yet  distant  but  approaching  Swan  is  heard.  A shriek  from  the
female  Eagle  comes  across  the  stream, — ^for,  kind  reader,  she  is  fully  as
alert  as  her  mate.  The  latter  suddenly  shakes  the  whole  of  his  body,
and  with  a few  touches  of  his  bill,  aided  by  the  action  of  his  cuticular
muscles,  arranges  his  plumage  in  an  instant.  The  snow-white  bird  is
now  in  sight : her  long  neck  is  stretched  forward,  her  eye  is  on  the
watch,  vigilant  as  that  of  her  enemy;  her  large  wings  seem  with  dif-
ficulty to  support  the  weight  of  her  body,  although  they  flap  incessantly.
So  irksome  do  her  exertions  seem,  that  her  very  legs  are  spread  beneath
her  tail,  to  aid  her  in  her  flight.  She  approaches,  however.  The  Eagle
has  marked  her  for  his  prey.  As  the  Swan  is  passing  the  dreaded  pair,
starts  from  his  perch,  in  full  preparation  for  the  chase,  the  male  bird,
with  an  awful  scream,  that  to  the  Swan’s  ear  brings  more  terror  than  the
report  of  the  large  duck-gun.

Now  is  the  moment  to  witness  the  display  of  the  Eagle’s  powers.  He
glides  through  the  air  like  a falling  star,  and,  like  a flash  of  lightning,
comes  upon  the  timorous  quarry,  which  now,  in  agony  and  despair,  seeks,
by  various  manoeuvres,  to  elude  the  grasp  of  his  cruel  talons.  It  mounts,
doubles,  and  willingly  would  plunge  into  the  stream,  were  it  not  prevent-
ed by  the  Eagle,  which,  long  possessed  of  the  knowledge  that  by  such  a
stratagem  the  Swan  might  escape  him,  forces  it  to  remain  in  the  air  by
attempting  to  strike  it  with  his  talons  from  beneath.  The  hope  of  es-
cape is  soon  given  up  by  the  Swan.  It  has  already  become  much  weak-
ened, and  its  strength  fails  at  the  sight  of  the  courage  and  swiftness  of  its
antagonist.  Its  last  gasp  is  about  to  escape,  when  the  ferocious  Eagle
strikes  with  his  talons  the  underside  of  its  wing,  and  with  unresisted
power  forces  the  bird  to  fall  in  a slanting  direction  upon  the  nearest
shore.

It  is  then,  reader,  that  you  may  see  the  cruel  spirit  of  this  dreaded
enemy  of  the  feathered  race,  whilst,  exulting  over  his  prey,  he  for  the
first  time  breathes  at  ease.  He  presses  down  his  powerful  feet,  and
drives  his  sharp  claws  deeper  than  ever  into  the  heart  of  the  dying  Swan.
He  shrieks  with  delight,  as  he  feels  the  last  convulsions  of  his  prey,  which
has  now  sunk  under  his  unceasing  efforts  to  render  death  as  painfully
felt  as  it  can  possibly  be.  The  female  has  watched  every  movement  of  her
mate ; and  if  she  did  not  assist  him  in  capturing  the  Swan,  it  was  not
from  want  of  will,  but  merely  that  she  felt  full  assurance  that  the  power


L


162


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


and  courage  of  her  lord  were  quite  sufficient  for  the  deed.  She  now  sails
to  the  spot  where  he  eagerly  awaits  her,  and  when  she  has  arrived,  they
together  turn  the  breast  of  the  luckless  Swan  upwards,  and  gorge  them-
selves with  gore.

At  other  times,  when  these  Eagles,  sailing  in  search  of  prey,  discover
a Goose,  a Duck,  or  a Swan,  that  has  alighted  on  the  water,  they  accom-
plish its  destruction  in  a manner  that  is  worthy  of  your  attention.  The
Eagles,  well  aware  that  water-fowl  have  it  in  their  power  to  dive  at  their
approach,  and  thereby  elude  their  attempts  upon  them,  ascend  in  the  air
in  opposite  directions  over  the  lake  or  river,  on  which  they  have  observed
the  object  which  they  are  desirous  of  possessing.  Both  Eagles  reach  a
certain  height,  immediately  after  which  one  of  them  glides  with  great
swiftness  towards  the  prey ; the  latter,  meantime,  aware  of  the  Eagle’s  in-
tention, dives  the  moment  before  he  reaches  the  spot.  The  pursuer  then
rises  in  the  air,  and  is  met  by  its  mate,  which  glides  toward  the  water-
bird,  that  has  just  emerged  to  breathe,  and  forces  it  to  plunge  again  be-
neath the  surface,  to  escape  the  talons  of  this  second  assailant.  The  first
Eagle  is  now  poising  itself  in  the  place  where  its  mate  formerly  was,  and
rushes  anew  to  force  the  quarry  to  make  another  plunge.  By  thus  alter-
nately gliding,  in  rapid  and  often  repeated  rushes,  over  the  ill-fated  bird,
they  soon  fatigue  it,  when  it  stretches  out  its  neck,  swims  deeply,  and
makes  for  the  shore,  in  the  hope  of  concealing  itself  among  the  rank
weeds.  But  this  is  of  no  avail,  for  the  Eagles  follow  it  in  all  its  mo-
tions, and  the  moment  it  approaches  the  margin,  one  of  them  darts
upon  it,  and  kills  it  in  an  instant,  after  which  they  divide  the  spoil.

During  spring  and  summer,  the  White-headed  Eagle,  to  procure  sus-
tenance, follows  a different  course,  and  one  much  less  suited  to  a bird
apparently  so  well  able  to  supply  itself  without  interfering  with  other
plunderers.  No  sooner  does  the  Fish-Hawk  make  its  appearance  along
our  Atlantic  shores,  or  ascend  our  numerous  and  large  rivers,  than  the
Eagle  follows  it,  and,  like  a selfish  oppressor,  robs  it  of  the  hard-earned
fruits  of  its  labour.  Perched  on  some  tall  summit,  in  view  of  the  ocean,
or  of  some  water-course,  he  watches  every  motion  of  the  Osprey  while  on
wing.  When  the  latter  rises  from  the  water,  with  a fish  in  its  grasp,
forth  rushes  the  Eagle  in  pursuit.  He  mounts  above  the  Fish-Hawk,
and  threatens  it  by  actions  well  understood,  when  the  latter,  fearing  per-
haps that  its  life  is  in  danger,  drops  its  prey.  In  an  instant,  the  Eagle,
accurately  estimating  the  rapid  descent  of  the  fish,  closes^  his  wings,  fol-


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


163


lows  it  with  the  swiftness  of  thought,  and  the  next  moment  grasps  it.
The  prize  is  carried  off  in  silence  to  the  woods,  and  assists  in  feeding  the
ever-hungry  brood  of  the  Eagle.

This  bird  now  and  then  procures  fish  himself,  by  pursuing  them  in
the  shallows  of  small  creeks.  I have  witnessed  several  instances  of  this
in  the  Perkioming  Creek  in  Pennsylvania,  where,  in  this  manner,  I saw
one  of  them  secure  a number  of  Red-Jins,  by  wading  briskly  through  the
water,  and  striking  at  them  with  his  bill.  I have  also  observed  a pair
scrambling  over  the  ice  of  a frozen  pond,  to  get  at  some  fish  below,  but
without  success.

It  does  not  confine  itself  to  these  kinds  of  food,  but  greedily  devours
young  pigs,  lambs,  fawns,  poultry,  and  the  putrid  flesh  of  carcasses  of
every  description,  driving  off  the  vultures  and  carrion-crows,  or  the  dogs,
and  keeping  a whole  party  at  defiance  until  it  is  satiated.  It  frequently
gives  chase  to  the  vultures,  and  forces  them  to  disgorge  the  contents  of
their  stomachs,  when  it  alights  and  devours  the  filthy  mass.  A ludicrous
instance  of  this  took  place  near  the  city  of  Natchez,  on  the  Mississippi.
Many  Vultures  were  engagedin  devouring  the  body  and  entrails  of  a dead
horse,  when  a White-headed  Eagle  accidentally  passing  by,  the  vultures
all  took  to  wing,  one  among  the  rest  with  a portion  of  the  entrails  partly
swallowed,  and  the  remaining  part,  about  a yard  in  length,  dangling
in  the  air.  The  Eagle  instantly  marked  him,  and  gave  chase.  The
poor  vulture  tried  in  vain  to  disgorge,  when  the  Eagle,  coming  up,  seized
the  loose  end  of  the  gut,  and  dragged  the  bird  along  for  twenty  or
thirty  yards,  much  against  its  will,  until  both  fell  to  the  ground,  when  the
Eagle  struck  the  vulture,  and  in  a few  moments  killed  it,  after  which  he
swallowed  the  delicious  morsel.

I have  heard  of  several  attempts  made  by  this  bird  to  destroy  chil-
dren, but  have  never  witnessed  any  myself,  although  I have  little  doubt
of  its  having  sufficient  daring  to  do  so.

The  flight  of  the  White-headed  Eagle  is  strong,  generally  uniform,
and  protracted  to  any  distance,  at  pleasure.  Whilst  travelling,  it  is  en-
tirely supported  by  equal  easy  ffappings,  without  any  intermission,  in  as
far  as  I have  observed  it,  by  following  it  with  the  eye  or  the  assistance  of
a glass.  When  looking  for  prey,  it  sails  with  extended  wings,  at  right
angles  to  its  body,  now  and  then  allowing  its  legs  to  hang  at  their
full  length.  Whilst  sailing,  it  has  the  power  of  ascending  in  circular
sweeps,  without  a single  flap  of  the  wings,  or  any  apparent  motion  either

L 2


164  WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.

of  them  or  of  the  tail ; and  in  this  manner  it  often  rises  until  it  disappears
from  the  view,  the  white  tail  remaining  longer  visible  than  the  rest  of  the
body.  At  other  times,  it  rises  only  a few  hundred  feet  in  the  air,  and
sails  off  in  a direct  line,  and  with  rapidity.  Again,  when  thus  elevated,
it  partially  closes  its  wings,  and  glides  downwards  for  a considerable  space,
when,  as  if  disappointed,  it  suddenly  checks  its  career,  and  reassumes  its
former  steady  flight.  When  at  an  immense  height,  and  as  if  observing
an  object  on  the  ground,  it  closes  its  wings,  and  glides  through  the  air
with  such  rapidity  as  to  cause  a loud  rustling  sound,  not  unlike  that  pro-
duced by  a violent  gust  of  wind  passing  amongst  the  branches  of  trees.
Its  fall  towards  the  earth  can  scarcely  be  followed  by  the  eye  on  such  oc-
casions, the  more  particularly  that  these  falls  or  glidings  through  the  air
usually  take  place  when  they  are  least  expected.

This  bird  has  the  power  of  raising  from  the  surface  of  the  water  any
floating  object  not  heavier  than  itself.  In  this  manner  it  often  robs  the
sportsman  of  ducks  which  have  been  killed  by  him.  Its  audacity  is  quite
remarkable.  While  descending  the  Upper  Mississippi,  I observed  one  of
these  Eagles  in  pursuit  of  a Green- winged  Teal.  It  came  so  near  our
boat,  although  several  persons  were  looking  on,  that  I could  perceive  the
glancings  of  its  eye.  The  Teal,  on  the  point  of  being  caught,  when  not
more  than  fifteen  or  twenty  yards  from  us,  was  saved  from  the  grasp  of
its  enemy,  one  of  our  party  having  brought  the  latter  down  by  a shot,
which  broke  one  of  its  wings.  When  taken  on  board,  it  was  fastened  to
the  deck  of  our  boat  by  means  of  a string,  and  was  fed  with  pieces  of
cat-fish,  some  of  which  it  began  to  eat  on  the  third  day  of  its  confinement.
But,  as  it  became  a very  disagreeable  and  dangerous  associate,  trying  on
all  occasions  to  strike  at  some  one  with  its  talons,  it  was  killed  and  thrown
overboard.

When  these  birds  are  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  approached  or  sur-
prised, they  exhibit  a great  degree  of  cowardice.  They  rise  at  once  and
fly  off  very  low,  in  zig-zag  lines,  to  some  distance,  uttering  a hissing  noise,
not  at  all  like  their  usual  disagreeable  imitation  of  a laugh.  When  not
carrying  a gun,  one  may  easily  approach  them  ; but  the  use  of  that  in-
strument being  to  appearance  well  known  to  them,  they  are  very  cautious
in  allowing  a person  having  one  to  get  near  them.  Notwithstanding  all
their  caution,  however,  many  are  shot  by  approaching  them  under  cover
of  a tree,  on  horseback,  or  in  a boat.  They  do  not  possess  the  power  of
smelling  gunpowder,  as  the  crow  and  the  raven  are  absurdly  supposed  to


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


165


do  ; nor  are  they  aware  of  the  effects  of  spring-traps,  as  I have  seen  some
of  them  caught  by  these  instruments.  Their  sight,  although  probably
as  perfect  as  that  of  any  bird,  is  much  affected  during  a fall  of  snow,  at
which  time  they  may  be  approached  without  difficulty.

The  White-headed  Eagle  seldom  appears  in  very  mountainous  dis-
tricts, but  prefers  the  low  lands  of  the  sea-shores,  those  of  our  large  lakes,
and  the  borders  of  rivers.  It  is  a constant  resident  in  the  United  States,
in  every  part  of  which  it  is  to  be  seen.  The  roosts  and  breeding  places
of  pigeons  are  resorted  to  by  it,  for  the  purpose  of  picking  up  the  young
birds  that  happen  to  fall,  or  the  old  ones  when  wounded.  It  seldom,
however,  follows  the  flocks  of  these  birds  when  on  their  migrations.

When  shot  at  and  wounded,  it  tries  to  escape  by  long  and  quickly
repeated  leaps,  and,  if  not  closely  pursued,  soon  conceals  itself.  Should
it  happen  to  fall  on  the  water,  it  strikes  powerfully  with  expanded  wings,
and  in  this  manner  often  reaches  the  shore,  when  it  is  not  more  than
twenty  or  thirty  yards  distant.  It  is  capable  of  supporting  life  without
food  for  a long  period.  I have  heard  of  some,  which,  in  a state  of  con-
finement, had  lived  without  much  apparent  distress  for  twenty  days,  al-
though I cannot  vouch  for  the  truth  of  such  statements,  which,  however,
may  be  quite  correct.  They  defend  themselves  in  the  manner  usually
followed  by  other  Eagles  and  Hawks,  throwing  themselves  backwards,  and
furiously  striking  with  their  talons  at  any  object  within  reach,  keeping
their  bill  open,  and  turning  their  head  with  quickness  to  watch  the  move-
ments of  the  enemy,  their  eyes  being  apparently  more  protruded  than
when  unmolested.

It  is  supposed  that  Eagles  live  to  a very  great  age, — some  persons
have  ventured  to  say  even  a hundred  years.  On  this  subject,  I can  only
observe,  that  I once  found  one  of  these  birds,  which,  on  being  killed,
proved  to  be  a female,  and  which,  judging  by  its  appearance,  must  have
been  very  old.  Its  tail  and  wing-feathers  were  so  worn  out,  and  of  such
a rusty  colour,  that  I imagined  the  bird  had  lost  the  power  of  moulting.
The  legs  and  feet  were  covered  with  large  warts,  the  claws  and  bill  were
much  blunted,  it  could  scarcely  fly  more  than  a hundred  yards  at  a time,
and  this  it  did  with  a heaviness  and  unsteadiness  of  motion  such  as  I
never  witnessed  in  any  other  bird  of  the  species.  The  body  was  poor  and
very  tough.  The  eye  was  the  only  part  which  appeared  to  have  sustained
no  injury.  It  remained  sparkling  and  full  of  animation,  and  even  after


166


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


death  seemed  to  have  lost  little  of  its  lustre.  No  wounds  were  perceivable
on  its  body.

The  White-headed  Eagle  is  seldom  seen  alone,  the  mutual  attachment
which  two  individuals  form  when  they  first  pair  seeming  to  continue  un-
til one  of  them  dies  or  is  destroyed.  They  hunt  for  the  support  of  each
other,  and  seldom  feed  apart,  but  usually  drive  off  other  birds  of  the  same
species.  They  commence  their  amatory  intercourse  at  an  earlier  period
than  any  other  land  bird  with  which  I am  acquainted,  generally  in  the
month  of  December.  At  this  time,  along  the  Mississippi,  or  by  the  mar-
gin of  some  lake  not  far  in  the  interior  of  the  forest,  the  male  and  female
birds  are  observed  making  a great  bustle,  flying  about  and  circling  in  va-
rious ways,  uttering  a loud  cackling  noise,  alighting  on  the  dead  branches
of  the  tree  on  which  their  nest  is  already  preparing,  or  in  the  act  of  being
repaired,  and  caressing  each  other.  In  the  beginning  of  January  incu-
bation commences.  I shot  a female,  on  the  17th  of  that  month,  as  she
sat  on  her  eggs,  in  which  the  chicks  had  made  considerable  progress.

The  nest,  which  in  some  instances  is  of  great  size,  is  usually  placed
on  a very  tall  tree,  destitute  of  branches  to  a considerable  height,  but  by
no  means  always  a dead  one.  It  is  never  seen  on  rocks.  It  is  composed
of  sticks,  from  three  to  five  feet  in  length,  large  pieces  of  turf,  rank  weeds,
and  Spanish  moss  in  abundance,  whenever  that  substance  happens  to  be
near.  When  finished,  it  measures  from  five  to  six  feet  in  diameter,  and
so  great  is  the  accumulation  of  materials,  that  it  sometimes  measures  the
same  in  depth,  it  being  occupied  for  a great  number  of  years  in  succes-
sion, and  receiving  some  augmentation  each  season.  When  placed  in  a
naked  tree,  between  the  forks  of  the  branches,  it  is  conspicuously  seen  at
a great  distance.  The  eggs,  which  are  from  two  to  four,  more  commonly
two  or  three,  are  of  a dull  white  colour,  and  equally  rounded  at  both
ends,  some  of  them  being  occasionally  granulated.  Incubation  lasts  for
more  than  three  weeks,  but  I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  its  precise
duration,  as  I have  observed  the  female  on  different  occasions  sit  for  a
few  days  in  the  nest,  before  laying  the  first  egg.  Of  this  I assured  my-
self by  climbing  to  the  nest  every  day  in  succession,  during  her  tempo-
rary  absence, — a rather  perilous  undertaking  when  the  bird  is  sitting.

I have  seen  the  young  birds  when  not  larger  than  middle-sized  puUets.
At  this  time,  they  are  covered  with  a soft  cottony  kind  of  down,  their
bill  and  legs  appearing  disproportionately  large.  Their  first  plumage  is
of  a greyish  colour,  mixed  with  brown  of  different  depths  of  tint,  and  be-


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


167


fore  the  parents  drive  them  off  from  the  nest,  they  are  fully  fledged.  As
a figure  of  the  Young  White-headed  Eagle  will  appear  in  the  course  of
the  publication  of  my  Illustrations,  I shall  not  here  trouble  you  with  a
description  of  its  appearance.  I once  caught  three  young  Eagles  of  this
species,  when  fully  fledged,  by  having  the  tree  on  which  their  nest  was,
cut  down.  It  caused  great  trouble  to  secure  them,  as  they  could  fly  and
scramble  much  faster  than  any  of  our  party  could  run.  They,  however,
gradually  became  fatigued,  and  at  length  were  so  exhausted  as  to  offer
no  resistance,  when  we  were  securing  them  with  cords.  This  happened
on  the  border  of  Lake  Pontchartrain,  in  the  month  of  April.  The
parents  did  not  think  fit  to  come  within  gun-shot  of  the  tree  while  the
axe  was  at  work.

The  attachment  of  the  parents  to  the  young  is  very  great,  when  the
latter  are  yet  of  a small  size  ; and  to  ascend  to  the  nest  at  this  time  would
be  dangerous.  But  as  the  young  advance,  and,  after  being  able  to  take
wing  and  provide  for  themselves,  are  not  disposed  to  fly  off,  the  old  birds
turn  them  out,  and  beat  them  away  from  them.  They  return  to  the  nest,
however,  to  roost,  or  sleep  on  the  branches  immediately  near  it,  for  several
weeks  after.  They  are  fed  most  abundantly  while  under  the  care  of  the
parents,  which  procure  for  them  ample  supplies  of  fish,  either  accidentally
cast  ashore,  or  taken  from  the  Fish-Hawk,  together  with  rabbits,  squir-
rels, young  lambs,  pigs,  oppossums,  or  raccoons.  Every  thing  that
comes  in  the  way  is  relished  by  the  young  family,  as  by  the  old  birds.

The  young  birds  begin  to  breed  the  following  spring,  not  always  in  pairs
of  the  same  age,  as  I have  several  times  observed  one  of  these  birds  in  brown
plumage  mated  with  a full-coloured  bird,  which  had  the  head  and  tail
pure  white.  I once  shot  a pair  of  this  kind,  when  the  brown  bird  (the
young  one)  proved  to  be  the  female.

This  species  requires  at  least  four  years  before  it  attains  the  full
beauty  of  its  plumage  when  kept  in  confinement.  I have  known  two  in-
stances in  which  the  white  of  the  head  did  not  make  its  appearance  until
the  sixth  spring.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  say  how  much  sooner  this
state  of  perfection  is  attained,  when  the  bird  is  at  full  liberty,  although  I
should  suppose  it  to  be  at  least  one  year,  as  the  bird  is  capable  of  breed-
ing the  first  spring  after  birth.

The  weight  of  Eagles  of  this  species  varies  considerably.  In  the
males,  it  is  from  six  to  eight  pounds,  and  in  the  females  from  eight  to
twelve.  These  birds  are  so  attached  to  particular  districts,  where  they


168


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE.


have  first  made  their  nest,  that  they  seldom  spend  a night  at  any  distance
from  the  latter,  and  often  resort  to  its  immediate  neighbourhood.  Whilst
asleep,  they  emit  a loud  hissing  sort  of  snore,  which  is  heard  at  the  dis-
tance of  a hundred  yards,  when  the  weather  is  perfectly  calm.  Yet,  so
light  is  their  sleep,  that  the  cracking  of  a stick  under  the  foot  of  a person
immediately  wakens  them.  When  it  is  attempted  to  smoke  them  while
thus  roosted  and  asleep,  they  start  up  and  sail  off  without  uttering  any
sound,  but  return  next  evening  to  the  same  spot.

Before  steam-navigation  commenced  on  our  western  rivers,  these
Eagles  were  extremely  abundant  there,  particularly  in  the  lower  parts  of
the  Ohio,  the  Mississippi,  and  the  adjoining  streams.  I have  seen  hundreds
going  down  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  to  New  Orleans,  when  it  was  not
at  all  difficult  to  shoot  them.  Now,  however,  their  number  is  consider-
ably diminished,  the  game  on  which  they  were  in  the  habit  of  feeding,
having  been  forced  to  seek  refuge  from  the  persecution  of  man  farther  in
the  wilderness.  Many,  however,  are  still  observed  on  these  rivers,  parti-
cularly along  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi.

In  concluding  this  account  of  the  White-headed  Eagle,  suffer  me,
kind  reader,  to  say  how  much  I grieve  that  it  should  have  been  selected
as  the  Emblem  of  my  Country.  The  opinion  of  our  great  Franklin  on
this  subject,  as  it  perfectly  coincides  with  my  own,  I shall  here  present  to
you.  “ For  my  part,”  says  he,  in  one  of  his  letters,  “ I wish  the  Bald
Eagle  had  not  been  chosen  as  the  representative  of  our  country.  He  is
a bird  of  bad  moral  character  ; he  does  not  get  his  living  honestly  ; you
may  have  seen  him  perched  on  some  dead  tree,  where,  too  lazy  to  fish  for
himself,  he  watches  the  labour  of  the  Fishing-Hawk  ; and  when  that  dili-
gent bird  has  at  length  taken  a fish,  and  is  bearing  it  to  his  nest  for  the
support  of  his  mate  and  young  ones,  the  Bald  Eagle  pursues  him,  and
takes  it  from  him.  With  all  this  injustice,  he  is  never  in  good  case,  but,
like  those  among  men  who  live  by  sharping  and  robbing,  he  is  generally
poor,  and  often  very  lousy.  Besides,  he  is  a rank  coward : the  little
King  Bird,  not  bigger  than  a Sparrow,  attacks  him  boldly,  and  drives
him  out  of  the  district.  He  is,  therefore,  by  no  means  a proper  emblem
for  the  brave  and  honest  Cincinnati  of  America,  who  have  driven  all  the
King  Birds  from  our  country  ; though  exactly  fit  for  that  order  of
knights  which  the  French  call  Chevaliers  d"" Industrie C

It  is  only  necessary  for  me  to  add,  that  the  name  by  which  this  bird
is  universally  known  in  America  is  that  of  Bald  Eagle , an  erroneous  de-


WHITE-HEADED  EAGLE,


169


nomination,  as  its  head  is  as  densely  feathered  as  that  of  any  other  species,
although  its  whiteness  may  have  suggested  the  idea  of  its  being  bare.


Falco  leucocephalus,  Lirm.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  Vk^.^Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  i p.  11.

Bald  Eagle,  Lath.  Synops.  yol.  i.  p.  29 — Wilson,  Americ.  Omith.  vol.  iv.  p.  89.
PL  36.  Adult.

Sea  Eagle,  Falco  Ossteragus,  Wils.  Amer,  Omith.  vol.  vii.  p.  16.  PI.  55.  fig.  2
Y oung.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXI.

Bill  shortish,  very  deep,  compressed  ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal
outline  at  first  straight,  curved  towards  the  tip,  rounded  above,  sloping
and  flattish  on  the  sides,  nearly  straight,  with  an  obtuse  process,  in  the
acute,  overlapping  edges ; the  tip  deflected,  trigonal,  acute,  at  its  lower
part  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  gap  line ; lower  mandible  slightly  con-
vex in  its  dorsal  outline,  with  inflected  acute  edges,  which  are  arched  to-
ward the  end,  the  tip  broadly  rounded.  A naked  cere,  in  the  fore  part
of  which  are  the  oblong,  oblique,  nearly  dorsal,  open  nostrils,  which  have
a process  from  the  anterior  margin.  Head  rather  large,  flat  above.  Neck
robust,  rather  short.  Body  ovate.  Feet  with  the  leg  long,  the  tarsus
short,  feathered  in  its  upper  third,  rounded,  anteriorly  covered  with  trans-
verse scutella,  posteriorly  with  large,  laterally  with  small  tuberculous
scales ; toes  robust,  free,  scutellate  above,  papillar  and  scabrous  beneath,
with  large  tubercles ; claws  curved,  rounded,  marginate  beneath,  very
acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated,  glossy  ; feathers  of  the  head,  neck  and
breast,  narrow  and  pointed ; of  the  back  and  breast  acute,  of  the  other
parts  broad  and  rounded.  Space  between  the  bill  and  eye  barish,
being  sparsely  covered  with  bristly  feathers.  Eyebrow  bare  and  pro-
jecting. Wings  long,  second  quill  longest,  first  considerably  shorter.
Tail  of  ordinary  length,  much  rounded,  extending  considerably  beyond
the  tips  of  the  wings  ; of  twelve,  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill,  cere,  edge  of  eyebrow,  iris,  and  feet,  yellow  ; claws  bluish-black.
The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  deep  chocolate,  the  head,  neck,  tail,
abdomen,  and  upper  and  under  tail-coverts,  white.

Length  34  inches,  extent  of  wings  7 feet ; bill  along  the  back
inches,  along  the  under  mandible  2f,  in  depth  ; tarsus  3,  middle
toe  3J.


( 170  )


THE  BLACK-BILLED  CUCKOO.

COCCYZUS  ERYTHROFHTHALMUS^  Ch.  BoNAP.

PLATE  XXXII.  Male  and  Female.

I HAVE  not  met  with  this  species  in  the  State  of  Louisiana  more  than
half  a dozen  times  ; nor  indeed  have  I seen  it  at  all  in  the  Western  States,
excepting  that  of  Ohio,  where  I have  occasionally  observed  an  individual,
apparently  out  of  its  usual  range.  Some  of  these  individuals  were  pro-
bably bound  for  the  Upper  Lakes.  The  woody  sides  of  the  sea  are  the
places  to  which  this  species  usually  resorts.  It  passes  from  the  south
early  in  March,  and  continues  its  route  through  Florida,  Georgia,  and  all
the  other  States  verging  on  the  Atlantic,  beginning  to  rest  and  to  breed
in  North  Carolina,  and  extending  its  travels  to  the  Province  of  Maine.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  swifter  than  that  of  its  near  relative,  the
Yellow-billed  Cuckoo,  for  which  bird  it  is  easily  mistaken  by  ordinary
observers.  It  does  not  so  much  frequent  the  interior  of  woods,  but  ap-
pears along  their  margins,  on  the  edges  of  creeks  and  damp  places.  But
the  most  remarkable  distinction  between  this  species  and  the  Yellow-billed
Cuckoo  is,  that  the  former,  instead  of  feeding  principally  on  insects  and
fruits,  procures  fresh- water  shellfish  and  aquatic  larvae  for  its  sustenance.
It  is  therefore  more  frequently  seen  on  the  ground,  near  the  edges  of  the
water,  or  descending  along  the  drooping  branches  of  trees  to  their  extre-
mities, to  seize  the  insects  in  the  water  beneath  them*.

The  nest  of  this  bird  is  built  in  places  similar  to  those  chosen  by  the
other  species,  and  is  formed  of  the  same  materials,  arranged  with  quite  as
little  art.  The  females  lay  from  four  to  six  eggs,  of  a greenish-blue,
nearly  equal  at  both  ends,  but  rather  smaller  than  those  of  the  Yellow-
billed Cuckoo.  It  retires  southward  fully  a fortnight  before  the  latter.

It  being  so  scarce  a species  in  Louisiana,  I have  honoured  it  by  plac-
ing a pair  on  a branch  of  Magnolia  in  bloom,  although  the  birds  repre-
sented were  not  shot  on  one  of  these  trees,  but  in  a swamp  near  some,

• After  the  summer  showers,  the  ground  is  seen  covered  with  multitudes  of  very  small
frogs,  of  a brownish-black  colour,  which  many  of  the  inhabitants  foolishly  suppose  to  have
descended  from  the  clouds.  Some  of  these  I have  occasionally  found  in  the  stomach  of
the  Black-billed  Cuckoo.


BLACK-BILLED  CUCKOO.


171


where  the  birds  were  in  pursuit  of  such  flies  as  you  see  figured,  probably
to  amuse  themselves.  The  Magnolia  has  already  been  presented  to
your  view  in  another  plate,  where  it  was  figured  in  seed.  Here  you  have
it  arrayed  in  all  the  beauty  of  its  splendid  blossoms.

CoccYZus  ERYTHHOPHTHALMUS,  Ch.  Bonap,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  United  States,  p.  42.

Black-billed  Cuckoo,  Cuculus  erythrophthalma,  Wils,  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  iv.
p.  15.  PL  xxviii.  fig.  2.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXIL  Fig  1.

Bill  as  long  as  the  head,  compressed,  slightly  arched,  acute,  not  more
robust  than  that  of  many  Sylvias ; upper  mandible  carinated  above,  its
margins  acute  and  entire ; lower  mandible  carinated  beneath,  acute.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  linear-elliptical,  half-closed  by  a membrane.  Head
and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  rather  slender-  Feet  short  and  small ;
tarsus  scutellate  before  and  behind ; toes  two  before,  separated ; two  be-
hind, one  of  which  is  versatile  ; the  sole  flat ; claws  slender,  compressed,
arched.

Plumage  blended,  soft,  slightly  glossed.  Wings  long,  the  first  quill
short,  the  third  longest.  Tail  long,  graduated,  of  ten  feathers,  which  are
rather  narrow  and  rounded.

Upper  mandible  brownish-black ; lower  bluish.  Iris  hasel.  A bare
space  of  a deep  scarlet  tint  around  the  eye.  Feet  dull  blue.  The  gene-
ral colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  greenish-brown.  Cheeks  and  fore-
head tinged  with  greyish-blue.  Tail-feathers,  excepting  the  two  middle
ones,  tipped  with  white.  Under  parts  brownish-white.

Length  llj  inches,  extent  of  wings  15 ; beak  along  the  ridge
along  the  gap  1^.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  very  little  in  external  appearance  from  the  male,
and  is  nearly  of  the  same  dimensions.


The  Great  Magnolia.

Magnolia  grandiflora,  Wild,  Sp.  PI.  voL  ii.  p.  1255.

This  plant  has  already  been  described  at  p.  the  ripe  fruit  having
been  represented  in  Plate  V.


( 172  )


THE  AMERICAN  GOLDFINCH.

FrINGILLA  TRISTIS,  LiNN.

PLATE  XXXIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  species  merely  passes  over  the  State  of  Louisiana  in  the  begin-
ning of  January,  and  at  that  season  is  seen  there  for  only  a few  days,
alighting  on  the  highest  tops  of  trees  near  water-courses,  in  small  groups
of  eight  or  ten,  males  and  females  together.  They  feed  at  that  period  on
the  opening  buds  of  Maples,  and  others  that  are  equally  tender  and  juicy.
In  the  month  of  November  they  are  again  seen  moving  southwards,  and
for  a few  days  only.

A fev/  breed  in  Kentucky  and  the  State  of  Ohio,  but  the  Middle  Dis-
tricts are  their  principal  places  of  resort  during  summer,  although  they
extend  their  migrations  to  a high  latitude.  They  arrive  in  the  State  of
New  York  about  the  middle  of  April ; and  as  they  become  very  abun-
dant in  that  State  during  the  summer,  I shall  describe  their  habits  as  ob-
served there.  •

The  flight  of  the  American  Goldfinch  is  exactly  similar  to  that  of  the
European  Bird  of  the  same  name,  being  performed  in  deep  curved  lines,  al-
ternately rising  and  falling,  after  each  propelling  motion  of  the  wings.  It
scarcely  ever  describes  one  of  these  curves  without  uttering  two  or  three
notes  whilst  ascending,  such  as  its  European  relative  uses  on  similar  occa-
sions. In  this  manner,  its  flight  is  prolonged  to  considerable  distances,
and  it  frequently  moves  in  a circling  direction  before  alighting.  Their
migration  is  performed  during  the  day.  They  seldom  alight  on  the
ground,  unless  to  procure  water,  in  which  they  wash  with  great  liveli-
ness and  pleasure,  after  which  they  pick  up  some  particles  of  gravel  or
sand.  So  fond  of  each  other‘*s  company  are  they,  that  a party  of  them
passing  on  the  wing  will  alter  its  course  at  the  calling  of  a single  one
perched  on  a tree.  This  call  is  uttered  with  much  emphasis  : the  bird
prolongs  its  usual  note,  without  much  alteration,  and  as  the  party  ap-
proaches, erects  its  body,  and  moves  it  to  the  right  and  left,  as  if  turning
on  a pivot,  apparently  pleased  at  shewing  the  beauty  of  its  plumage  and
the  elegance  of  its  manners.  No  sooner  has  the  flock,  previously  on
wing,  alighted,  than  the  whole  party  plume  themselves,  and  then  perform


AMERICAN  GOLDFINCH.


173


a little  sweet  concert.  So  much  does  the  song  of  our  Goldfinch  resemble
that  of  the  European  species,  that  whilst  in  France  and  England,  I have
frequently  thought,  and  with  pleasure  thought,  that  they  were  the  notes
of  our  own  bird  which  I heard.  In  America  again,  the  song  of  the  Gold-
finch recalled  to  my  remembrance  its  transatlantic  kinsman,  and  brought
with  it  too  a grateful  feeling  for  the  many  acts  of  hospitality  and  kind-
ness which  I have  experienced  in  the  “ old  countr}^”  •

The  nest  also  is  perfectly  similar  to  that  of  the  European  bird,  being
externally  composed  of  various  lichens  fastened  together  by  saliva,  and
lined  with  the  softest  substances.  It  is  small  and  extremely  handsome,
and  is  generally  fixed  on  a branch  of  the  Lombardy  Poplar,  being  some-
times secured  to  one  side  of  a twig  only.  I have  also  found  it  in  Alder
bushes,  a few  feet  above  the  ground,  as  well  as  in  other  trees.  The  fe-
male deposits  from  four  to  six  eggs,  which  are  white,  tinged  with  blush,
and  marked  at  the  larger  end  with  reddish-brown  spots.  They  raise  only
one  brood  in  a season.  The  young  follow  the  parents  for  a long  time,
are  fed  from  the  mouth,  as  Canaries  are,  and  are  gradually  taught  to  ma-
nage this  themselves.  When  it  happens  that  the  female  is  disturbed  while
on  her  nest,  she  glides  off  to  a neighbouring  tree,  and  calls  for  her  mate,
pivoting  herself  on  her  feet,  as  above  described.  The  male  approaches,
passes  and  repasses  on  the  wing  at  a respectful  distance  from  the  intruder,
in  deeper  curves  than  usual,  uttering  its  ordinary  note,  and  when  the  un-
welcome visitant  has  departed,  flies  with  joy  to  his  nest,  accompanied  by
the  female,  who  presently  resumes  her  occupation.

The  food  of  the  American  Goldfinch  consists  chiefly  of  seeds  of  the
Hemp,  the  Sun-flower,  the  Lettuce,  and  various  species  of  Thistle.  Now
and  then,  during  winter,  it  eats  the  fruit  of  the  Elder.

In  ascending  along  the  shores  of  the  Mohawk  river,  in  the  month  of
August,  I have  met  more  of  these  pretty  birds  in  the  course  of  a day’s
walk  than  anywhere  else ; and  whenever  a thistle  was  to  be  seen  along
either  bank  of  the  New  York  Canal,  it  was  ornamented  with  one  or  more
Goldfinches.  They  tear  up  the  down  and  withered  petals  of  the  ripening
flowers  with  ease,  leaning  downwards  upon  them,  eat  off  the  seed,  and
allow  the  down  to  float  in  the  air.  The  remarkable  plumage  of  the  male,
as  well  as  its  song,  are  at  this  season  very  agreeable ; and  so  familiar  are
these  birds,  that  they  suffer  you  to  approach  within  a few  yards,  before
they  leave  the  plant  on  which  they  are  seated.  For  a considerable  space
along  the  Gennessee  river,  the  shores  of  Lake  Erie,  Lake  Ontario,  and


174


AMERICAN  GOLDFINCH.


even  I^ake  Superior,  I have  always  seen  many  of  them  in  the  latter  part
of  summer.  *1  hey  have  then  a decided  preference  for  the  vicinity  of  water.

It  is  an  extremely  hardy  bird,  and  often  remains  the  whole  winter  in
the  Middle  Districts,  although  never  in  great  numbers.  When  deprived
of  liberty,  it  will  live  to  a great  age  in  a room  or  cage.  I have  known
two  instances  in  which  a bird  of  this  species  had  been  confined  for  up-
wards of  ten  years.  They  were  procured  in  the  market  of  New  York
when  in  mature  plumage,  and  had  been  caught  in  trap-cages.  One  of
them  having  undergone  the  severe  training,  more  frequently  inflicted  in
Europe  than  America,  and  known  in  France  by  the  name  of  gaUrieriy
would  draw  water  for  its  drink  from  a glass,  it  having  a little  chain
attached  to  a narrow  belt  of  soft  leather  fastened  round  its  body,  and  an-
other equally  light  chain  fastened  to  a little  bucket,  kept  by  its  weight  in
the  water,  until  the  little  fellow  raised  it  up  with  its  bill,  placed  a foot
upon  it,  and  pulled  again  at  the  chain  until  it  reached  the  desired  fluid
and  drank,  when,  on  letting  go,  the  bucket  immediately  fell  into  the  glass
below.  In  the  same  manner,  it  was  obliged  to  draw  towards  its  bill  a lit-
tle chariot  filled  with  seeds  ; and  in  this  distressing  occupation  was  doom-
ed to  toil  through  a life  of  solitary  grief,  separated  from  its  companions,
wantoning  on  the  wildflowers,  and  procuring  their  food  in  the  manner  in
which  nature  had  taught  them.  After  being  caught  in  trap-cages,  they
feed  as  if  quite  contented ; but  if  it  has  been  in  spring  that  they  have
lost  their  liberty,  and  they  have  thus  been  deprived  of  the  pleasures  anti-
cipated from  the  previous  connexion  of  a mate,  they  linger  for  a few  days
and  die.  It  is  more  difficult  to  procure  a mule  brood  between  our  species
and  the  Canary,  than  between  the  latter  and  the  European  Goldfinch,  al-
though I have  known  many  instances  in  which  the  attempt  was  made
with  complete  success.

The  young  males  do  not  appear  in  full  plumage  until  the  following
spring.  The  old  ones  lose  their  beauty  in  winter,  and  assume  the  duller
tints  of  the  female.  In  fact,  at  that  season,  young  and  old  of  both  sexes
resemble  each  other.

, There  is  a trait  of  sagacity  in  this  bird  and  the  Purple  Finch  {Frin-
gilla  purpurea)  y which  is  quite  remarkable,  and  worthy  of  the  notice  of
such  naturalists  as  are  fond  of  contrasting  instinct  with  reason.  When  a
Goldfinch  alights  on  a twig  imbued  with  bird-lime  expressly  for  the  pur-
pose of  securing  it,  it  no  sooner  discovers  the  nature  of  the  treacherous
substance,  than  it  throws  itself  backwards,  with  closed  wings,  and  hangs


AMERICAN  GOLDFINCH.


175


in  this  position  until  the  bird-lime  has  run  out  in  the  form  of  a dender
thread  considerably  below  the  twig,  when  feeling  a certain  degree  of  se-
curity, it  beats  its  wings  and  flies  off,  with  a resolution,  doubtless,  never
to  alight  in  such  a place  again  ; as  I have  observed  Goldfinches  that  had
escaped  from  me  in  this  manner,  when  about  to  alight  on  any  twig,  whe-
ther smeared  with  bird-lime  or  not,  flutter  over  it,  as  if  to  assure  them-
selves of  its  being  safe  for  them  to  perch  upon  it.


FiiiNGiLirA  TRiavis,  £.in».  SystNat^  voL  i.  p.  320.— La/A.  Ind.  Ornitlfc.  voL  i.  p.  62.
—Ch,  Bonaparte^  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  111.

American  Goldfinch,  Fringilla  tristis,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  208. — Wils.
Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  20.  PL  I.  2.  Adult  Male  in  Summer.— CA.  Bonaparte,
Amer.  Ornith.  voL  i.  p.  57.  PI.  6.  fig.  4.  Female.

Adult  Male  in  spring.  Plate  XXXIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  short,  conical,  very  acute ; upper  mandible  a little  broader
than  the  lower,  very  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip,  rounded  on  the  sides,  as
is  the  lower,  which  has  the  edges  inflected  and  acute ; the  gap  line  straight,
not  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  concealed  by
the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck  short.  Body  pretty  full.  Legs
of  moderate  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered
anteriorly  with  a few  longish  scutella  ; toes  scutellate  above,  free,  the  la-
teral ones  nearly  equal ; claws  very  slender,  much  compressed,  acute,  and
slightly  arched,  that  of  the  hind  toe  not  much  larger.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  third  and
fourth  quills  longest,  the  second  nearly  as  long.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,
forked,  the  lateral  feathers  curved  outwards  a little  towards  the  tip.

Bill  and  feet  yellowish-brown.  Iris  dark  brown.  The  general  colour
of  the  plumage  is  a rich  lemon-yellow,  fading  posteriorly  into  yellowish-
white.  Fore  and  upper  part  of  the  head,  wings,  and  tail,  black  ; quills
externally  margined,  and  the  large  coverts  tipped,  with  yellowish- white ;
inner  webs  of  the  tail  white.

Length  4^  inches,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the
gap

Adult  Female  in  spring.  Plate  XXXIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  wants  the  black  spot  on  the  head,  and  in  her  the  fine  yel-
low of  the  male  is  changed  into  brownish-olive,  fading  posteriorly  into  yel-


176


AMERICAN  GOLDFINCH.


lowish-grey,  the  fore  neck  and  breast  greyish-yellow.  The  band  formed
by  the  tips  of  the  large  wing-coverts  is  dull  white.

Length  and  other  dimensions  nearly  as  in  the  male.


The  Common  Thistle.

Cnicus  lanceolatus,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iii.  p.  1666.  Pursh,  Flora  Araer.  vol.  ii.
p.  506.  Smith,  Engl.  Bot.  vol.  iii.p.  388 — Syngenesia  Polygamia  ^qualis,
Linn.  Cinarocephal^e,  Juss.

This  well  known  species  of  Thistle,  common  in  the  temperate  and  cold-
er parts  of  both  continents^  it  is  unnecessary  to  describe.


2


( 177  )


THE  WORM.EATING  WARBLER.

Sylvia  vermivora,  Lath.

PLATE  XXXIV.  Male  and  Female.

The  nest  of  this  active  little  bird  is  formed  of  singular  materials,
being  composed  externally  of  dried  mosses  and  the  green  blossoms  of
Hickories  and  Chestnut-trees,  while  the  interior  is  prettily  lined  with  fine
fibrous  roots,  the  whole  apparently  rather  small  for  the  size  of  the  occu-
pants. About  the  middle  of  May  the  female  lays  four  or  five  eggs,
which  are  cream-coloured,  with  a few  dark  red  spots  near  the  larger  end,
leaving  a circular  unspotted  part  at  the  extremity.  The  nest  is  usu-
ally placed  between  two  small  twigs  of  a bush,  not  more  than  eight  or
nine  feet  from  the  ground,  and  sometimes  only  four  or  five.

The  flight  of  the  Worm-eating  Warbler  resembles  that  of  the  Crested
Titmouse,  being  of  short  duration,  and  accompanied  with  the  same  rust-
ling noise,  which  is  occasioned  by  the  rather  concave  formation  of  their
wings.

It  merely  passes  through  Louisiana  in  spring,  appearing  there  as
early  as  the  beginning  of  April,  and  extends  its  migrations  to  the  borders  of
I.ake  Erie,  where"  I shot  several  in  autumn.  It  is  probable  that  it  pro-
ceeds farther  north.  It  returns  through  Louisiana  about  the  end  of  Oc-
tober, only  remaining  a few  days  on  its  passage.

It  is  an  inhabitant  of  the  interior  of  the  forests,  and  is  seldom  found
on  the  borders  of  roads  or  in  the  fields.  In  spring  they  move  in  pairs,
and,  during  their  retrograde  marches,  in  little  groups,  consisting  each  of
a family,  seven  or  eight  in  number ; on  which  account  I am  inclined  to
believe  that  they  raise  only  a single  brood  in  the  year.  They  are  ever
amongst  the  decayed  branches  of  trees  or  other  plants,  such  as  are  acci-
dentally broken  off*  by  the  wind,  and  are  there  seen  searching  for  insects
or  caterpillars.  They  also  resort  to  the  ground,  and  turn  over  the  dried
leaves  in  quest  of  the  same  kind  of  food.  They  are  unsuspecting,  and
will  suffer  a person  to  approach  within  a few  paces.  When  disturbed,
they  fly  off*  to  some  place  where  withered  leaves. are  seen.  They  have
only  a few  weak  notes,  which  do  not  deserve  the  name  of  song.  Their
industry,  however,  atones  for  this  defect, . as  they  are  seen  continually

M


178


WORM-EATING  WARBLER.


moving  about,  rustling  among  the  leaves,  and  scarcely  ever  removing
from  one  situation  to  another  until  after  they  have  made  a full  inspection
of  the  part  in  which  they  have  been  employed.

This  species  reaches  the  Central  Atlantic  Districts  in  the  middle  of
May,  and  breeds  there,  as  well  as  farther  northward.  I have  found  them
more  numerous  in  the  Jerseys  than  in  any  other  portion  of  the  Union.
In  Kentucky  and  Ohio  I have  seen  only  a few  of  them ; nor  have  I ever
found  their  nests  in  either  of  these  States.

The  plant  on  which  you  see  a pair  of  Worm-eating  Warblers  is  well
known  throughout  the  United  States  by  the  name  of  Poke-berry.  It  grows
in  every  situation,  from  the  tops  of  the  most  arid  mountain-ridges  to  the
lowest  and  richest  valleys ; and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  follow  a fence
for  a hundred  yards  without  seeing  some  of  it.  Its  berries  are  food
for  numerous  species  of  our  birds,  and  produce  a beautiful  dark
crimson  juice,  which  is  used  instead  of  red  ink  by  some  of  the  coun-
try people,  although  it  does  not  retain  its  original  colour  for  many
days.  This  plant  grows  to  the  height  of  four  or  six  feet,  and  is  eaten
when  it  first  shoots  from  the  ground  as  a substitute  for  asparagus,  quan-
tities of  it  being  not  unfrequently  exposed  in  the  markets.  The  juice  of
the  berries  is  taken  in  cases  of  ague  and  continued  fever,  but  requires  to
be  used  with  judgment,  as  too  large  a doze  proves  deleterious.

Sylvia  vermivora,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  544 — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Svnops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  86.

Worm-Eating  Warbler,  Sylvia  vermivora,  IFils.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  74.
vol.  xxiv.  fig.  4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  longish,  nearly  straight,  rather  strong,  elongated-conical,  as  deep
as  broad  at  the  base,  with  sharp,  nearly  straight  edges.  Nostrils  basal,
oval,  half  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large,  neck  short.
Body  short  and  full.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather  slender;  tarsus
compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  long  scutella,  acute  behind,
longer  than  the  middle  toe ; toes  scutellate  above,  free ; claws  arched,
slender,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  con-
siderably curved,  the  second  quill  longest,  the  first  little  shorter.  Tail
rather  short,  a little  rounded,  of  twelve  rather  narrow,  obtuse  feathers.


WORM-EATING  WARBLER.


179


Bill  blackish-brown  above,  greenish-grey  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet
flesh-colour.  General  colour  of  the  upper  parts  deep  green,  tinged  with
brown.  Head  and  lower  parts  light  brownish-yellow,  the  former  with
four  longitudinal  black  bands,  of  which  one  on  each  side  proceeds  from
the  middle  of  the  upper  mandible,  the  other  from  the  inferior  angle  of  its
base.  The  lower  part  of  the  neck  anteriorly,  and  the  fore  part  of  the
breast  are  more  yellow  than  the  rest  of  the  under  parts ; the  abdomen
and  under  tail-coverts  nearly  white.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  8^ ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  f , middle  t6e  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXIV.  Fig.  2.

The  female  hardly  differs  from  the  male  in  external  appearance.


The  American  Poke- weed.

Phytolacca  decandra,  IVilld.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  i.  p.  322.  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  324.

— Decandria  Decagynia,  Linn.  Atriplices,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  elliptico-lanceolate  leaves,  and  de-
candrous flowers,  the  other  species  differing  in  the  number  of  stamina
and  one  of  them  being  dioecious.  The  berries,  which  are  nearly  globu-
lar, are  disposed  in  an  elongated,  pendulous  raceme,  and  are  of  a purplish-
black  colour.  The  flowers  are  white,  their  peduncles,  partial  and  gene-
ral, of  a bright  carmine-purple  colour.


( 180  )


CHILDREN’S  WARBLER.

Sylvia  Childuenii.

PLATE  XXXV.  Male  AND  Female.

This  little  bird  so  much  resembles  the  young  of  that  called,  I know
not  why,  the  Blue-eyed  Yellow  Warbler,  that  I was  at  first  inclined  to
think  it  the  same ; but,  recollecting  that  the  latter  acquires  the  full  co-
louring of  its  plumage,  in  both  sexes,  before  the  return  of  spring,  and
finding  some  material  differences  in  their  habits,  I have  not  hesitated  in
presenting  it  to  you,  kind  reader,  not  only  as  a new  species,  but  as  one
extremely  rare  in  the  United  States.

I shot  two  of  these  birds  in  May  1821,  near  the  town  of  Jackson,  in
the  State  of  Louisiana.  They  were  sitting  amongst  the  stalks  of  the
plant,  on  which  they  are  represented.  Their  wings  were  constantly
drooping  by  the  sides  of  their  body,  their  tail  spread  out  like  a fan,  and
they  uttered  a low  tweet  note,  which  was  very  soft  and  sweet.  They  now
and  then  chased  small  insects  on  the  wing,  but  more  commonly  searched
for  them  amongst  the  leaves  and  blossoms  of  the  plants  on  which  they
were.  After  a few  minutes,  I discovered  their  nest,  which  contained  five
young  ones  nearly  fledged.  It  was  attached  by  the  sides  to  two  twigs  of
the  plant,  and  was  formed  of  the  dried  bark  of  the  same  plant,  mixed
with  skins  of  caterpillars  and  some  silky  substances.  The  lining  consist-
=ed  of  goat’s  or  deer  hair,  I think  the  former,  as  there  wern  some  tame
goats  in  an  adjoining  pasture.  I shot  both  the  parents,  and  took  the
young  under  my  care,  but  they  would  not  receive  any  food,  and  died  to-
wards the  end  of  the  second  day  after  their  removal.  I have  never  seen
another  of  these  birds  since.

The  scarcity  of  this  species  in  the  United  States  putting  me  in  mind
of  that  of  true  friendship  among  men,  I have  named  it  after  my  most  es-
teemed friend,  J.  G.  Children,  Esq.  of  the  British  Museum,  as  a tri-
bute of  sincere  gratitude  for  the  unremitted  kindness  which  he  has  shewn
me.

The  plant  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  Wild  Spanish  Coffee,  It
grows  very  abundantly  in  almost  every  field  in  the  Uplands  of  Lower
Louisiana.  The  smell  of  its  flowers,  as  well  as  of  its  leaves,  is  extremely
disagreeable,  if  not  nauseous.


CHILDREN’S  WARBLER.


181


Children’s  Warbler,  Sylvia  Childrenii.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXV. ‘Fig.  1.

Bill  longish,  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  the  edges  sharp,  the
gap  line  slightly  deflected  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptic^,
half  closed  by  a membrane.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  ra-
ther slender,  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender;  tarsus  longer  than  the
middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  by  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long ;
toes  scutellate  above,  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size ; claws'  slender,
compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
first  quill  longest.  Tail  shortish,  when  closed  nearly  even.  A few  short
.bristles  at  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible.

Bill  brown,  lighter  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  flesh-coloured.
The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  yellowish-green,  tinged  with
brown.  Forehead,  sides  of  the  head,  supra-ocular  region,  and  under
parts  generally  deep  yellow.  Quills  dusky  on  the  inner  webs.  Tail
feathers  dusky  on  the  outer  webs,  yellow  on  the  inner,  excepting  the  two
middle,  which  are  dusky.

Length  4|  inches,  extent  of  wings  7 J ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap


Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXV.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  considerably  smaller.  The  distribution  of  its  colour-
ing is  the  same,  but  the  tints  are  much  lighter,  the  upper  parts  being
pale  yellowish-green  tinged  with  grey  ; the  sides  of  the  head,  supra-ocular
and  frontal  spaces  pale  yellowish-grey,  and  the  under  parts  of  a tint  ap-
proaching to  lemon-yellow.


The  Wild  Spanish  Coffee.

Cassia  occidentalis,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  518.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  305. — Decandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Leguminosa:,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  ovato-lanceolate,  quinquejugate
leaves,  scabrous  at  the  margin,  the  outer  larger  ; its  many-flowered  axil-
lar  and  somewhat  panicled  peduncles ; and  its  linear,  falciform  legumes.
It  flowers  through  the  summer,  and  grows  chiefly  in  old  fields,  in  the
Southern  States.


( 182  )


MEADVILLE.

The  incidents  that  occur  in  the  life  of  a student  of  nature,  are  not  all
of  the  agreeable  kind,  in  proof  of  which,  I shall  present  you,  good  reader,
with  an  extract  from  one  of  my  journals.

My  money  was  one  day  stolen  from  me  by  a person,  who  perhaps
imagined  that  to  a naturalist  it  was  of  little  importance.  This  happened
on  the  shores  of  Upper  Canada.  The  affair  was  as  unexpected  as  it  well
could  be,  and  as  adroitly  managed  as  if  it  had  been  planned  and  executed  in
Cheapside.  To  have  repined  when  the  thing  could  not  be  helped,  would
certes  not  have  been  acting  manfully.  I therefore  told  my  companion
to  keep  a good  heart,  for  I felt  satisfied  that  Providence  had  some  re-
lief in  store  for  us.  The  whole  amount  of  cash  left  with  two  individuals
fifteen  hundred  miles  from  home,  was  just  seven  dollars  and  a-half.  Our
passage  across  the  lake  had  fortunately  been  paid  for.  We  embarked
and  soon  got  to  the  entrance  of  Presque  Isle  Harbour,  but  could  not
pass  the  bar,  on  account  of  a violent  gale  which  came  on  as  we  approached
it.  The  anchor  was  dropped,  and  we  remained  on  board  during  the
night,  feeling  at  times  very  disagreeable,  under  the  idea  of  having  taken
so  little  care  of  our  money.  How  long  we  might  have  remained  at
anchor  I cannot  tell,  had  not  that  Providence,  on  whom  I have  never
ceased  to  rely,  come  to  our  aid.  Through  some  means  to  me  quite  un-
known, Captain  Judd  of  the  United  States  Navy,  then  probably  com-
mandant at  Presque  Isle,  sent  a gig  with  six  men  to  our  relief.  It  was
on  the  29th  of  August  1824,  and  never  shall  I forget  that  morning.  My
drawings  were  put  into  the  boat  with  the  greatest  care.  W e shifted  into
it,  and  seated  ourselves  according  to  directions  politely  given  us.  Our
brave  fellows  pulled  hard,  and  every  moment  brought  us  nearer  to  the
American  shore.  I leaped  upon  it  with  elated  heart.  My  drawings
were  safely  landed,  and  for  any  thing  else  I cared  little  at  the  moment.
I searched  in  vain  for  the  officer  of  our  navy,  to  whom  I still  feel  grate-
ful, and  gave  one  of  our  dollars  to  the  sailors  to  drink  the  ‘‘  freedom  of  the
waters  after  which  we  betook  ourselves  to  a humble  inn  to  procure
bread  and  milk,  and  consider  how  we  were  to  proceed.

Our  plans  were  soon  settled,  for  to  proceed  was  decidedly  the  best.
Our  luggage  was  rather  heavy,  so  we  hired  a cart  to  take  it  to  Mead-
ville,  for  which  we  offered  five  dollars.  This  sum  was  accepted,  and  we


MEADVILLE.


183


set  off.  The  country  through  which  we  passed  might  have  proved  fa-
vourable to  our  pursuits,  had  it  not  rained  nearly  the  whole  day.  At
night  we  alighted  and  put  up  at  a house  belonging  to  our  conductor’s
father.  It  was  Sunday  night.  The  good  folks  had  not  yet  returned
from  a distant  meeting-house,  the  grandmother  of  our  driver  being  the
only  individual  about  the  premises.  We  found  her  a cheerful  dame,
who  bestirred  herself  as  actively  as  age  would  permit,  got  up  a blazing
fire  to  dry  our  wet  cloths,  and  put  as  much  bread  and  milk  on  the  table
as  might  have  sufficed  for  several  besides  ourselves.

Being  fatigued  by  the  jolting  of  the  cart,  we  asked  for  a place  in
which  to  rest,  and  were  shewn  into  a room  in  which  were  several  beds.
We  told  the  good  woman  that  I should  paint  her  portrait  next  morning
for  the  sake  of  her  children.  My  companion  and  myself  were  soon  in
bed,  and  soon  asleep,  in  which  state  we  should  probably  have  remained
till  morning,  had  we  not  been  awakened  by  a light,  which  we  found  to
be  carried  by  three  young  damsels,  who  having  observed  where  we  lay,
blew  it  out,  and  got  into  a bed  opposite  ours.  As  we  had  not  spoken,  it
is  probable  the  girls  supposed  us  sound  asleep,  and  we  heard  them  say
how  delighted  they  would  be  to  have  their  portraits  taken,  as  well  as
that  of  their  grandmother.  My  heart  silently  met  their  desire,  and  we
fell  asleep,  without  farther  disturbance.  In  our  back  woods  it  is  fre-
quently the  case  that  one  room  suffices  for  all  the  sleepers  of  a family.

Day  dawned,  and  as  we  were  dressing  we  discovered  that  we  were
alone  in  the  apartment,  the  good  country  girls  having  dressed  in  silence
and  left  us  before  we  had  awakened.  We  joined  the  family  and  were
kindly  greeted.  No  sooner  had  I made  known  my  intentions  as  to  the
portraits,  than  the  young  folks  disappeared  and  soon  after  returned  at-
tired in  their  Sunday  clothes.  The  black  chalk  was  at  work  in  a few
minutes,  to  their  great  delight,  and  as  the  fumes  of  the  breakfast  that
was  meantime  preparing  reached  my  sensitive  nose,  I worked  with  re-
doubled ardour.  The  sketches  were  soon  finished,  and  soon  too  was  the
breakfast  over.  I played  a few  airs  on  my  flageolet,  while  our  guide  was
putting  the  horses  to  the  cart,  and  by  ten  o’clock  we  were  once  more  un-
der way  towards  Meadville.  Never  shall  I forget  Maxon  Randell  and
his  hospitable  family.  My  companion  was  as  pleased  as  myself,  and  as
the  weather  was  now  beautiful,  we  enjoyed  our  journey  with  all  that  hap-
py thoughtlessness  best  suited  to  our  character.  The  country  now  be-
came covered  with  heavy  timber,  principally  evergreens,  the  Pines  and


184


MEADVILLE.


. the  Cucumber  trees  loaded  with  brilliant  fruits,  and  the  Spruces  throwing
a shade  over  the  land  in  good  keeping  for  a mellow  picture.  The  late-
ness of  the  crops  was  the  only  disagreeable  circumstance  that  struck  us ;
hay  was  yet  standing,  probably,  however,  a second  crop ; the  peaches
' were  quite  small  and  green,  and  a few  persons  here  and  there,  as  we  pas-
sed the  different  farms,  were  reaping  oats.  At  length  we  came  in  sight
of  French  Creek,  and  soon  after  reached  Meadville.  Here  we  paid  the
five  dollars  promised  to  our  conductor,  who  instantly  faced  about,  and
applying  the  whip  to  his  nags,  bade  us  adieu,  and  set  off.

We  had  now  only  a hundred  and  fifty  cents.  No  time  was  to  be  lost.
We  put  our  baggage  and  ourselves  under  the  roof  of  a tavern-keeper
known  by  the  name  of  J.  E.  Smith,  at  the  sign  of  the  Traveller's  Best,  and
soon  after  took  a walk  to  survey  the  little  village  that  was  to  be  laid  un-
der contribution  for  our  further  support.  Its  appearance  was  rather
dull ; but,  thanks  to  God,  I have  never  despaired  while  rambling  thus
for  the  sole  purpose  of  admiring  his  grand  and  beautiful  works.  I had
opened  the  case  that  contained  my  drawings,  and  putting  my  portfolio
under  my  arm,  and  a few  good  credentials  in  my  pocket,  walked  up
Main  Street,  looking  to  the  right  and  left,  examining  the  different  heads
which  occurred,  until  I fixed  my  eyes  on  a gentleman  in  a store  who
looked  as  if  he  might  want  a sketch.  I begged  him  to  allow  me  to  sit
down.  This  granted,  I remained  purposely  silent  until  he  very  soon
asked  me  what  was  “ in  that  portfolio!’’'  These  three  words  sounded
well,  and  without  waiting  another  instant,  I opened  it  to  his  view.  This
was  a Hollander,  who  complimented  me  much  on  the  execution  of  the
drawings  of  birds  and  flowers  in  my  portfolio.  Shewing  him  a sketch  of
the  best  friend  I have  in  the  world  at  present,  I asked  him  if  he  would
like  one  in  the  same  style  of  himself.  He  not  only  answered  in  the  af-
firmative, but  assured  me  that  he  would  exert  himself  in  procuring  as
many  more  customers  as  he  could.  I thanked  him,  be  assured,  kind
reader ; and  having  fixed  upon  the  next  morning  for  drawing  the  sketch,

I returned  to  the  Traveller’’ s Rest^  with  a hope  that  to-morrow  might
prove  propitious.  Supper  was  ready,  and  as  in  America  we  have  gene-
rally but  one  sort  of  Table  dliote^  we  sat  down,  when,  every  individual
looking  upon  me  as  a Missionary  priest,  on  account  of  my  hair,  which  in
those  days  flowed  loosely  on  my  shoulders,  I was  asked  to  say  grace,
wdiich  I did  with  a fervent  spirit.

Daylight  returned.  I visited  the  groves  and  woods  around,  with  my


MEADVILLE.


185


companion^  returned,  breakfasted,  and  went  to  the  store,  where,  notwith-
standing my  ardent  desire  to  begin  my  task,  it  was  ten  o’clock  before  the
sitter  was  ready.  But,  reader,  allow  me  to  describe  the  artisfs  room.
See  me  ascending  a crazy  flight  of  steps,  from  the  back  part  of  a store-room
into  a large  garret  extending  over  the  store  and  counting  room,  and
mark  me  looking  round  to  see  how  the  light  could  be  stopped  from  ob-
truding on  me  through  no  less  than  four  windows  facing  each  other  at
right' angles.  Then  follow  me  scrutinizing  the  corners,  and  finding  in
one  a cat  nursing  her  young,  among  a heap  of  rags  intended  for  the
paper-mill.  Two  hogsheads  filled  with  oats,  a parcel  of  Dutch  toys  care-
lessly thrown  on  the  floor,  a large  drum  and  a bassoon  in  another  part,
fur  caps  hanging  along  the  wall,  and  the  portable  bed  of  the  merchant’s
clerk  swinging  like  a hammock  near  the  centre,  together  with  some  rolls
of  sole  leather,  made  up  the  picture.  I saw  all  this  at  a glance,  and
closing  the  extra  windows  with  blankets,  I soon  procured  a,  painter'' s light.

A young  gentleman  sat,  to  try  my  skill.  I finished  his  phiz,  which
was  approved  of.  The  merchant  then  took  the  chair,  and  I had  the  good
fortune  to  please  him  also.  The  room  became  crowded  with  the  gentry
of  the  village.  Some  laughed,  while  others  expressed  their  wonder  ; but
my  work  went  on  notwithstanding  the  observations  that  were  made.  My
sitter  invited  me  to  spend  the  evening  with  him,  which  I did,  and  joined
him  in  some  music  on  the  flute  and  violin.  I returned  to  my  companion
.with  great  pleasure;  and  you  may  judge  how  much  that  pleasure  was  in-
creased, when  I found  that  he  also  had  made  two  sketches.  Having
written  a page  or  two  of  our  journals,  we  retired  to  rest.

The  following  day  was  spent  much  in  the  same  manner.  I felt  high-
ly gratified  that  from  under  my  grey  coat  my  talents  had  made  their  way
and  I was  pleased  to  discover  that  industry  and  moderate  abilities  prove
at  least  as  valuable  as  first-rate  talents  without  the  former  of  these  ({ua,-
lities.  We  left  Meadville  on  foot,  having  forwarded  our  baggage  by
waggon.  Our  hearts  were  light,  our  pockets  replenished,  and  we  walked
in  two  days  to  Pittsburg,  as  happy  as  circumstances  permitted  us  to  be.


( 186  )


THE  STANLEY  HAWK.

Falco  Stan  leu.

PLATE  XXXVI.  Male  AND  Female.

Before  entenng  upon  the  description  of  this  interesting  species,  al-
low me  to  submit  to  your  consideration  a few  observations  respecting  the
flight  of  the  different  species  of  Hawks,  which  I have  had  occasion  to  exa-
mine both  in  America  and  in  Europe.

All  such  species  as  are  usually  referred  to  the  subgenus  Astur,  or  are
most  nearly  allied  to  it,  and  which  consequently  have  shorter  wings,  as
well  as  longer  tails,  than  the  true  Falcons,  sail  less  frequently  and  less
continuously  in  circles,  and  embrace  a smaller  space  in  their  gyrations,
than  the  latter  birds.  Their  general  flight  is  low,  sometimes  only  a few
feet  above  the  ground,  and  their  velocity  surpasses  that  of  the  true  Fal-
cons on  such  occasions.  Their  body  is  more  compressed  and  elongated,
and  appears  to  be  propelled  through  the  air  chiefly  by  the  action  of  their
long  tail.  None  of  these  birds  ever  glide  down  on  their  prey  from  a great
height,  with  closed  wings,  and  the  rustling  noise  produced  by  Eagles  or
other  nobler  tribes  of  the  genus.  The  types  of  this  group  I would  con-
sider to  be  the  Goshawk  {Falco  palumhai'ius)  and  the  Stanley  Hawk.
For  the  type  of  the  True  Falcons,  no  species  could  answer  better  than  the
Great-footed  Hawk  {Falco  peregrinus).

A distinct  and  intermediate  kind  of  flight  belongs  to  such  Hawks  as
have  both  a long  tail  and  long  wings.  These  species  are  able  to  dive
through  the  air,  either  when  in  pursuit  of  their  prey,  or  for  amusement
or  exercise,  although  with  less  firmness  of  action  than  the  True  Falcons ;
and  they  fly  over  the  earth  with  less  velocity  than  the  Asturs,  their  motions
then  consisting  of  easy  flappings,  or  loose  protracted  sailings.  The  Hen-
harrier {Falco  cyaneus).,  the  Forked-tailed  Hawk  {Falco  Jurcatus)^  and
the  White- tailed  Hawk  [Falco  dispar'),  are  of  this  tribe.

It  may  be  remarked  here,  that  most  species  of  Shrikes  bear  a great  re-
semblance in  their  flight  to  the  Asturs.  But,  let  us  return  to  the  Stan-
ley Hawk.

On  the  5th  of  December  1809,  I made  a drawing  of  the  male  of  this
species,  in  its  matured  state  of  colouring,  at  Louisville,  in  Kentucky,


STANLEY  HAWK.


187


where  I then  resided.  That  drawing  is  now  before  me,  and  the  bird  which
it  represents  is  to  this  day  undescribed.  The  figure  would  have  been  en-
graved and  presented  to  your  consideration,  kind  reader,  had  it  not  been
as  stiff,  and  as  little  indicative  of  life,  as  those  usually  seen  in  books  on
Natural  History.  The  expectation  of  being  able  to  procure  another  in-
dividual in  precisely  the  same  state  of  plumage,  has,  together  with  the
above  circumstance,  induced  me  to  content  myself,  for  the  present,  with
offering  to  your  inspection  a male,  probably  two  years  old,  and  an  adult
female.  I have  killed  many  of  the  latter  in  the  course  of  my  rambles,  but
I had  not  the  good  fortune  to  obtain  an  old  male,  although  I have  seen
several  on  wing,  and  once  wounded  one  whilst  perched  near  its  nest.  In
this  article,  I shall  give  you  a full  description  of  the  three  different  figures,
as  they  shew  considerable  diversity,  especially  in  the  colour  of  the  eyes,
the  adult  bird  having  the  iris  of  a reddish-orange  tint,  while  the  young
bird  has  it  of  a bright  yellow.  But  as  I am  desirous  of  adhering  to
my  plan,  I shall  speak  of  its  habits  before  I trouble  you  with  its  de-
scription, remarking  in  the  mean  time,  that  I have  honoured  the  species
with  the  name  of  the  President  of  the  Linnean  Society  of  London,  the
Right  Honourable  Lord  Stanley,  a nobleman  whose  continued  kindness
to  me  I am  happy  in  acknowledging.

The  flight  of  the  Stanley  Hawk  is  rapid,  protracted,  and  even.  It  is
performed  at  a short  height  above  the  ground  or  through  the  forest.  It
passes  along  in  a silent  gliding  manner,  with  a swiftness  even  superior  to
that  of  the  Wild  Pigeon  (Columba  migratoria),  seldom  deviating  from  a
straight-forward  course,  unless  to  seize  and  secure  its  prey.  Now  and
then,  but  seldom  unless  after  being  shot  at,  it  mounts  in  the  air  in  circles,
of  which  it  describes  five  or  six  in  a hurried  manner,  and  again  plunging
downwards,  continues  its  journey  as  before.

The  daring  exploits  performed  by  the  Stanley  Hawk,  which  have  tak-
en place  in  my  presence,  are  very  numerous,  and  I shall  relate  one  or  two
of  them.  This  marauder  frequently  attacks  birds  far  superior  to  itself  in
weight,  and  sometimes  possessed  of  courage  equal  to  its  own.  As  I was
one  morning  observing  the  motions  of  some  Parakeets  near  Bayou  Sara,
in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  in  the  month  of  November,  I heard  a Cock  crow-
ing not  far  from  me,  and  in  sight  of  a farm-house.  The  Stanley  Hawk
the  next  moment  flew  past  me,  and  so  close  that  I might  have  touched 'it
with  the  barrel  of  my  gun,  had  I been  prepared.  Its  wings  struck  with
extraordinary  rapidity,  and  its  tail  appeared  as  if  closed.  Not  more  than
a few  seconds  elapsed  before  I heard  the  cackling  of  the  Hens,  and  the


188


STANLEY  HAWK.


war-cry  of  the  Cock,  and  at  the  same  time  observed  the  Hawk  rising,  as  if
without  effort,  a few  yards  in  the  air,  and  again  falling  towards  the  ground
with  the  rapidity  of  lightning.  I proceeded  to  the  spot,  and  found  the
Hawk  grappled  to  the  body  of  the  Cock,  both  tumbling  over  and  over,  and
paying  no  attention  to  me  as  I approached.  Desirous  of  seeing  the  result,
.1  remained  still,  until  perceiving  that  the  Hawk  had  given  a fatal  squeeze
to  the  brave  Cock,  I ran  to  secure  the  former  ; but  the  marauder  had  kept
a hawk’s  eye  upon  me,  and,  disengaging  himself,  rose  in  the  air  in  full
confidence.  The  next  moment  I pulled  a trigger,  and  he  fell  dead  to  the
ground.  It  proved  a young  male,  such  as  you  see,  kind  reader,  repre-
sented in  the  Plate,  pursuing  a lovely  Blue-bird  nearly  exhausted.  The
Cock  was  also  dead ; its  breast  was  torn,  and  its  neck  pierced  in  several
places  by  the  sharp  claws  of  the  Hawk.

Some  years  afterwards,  not  far  from  the  amed  Falls  of  Niagara,  in  the
month  of  June,  one  of  these  Hawks,  which  on  being  examined  proved  to
be  a female,  attacked  a brood  of  young  chickens,  yet  under  the  care  of
their  mother.  It  had  just  struck  one  of  the  chickens,  and  was  on  the
eve  of  carrying  it  off  in  its  claws,  when  the  hen,  having  perceived  the
murderous  deed,  flew  against  the  Hawk  with  such  force  as  to  throw  it
fairly  on  its  back,  when  the  intrepid  mother  so  effectively  assailed  the  mis-
creant with  feet  and  bill,  as  to  enable  me,  on  running  up,  to  secure  the  latter.

This  species  frequently  kills  and  eats  the  bird  commonly  called  the
Pheasant  {Tetrao  Umbellus).  Partridges  and  young  hares  are  also  fa-
vourite dainties.  It  also  follows  the  Wild  Pigeons  in  their  migrations,
and  always  causes  fear  and  confusion  in  their  ranks.

It  breeds  in  the  mountainous  districts  of  the  Middle  and  Northern
States,  to  which  it  returns  early  in  spring  from  the  Southern  States,  where
it  spends  the  winter  in  considerable  numbers,  and  is  known  by  the  name
of  the  Great  Pigeon  Hawk.  So  rapidly  must  they  travel  from  one  extre-
mity of  the  country  to  another,  to  reach  the  places  to  which  they  resort  for
the  purpose  of  breeding,  that  I have  seen  them  copulate  in  Louisiana,  where
they  never  breed,  in  the  month  of  February,  and  have  found  their  nest
with  eggs  in  which  the  chick  was  far  advanced,  in  the  State  of  Connecti-
cut, on  the  20th  of  April.

The  nest  is  usually  placed  in  the  forks  of  the  branch  of  an  Oak-tree
towards  its  extremity.  In  its  general  appearance  it  resembles  that  of  the
Common  Crow,  for  which  I have  several  times  mistaken  it.  It  is  com-
posed externally  of  numerous  crooked  sticks,  and  has  a slight  lining  of
grasses  and  a few  feathers.  The  eggs  are  three  or  four,  almost  globular.


STANLEY  HAWK.


189


large  for  the  size  of  the  bird,  of  a dullish- white  colour,  strongly  granulat-
ed, and  consequently  rough  to  the  touch.  It  was  on  discovering  one  of
these  nests  that  I wounded  the  second  adult  male  which  I have  seen,  but
which  never  returned  to  its  nest,  on  which  I afterwards  shot  the  female  re-
presented in  the  Plate,  in  the  act  of  pouncing.  I have  several  times  found
other  nests  of  birds  of  this  species,  but  the  owners  were  not  in  full  plumage,
and  their  eyes  had  not  obtained  the  rich  orange  colouring  of  the  adult  birds.

Those  which  I have  observed  near  the  Falls  of  Niagara  were  generally
engaged  in  pursuing  Red- winged  Starlings,  over  the  marshes  of  the  neigh-
bourhood. When  this  Hawk  is  angry,  it  raises  the  feathers  of  the  upper
part  of  the  head,  so  as  to  make  them  appear  partially  tufted.  The  cry
at  this  time  may  be  represented  by  the  syllable  hee,  kee,  Icee^  repeated
eight  or  ten  times  in  rapid  succession,  and  much  resembling  that  of  the
Pigeon  Hawk  {Falco  columbarius)  or  the  European  Kestril.  The  young
of  this. species  bear  no  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Goshawk,  of  which  a
figure  will  be  given  in  the  same  Plate  with  the  adult  of  the  Stanley  Hawk^

Stanley  Hawk,  Falco  Stanleit.

Adult  Male.

Bill  short,  robust,  cerate;  upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal ; outline
curved  from  the  base,  the  back  rounded,  the  sides  sloping  at  the  base,
convex  toward  the  end,  the  margin  sharp,  overlapping,  having  an  obtuse
lobe,  the  tip  trigonal,  very  acute,  and  curved  downwards;  lower  mandi-
ble broadly  rounded  on  the  back,  convex  on  the  sides,  acute  in  the  edges,
somewhat  abrupt  at  the  end.  Nostrils  oval,  oblique,  in  the  fore-part  of
the  cere.  Head  rather  large,  flat  above  ; eyebrow  acute  and  projecting.
Neck  strong.  Body  rather  elongated.  Legs  long  ; tarsi  rather  long,
and  with  the  toes  somewhat  slender,  the  former  scutellate  anteriorly,  the
latter  scutellate  above,  papillar  and  tuberculate  beneath ; claws  long,
curved,  roundish,  rather  slender,  and  extremely  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated,  glossy.  Space  between  the  beak  and
eye  sparsely  covered  with  bristly  feathers.  Tibial  feathers  rather  com-
pact, and  not  much  elongated.  Wings  long:  fifth  quill  longest,  sixth
and  fourth  nearly  equal,  first  very  short.  Tail  long,  straight,  a little
rounded,  of  twelve  rather  broad  feathers.

Bill  light  blue  at  the  base,  black  at  the  tip.  Cere  greenish-yellow.
Iris  reddish-orange.  Tarsus  and  toes  bright  yellow ; claws  brownish-


190


STANLEY  HAWK.


black.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  greyish-brown.
Quills  barred  with  brownish-black.  Tail  with  four  bars  of  brownish-
black,  the  terminal  one  broader ; the  tips  of  all  the  feathers  white.  The
general  colour  of  the  lower  parts  is  brownish- white.  Sides  of  the  head
and  the  throat  longitudinally  lined  with  dark  brown;  fore-neck  and
breast  marked  with  arrow-shaped  spots  of  brownish-red,  the  shafts  black-
ish. Legs  similarly  marked,  the  spots  smaller,  and  transversely  elon-
gated. Abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts  nearly  free  of  spots.

Length  20  inches,  extent  of  wings  36;  beak  along  the  back  1|,
along  the  gap  from  the  tip  of  the  lower  mandible  1 1 ; tarsus  2f , middle
toe  2J.  Wings  inches  shorter  than  the  tail.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXVI.  Fig.  2.

Bill  brownish-black  above ; the  base  of  the  upper  mandible,  and  the
greater  part  of  the  lower,  light  blue.  Cere  greenish.  Iris  yellow.  Feet
greenish-yellow  ; claws  brownish-black.  Head  and  neck  brownish- white,
each  feather  with  a large  reddish-brown  spot  near  the  end.  General
colour  of  the  upper  parts  chocolate-brown ; quills  and  tail  wood-brown,
barred  as  in  the  male.  Under  parts  brownish-white.  Throat  and  sides
of  the  head  marked  as  in  the  male ; breast  with  guttiform  spots  of  deep
brown ; legs  with  smaller,  somewhat  arrow-shaped  spots  of  reddish-
brown.  Abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts  whitish.

Length  21 J inches,  extent  of  wings  38;  bill  along  the  back  1|,
along  the  gap  tarsus  3,  middle  toe  2|.  Wings  5 inches  shorter
than  the  tail.

Young  Male.  Plate  XXXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  and  feet  coloured  nearly  as  in  the  adult.  Iris  yellow,  as  in  the
female.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  umber ; several  of
the  scapulars,  wing-coverts  and  upper  tail-coverts  with  a large  spot  of
white.  Quills  and  tail-feathers  barred  as  in  the  adult,  the  last  bar  on
the  tail  much  narrower.  Under  parts  light  reddish-brown.  Sides  of  the
head,  and  the  neck  longitudinally  streaked  with  deep  brown  ; the  mark-
ings on  the  breast  and  legs  also  longitudinal.

Length  19f,  extent  of  wings  34;  beak  1| ; wings  5|  inches  shorter
than  the  tail.

The  bird  represented  as  about  to  be  seized  by  the  male  is  the  Blue-
bird, Saocicola  Sialis  of  Bonaparte,  Sylvia  Sialis  of  other  authors.


( 191  )


THE  GOLDEN-WINGED  WOODPECKER.

Picus  AUSATUS,  Linn.

PLATE  XXXVII.  Male  and  Female.

It  is  generally  agreeable  to  be  in  the  company  of  individuals  who
are  naturally  animated  and  pleasant.  For  this  reason,  nothing  can  be
more  gratifying  than  the  society  of  Woodpeckers  in  the  forests.  To
prove  this  to  you,  kind  reader,  I shall  give  you  a full  account  of  the
habits  of  the  Golden-winged  Woodpecker.

This  species,  which  is  usually  called  Pique-hois  jaune  by  the  French
settlers  in  Louisiana,  and  receives  the  name  of  High-holder,  Yucher^  and
Flicker  in  other  parts  of  the  Union,  being  seldom  or  never  graced  with
the  epithet  Gulden-winged,  employed  by  naturalists,  is  one  of  the  most
lively  of  our  birds,  and  is  found  over  the  whole  of  the  United  States.

No  sooner  has  spring  called  them  to  the  pleasant  duty  of  making
love,  as  it  is  called,  than  their  voice,  which,  by  the  way,  is  not  at  all  dis-
agreeable to  the  ear  of  man,  is  heard  from  the  tops  of  high  decayed
trees,  proclaiming  with  delight  the  opening  of  the  welcome  season.  Their
note  at  this  period  is  merriment  itself,  as  it  imitates  a prolonged  and  jo-
vial laugh,  heard  at  a considerable  distance.  Several  males  pursue  a
female,  reach  her,  and,  to  prove  the  force  and  truth  of  their  love,  bow
their  heads,  spread  their  tail,  and  move  sidewise,  backwards  and  for-
wards, performing  such  antics,  as  might  induce  any  one  witnessing  them,
if  not  of  a most  morose  temper,  to  join  his  laugh  to  theirs.  The  female
flies  to  another  tree,  where  she  is  closely  followed  by  one,  two,  or  even
half  a dozen  of  these  gay  suitors,  and  where  again  the  same  ceremonies
are  gone  through.  No  fightings  occur,  no  jealousies  seem  to  exist  among
these  beaux,  until  a marked  preference  is  shewn  to  some  individual,  when
the  rejected  proceed  in  search  of  another  female.  In  this  manner  all  the
Golden- winged  Woodpeckers  are  soon  happily  mated.  Each  pair  imme-
diately proceed  to  excavate  the  trunk  of  a tree,  and  finish  a hole  in  it
sufficient  to  contain  themselves  and  their  young.  They  both  work  with
great  industry  and  apparent  pleasure.  Should  the  male,  for  instance,  be
employed,  the  female  is  close  to  him,  and  congratulates  him  on  the  re-
moval of  every  chip  which  his  bill  sends  through  the  air.  While  he  rests.


192


GOLDEN-WINGED  WOODPECKER.


he  appears  to  be  speaking  to  her  on  the  most  tender  subjects,  and  when
fatigued,  is  at  once  assisted  by  her.  In  this  manner,  by  the  alternate
exertions,  of  each,  the  hole  is  dug  and  finished.  They  caress  each  other
on  the  branches,  climb  about  and  around  the  tree  with  apparent  delight,
rattle  with  their  bill  against  the  tops  of  the  dead  branches,  chase  all  their
cousins  the  Red-heads,  defy  the  Purple  Grakles  to  enter  their  nest,  feed
plentifully  on  ants,  beetles  and  larvae,  cackling  at  intervals,  and  ere  two
weeks  have  elapsed,  the  female  lays  either  four  or  six  eggs,  the  whiteness
and  transparency  of  which  are  doubtless  the  delight  of  her  heart.  If  to
raise  a numerous  progeny  may  contribute  to  happiness,  these  Wood-
peckers are  in  this  respect  happy  enough,  for  they  have  two  broods  each
season.;  and  as  this  might  induce  you  to  imagine  Woodpeckers  extremely
abundant  in  America,  I may  at  once  tell  you  that  they  are  so.

Even  in  confinement,  the  Golden- winged  Woodpecker  never  suffers
its  naturally  lively  spirit  to  droop.  It  feeds  well,  and  by  way  of  amuse-
ment, will  continue  to  destroy  as  much  furniture  in  a day  as  can  well  be
mended  by  a different  kind  of  workman  in  two.  Therefore,  kind  reader,
do  not  any  longer  believe  that  Woodpeckers,  I mean  those  of  America,
are  such  stupid,  forlorn,  dejected  and  unprovided  for  beings,  as  they
have  hitherto  been  represented.  In  fact,  I know  not  one  of  the  seventeen
species  found  in  our  extensive  woods,  that  does  not  exhibit  quite  as  much
mirth  and  gaiety  as  the  present  bird.  They  are  serviceable  birds  in
many  points  of  view,  and  therefore  are  seldom  shot  at,  unless  by  idlers,
their  flesh,  moreover,  not  being  very  savoury.  They  have  ample  range,
and  wherever  they  alight,  there  is  to  be  found  the  food  to  which  they  at
all  times  give  decided  preference.

The  flight  of  this  species  is  strong  and  prolonged,  being  performed
in  a straighter  manner  than  that  of  any  other  of  our  Woodpeckers.  They
propel  themselves  by  numerous  beats  of  the  wings,  with  short  intervals
of  sailing,  during  which  they  scarcely  fall  from  the  horizontal.  Their
migrations,  although  partial,  as  many  remain  even  in  the  middle  districts
during  the  severest  winters,  are  performed  under  night,  as  is  known  by  their
note  and  the  whistling  of  their  wings,  which  are  heard  from  the  ground,
although  by  no  means  so  distinctly  as  when  they  fly  from  a tree  or  from
the  earth,  when  suddenly  alarmed.  When  passing  from  one  tree  to  ano-
ther on  wing,  they  also  fly  in  a straight  line,  until  within  a few  yards  of
the  spot  on  which  they  intend  to  alight,  when  they  suddenly  raise  them-
selves a few  feet,  and  fasten  themselves  to  the  bark  of  the  trunk  by  their


1


GOLDEN- WINGED  WOODPECKER.


193


claws  and  tail.  If  they  intend  to  settle  on  a branch,  which  they  as  fre-
quently do,  they  do  not  previously  rise ; but  in  either  case,  no  sooner  has
the  bird  alighted,  if  it  be  not  pursued  or  have  suspicions  of  any  object
about  it,  than  it  immediately  nods  its  head,  and  utters  its  well-known
note,  Flicker?"'  It  easily  moves  sidewise  on  a small  branch,  keeping
itself  as  erect  as  other  birds  usually  do ; but  with  equal  ease  does  it
climb  by  leaps  along  the  trunk  of  trees  or  their  branches,  descend,  and
move  sidewise  or  spirally,  keeping  at  all  times  its  head  upwards,  and  its
tail  pressed  against  the  bark  as  a support.

On  the  ground,  where  it  frequently  alights,  it  hops  with  great  ease.  This,
however,  it  does  merely  to  pick  up  a beetle,  a caterpillar,  a grain  of  corn
dropt  by  a squirrel  from  the  ear  in  the  fields,  or  to  enable  it  to  examine
the  dead  roots  of  trees,  or  the  side  of  a prostrate  log,  from  which  it  pro-
cures ants  and  other  small  insects.  It  is  also  fond  of  various  fruits  and
berries.  Apples,  grapes,  persimons  and  dogwood  berries  seem  quite
agreeable  to  it,  and  it  does  not  neglect  the  young  corn  of  the  farmer'^s
field.  Even  poke-berries  or  huckle  berries  answer  its  purpose  at  times,
and  during  winter  it  is  a frequenter  of  the  corn-cribs.

In  this  species,  as  in  a few  others,  there  is  a singular  arrangement  in
the  colouring  of  the  feathers  of  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  which  I con-
ceive it  necessary  for  me  to  state,  that  it  may  enable  persons  better  quali-
fied than  myself  to  decide  as  to  the  reasons  of  such  arrangement.  The
young  of  this  species  frequently  have  the  whole  upper  part  of  the  head
tinged  with  red,  which  at  the  approach  of  winter  disappears,  when  mere-
ly a circular  line  of  that  colour  is  to  be  observed  on  the  hind  part,  be-
coming of  a rich  silky  vermilion  tint.  The  Hairy,  Downy  and  Red-
cockaded  Woodpeckers  are  subject  to  the  same  extraordinary  changes,
which,  as  far  as  I know,  never  reappear  at  any  future  period  of  their
lives.  I was  at  first  of  opinion  that  this  change  appeared  only  on
the  head  of  the  male  birds,  but  on  dissection  I found  it  equally  affect-
ing both  sexes.  I am  induced  to  believe,  that,  in  consequence  of  this,
many  young  Woodpeckers  of  different  species  have  been  described  and
figured  as  forming  distinct  species  themselves.  I have  shot  dozens  of
young  Woodpeckers  in  this  peculiar  state  of  plumage,  which,  on  being
shewn  to  other  persons,  were  thought  by  them  to  be  of  different  species
from  what  the  birds  actually  were.  This  occurrence  is  the  more  worthy
of  notice,  as  it  is  exhibited  on  all  the  species  of  this  genus  on  the  heads
of  which,  when  in  full  plumage,  a very  narrow  line  exists.

N


194


GOLDEN-WINGED  WOODPECKER.


Raccoons  and  Black  Snakes  are  dangerous  enemies  to  this  bird.  The
former  frequently  put  one  of  their  fore  legs  into  the  hole  where  it  has
nestled  or  retired  to  rest,  and  if  the  hole  be  not  too  deep,  draw  out  the
eggs  and  suck  them,  and  frequently  by  the  same  means  secure  the  bird
itself.  The  Black  Snake  contents  itself  with  the  eggs  or  young.  Seve-
ral species  of  Hawks  attack  them  on  the  wing,  and  as  the  Woodpeckers,
generally  escape  by  making  for  a hole  in  the  nearest  tree,  it  is  pleasing  to
see  the  disappointment  of  the  Hawk,  when,  as  it  has  just  been  on  the  point
of  seizing  the  terrified  bird,  the  latter  dives,  as  it  were,  into  the  hole.
Should  the  Woodpecker  not  know  of  a hole  near  enough  to  afford  it  se-
curity, it  alights  on  a trunk,  and  moves  round  it  with  such  celerity  as
frequently  to  enable  it  to  elude  its  pursuer.

Their  flesh  is  esteemed  good  by  many  of  the  sportsmen  of  the  Middle
Districts,  and  is  frequently  eaten.  Some  are  now  and  then  exposed  in
the  markets  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia ; but  I look  upon  the  flesh  as
very  disagreeable,  it  having  a strong  flavour  of  ants.

The  neck  of  this  species  is  larger  than  that  of  any  other  with  which
I am  acquainted,  and  consequently  the  skin  of  this  bird  is  more  easily
pulled  over  the  head,  which  it  is  difficult  to  do  in  the  other  species,  on
account  of  the  slenderness  of  their  neck,  and  the  great  size  of  the  head.


Picus  AURATUS,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  174 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  242. —

Ck.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  44.

Gold-winged  Woodpecker  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  597- — Wils.  Americ.  Ornith.
vol,  ii.  p.  45.  PI.  iii.  fig.  1.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXVII.  Fig.l,  1,  1.

Bill  slightly  arched,  strong,  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  compressed
at  the  tip,  which  is  a little  abrupt ; upper  mandible  convex  on  the  sides,
with  acute,  overlapping  edges ; lower  mandible  with  acute,  inflected  edges,
the  dorsal  outline  nearly  straight,  a little  convex  towards  the  end.  Nos-
trils basal,  lateral,  oval,  partly  covered  by  recumbent  feathers.  Head  of
ordinary  size.  Neck  shortish.  Body  ovate.  Feet  short,  rather  robust ;
tarsus  scutellate  before,  compressed ; two  toes  before,  and  two  behind,
scutellate  above ; claws  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  rather  compact  and  imbricated,  blended  on  the  head  and  neck.
Wings  longish,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  the  secondmuch  shorter,
the  first  very  small,  l^ail  of  ordinary  length,  rounded,  consisting  of  ten


GOLDEN- WINGED  WOODPECKER.


J95


broad  feathers,  worn  to  an  elongated  tip  by  being  rubbed  against  the  bark
of  trees.

Bill  brown  above  and  at  the  tip,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  light  brown.
Feet  greyish-blue.  Upper  part  of  the  head  and  hind  neck  light  purplish-
grey  ; a transverse  band  of  scarlet  on  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput.  Up-
per parts  generally  light  greenish-brown,  spotted  with  black ; the  lower
back  white,  the  tail-coverts  of  the  same  colour,  spotted  with  black.  Pri-
maries brownish-black,  their  shafts,  as  are  those  of  all  the  large  feathers,
orange.  Tail  brownish-black.  Sides  of  the  head  and  fore  neck  light
brownish-red,  tinged  with  grey.  A black  streak  along  each  side  of  the
throat,  and  a lunated  patch  of  the  same  across  the  fore  part  of  the  breast.
The  rest  of  the  breast  reddish- white,  spotted  with  black,  as  are  the  lighter
coloured  abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts.  Under  surface  of  the  wings
and  tail  of  a fine  rich  yellow.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  16;  bill  along  the  ridge  1^,  along
the  gap  If ; tarsus  IJ,  middle  toe  1 J.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXVII.  Fig.  2,  2.

The  female  differs  chiefly  in  wanting  the  black  streaks  on  the  throat,
in  having  the  lunulated  spot  on  the  breast  smaller,  and  in  being  some-
what duller  in  the  tints  of  the  plumage  generally.

Dimensions  nearly  the  same.


( 196  )


THE  KENTUCKY  WARBLER.

S YL  VIA  FORMOSA,  Wl  LS.

PLATE  XXXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  beautiful  species  is  the  most  common  and  abundant  that  visits
the  State  of  Louisiana  and  those  situated  on  the  borders  of  the  Missis-
sippi. In  Kentucky  it  is  much  less  common,  and  in  the  State  of  Ohio
scarcer  still.  It  is  an  extremely  active  and  lively  bird.  It  is  found  in
all  the  low  grounds  and  damp  places  near  water-courses,  and  generally
among  the  tall  rank  weeds  and  low  bushes  growing  in  rich  alluvial  soil.
Continually  in  motion,  it  is  seen  hopping  in  every  direction  from  stalk  to
stalk,  or  from  one  twig  to  another,  preying  upon  insects  and  larvae,  or
picking  small  berries,  seldom,  however,  pursuing  insects  on  wing.  Du-
ring spring,  its  agreeable  notes  are  heard  in  every  quarter.  They  are
emphatic,  and  resemble  the  words  tweedle,  tweedle,  tweedle,  distinctly  re-
peated. This  little  bird  is  seen  at  intervals  of  a few  minutes  on  the  skirts
of  the  tall  plants,  peeping  cunningly  to  discover  whether  any  intruders
may  be  near ; after  which  it  immediately  re-enters  the  thicket,  and  repeats
its  little  ditty.

I never  saw  this  bird  fly  farther  than  a few  yards  at  a time  Its
flight  is  low,  and  performed  in  a quick  gliding  manner,  the  bird  throwing
itself  into  the  nearest  bush  or  thicket  of  tall  grass.  It  arrives  in  the
Southern  States,  from  Mexico,  about  the  middle  of  March,  and  remains
with  us  until  the  middle  of  September,  during  which  time  it  rears  two
broods.  Its  nest  is  small,  beautifully  constructed,  and  usually  attached
to  several  stems  of  rank  weeds.  The  outer  parts  are  formed  of  the  bark
of  stalks  of  the  same  weeds  in  a withered  state,  mixed  with  a finer  kind
and  some  cottony  substances.  It  is  beautifully  lined  with  the  cottony  or
silky  substance  that  falls  from  the  Cotton- wood  tree.  The  eggs  are  from
four  to  six,  of  a pure  v/hite  colour,  finely  sprinkled  with  bright  red  dots.

This  species  destroys  great  numbers  of  spiders,  which  it  frequently
obtains  by  turning  over  the  withered  leaves  on  the  ground.  The  young
males  do  not  attain  the  full  beauty  of  their  plumage  until  the  first  spring,
and  resemble  the  mother  during  their  stay  with  us  the  first  season


KENTUCKY  WARBLER.


197


Young  and  old  associate  together,  and  live  in  great  harmony.  I have
not  seen  this  species  farther  eastward  than  North  Carolina.

The  branch  on  which  two  of  these  birds  are  represented,  is  that  of  the
tree  commonly  called  the  White  Cucumber,  a species  nf  Magnolia.  It
flowers  as  early  in  the  season  as  the  Dog- wood.  The  flowers  open  before
the  leaves  are  expanded,  and  emit  an  odour  resembling  that  of  a lemon,
but  soon  becoming  disagreeable,  as  the  blossom  fades.  I’his  tree  seldom
grows  to  the  height  of  thirty  feet,  and  is  consequently  disregarded  as  a
timber-tree.  I have  met  with  it  only  in  the  States  of  Mississippi  and
Louisiana,  where  it  grows  on  the  grounds  preferred  by  the  Kentucky
Warbler  during  its  stay  in  those  States.


KextuckyWarbler,  Sylvia  FORMOSA,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  85,  Pl.xxv.

Fig.  3.

Sylvia  Formosa,  Ch.  Boncuparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  34.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  the
edges  acute,  the  gap  line  a little  deflected  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,
lateral,  elliptical,  half  closed  by  a membrane.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary
size.  Body  rather  full.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer
than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  by  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost
long  ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size  ;
claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  slightly  forked  when  closed.

Bill  brownish-black  above,  lighter  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  pale
flesh-colour.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  above  is  deep  yellowish-
green,  the  crown  of  the  head,  and  a broad  patch  under  the  eye,  includ-
ing the  lore,  black.  Under  parts,  and  a broad  streak  over  the  eye,  bright
yellow,  tinged  with  green  on  the  sides,  abdomen,  and  under  tail-coverts.
Wings  and  tail  yellowish-green,  the  inner  webs  only  being  dusky.  Some
spots  of  bluish-grey  on  the  occiput.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the
gap  ; tarsus  ih  middle  toe  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXVIII.  Fig.  2.


198


KENTUCKY  WARBLER.


The  female  resembles  the  male,  but  wants  the  black  band  under  the
eye,  and  has  the  black  of  the  head  less  extended  backwards.  The  tints
of  the  plumage  generally  are  also  lighter.

Dimensions  nearly  the  same.


Magnolia  auriculata,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1268.  Pursh.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.

p.  482.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Septentr.  vol.  iii.  p.  94.  PI.  7 Polyan-

DRiA  PoLYGYNiA,  Linn.  Magnoli-®,  Juss.

This  species,  which  is  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  its  foliage,  is  known
in  America  by  the  names  of  White  Cucumber  Tree,  Long-leaved  Cucum-
ber Tree,  and  Indian  Physic.  The  latter  name  it  has  obtained  from  the
circumstance  of  its  bark  being  used  in  intermittent  fevers.  It  is  characte-
rized by  its  rhomboido-oboval  acute  leaves,  which  are  narrowed  and
two-lobed  at  the  base  ; and  its  ovate  acute  petals.  The  flowers  are
sreenish-white.


( 199  )


THE  CRESTED  TITMOUSE.

Parus  bicolor,  Linn.

PLATE  XXXIX,  Male  and  Female.

Although  this  smart  little  bird  breeds  in  the  State  of  Louisiana  and
the  adjacent  districts,  it  is  not  there  found  in  so  great  numbers  as  in  the
Middle  States,  and  farther  to  the  northward.  It  generally  prefers  the
depth  of  the  forests  during  summer,  after  which  it  approaches  the  plan-
tations, and  even  resorts  to  the  granaries  for  corn.

Its  flight  is  short,  the  bird  being  seldom  seen  on  the  wing  long
enough  to  cross  a field  of  moderate  extent.  It  is  performed  by  repeated
flaps  of  the  wings,  accompanied  by  jerks  of  the  body  and  tail,  and  occa-
sions a rustling  noise,  as  it  takes  place  from  one  tree  to  another.  It
moves  along  the  branches,  searches  in  the  chinks,  flies  to  the  end  of  twigs
and  hangs  to  them  by  its  feet,  whilst  the  bill  is  engaged  in  detaching  a
beech  or  hazel  nut,  an  acorn  or  a chinquapin,  upon  all  of  which  it
feeds,  removing  them  to  a large  branch,  where,  having  secured  them  in
a crevice,  it  holds  them  with  both  feet,  and  breaks  the  shell  by  repeated
blows  of  its  bill.  They  are  to  be  seen  thus  employed  for  many  minutes
at  a time.  They  move  about  in  little  companies  formed  of  the  parents
and  their  young,  eight  or  ten  together,  and  escorted  by  the  Nuthatch  or
the  Downy  Woodpecker.  It  is  pleasing  to  listen  to  the  sound  produced
by  their  labour,  which  in  a calm  day  may  be  heard  at  the  distance  of
twenty  or  thirty  yards.  If  a nut  or  an  acorn  is  accidentally  dropped,
the  bird  flies  to  the  ground,  picks  it  up,  and  again  returns  to  a branch^.
They  also  alight  on  the  ground  or  on  dry  leaves,  to  look  for  food,  after
the  trees  become  bare,  and  hop  about  with  great  nimbleness,  going  to  the
margins  of  the  brooks  to  drink,  and  when  unable  to  do  so,  obtaining  wa-
ter by  stooping  from  the  extremity  of  a twig  hanging  over  the  stream.
In  fact,  they  appear  to  prefer  this  latter  method,  and  are  also  fond  of
drinking  the  drops  of  rain  or  dew  as  they  hang  at  the  extremities  of  the
leaves.

Their  notes  are  rather  musical  than  otherwise,  the  usual  one  being
loud  and  mellow.  They  do  not  use  the  tee-tee-tee  of  their  relative  the
Black-capped  Titmouse,  half  so  often  as  the  latter  does,  but  emit  a con-


^00


CRESTED  TITMOUSE.


siderable  variety  of  sounds,  many  of  which,  if  the  bird  from  which  they
coi^e  does  not  happen  to  be  known  to  the  listener,  are  apt  to  induce  dis-
appointment in  him,  when  on  going  up  he  finds  it  to  be  very  different  from
what  he  expected.  These  sounds  sometimes  resemble  a whistle,  at  an-
other time  a loud  murmur,  and  seem  as  if  proceeding  from  a bird  at  a
much  greater  distance.

T he  crest  of  this  species,  v/hich  is  generally  erect,  is  a great  improve-
ment to  its  general  appearance,  the  tints  of  the  plumage  being,  as  you
perceive,  kind  reader,  none  of  the  most  brilliant.  The  Crested  Titmouse
is  of  a rather  vicious  disposition,  which  sometimes  prompts  it  to  attack
smaller  birds,  and  destroy  them  by  thumping  their  heads  with  its  bill  un-
til it  breaks  the  skull.

This  species  sometimes  forms  a nest  by  digging  a hole  for  the  pur-
pose in  the  hardest  wood,  with  great  industry  and  perseverance,  although
it  is  more  frequently  contented  with  the  hole  of  the  Downy  Woodpecker,
or  some  other  small  bird  of  that  genus.  It  fills  the  hole  with  every  kind
of  warm  materials,  after  which  the  female  deposits  from  six  to  eight  eggs,
of  a pure  white,  with  a few  red  spots  at  the  larger  end.  The  eggs  are
laid  about  the  beginning  of  April  in  the  Southern  States,  and  nearly  a
month  later  in  the  Middle  Districts.  As  soon  as  the  young  are  able  to
leave  the  nest,  they  are  seen  following  the  parent  birds,  and  continue
with  them  until  the  next  spring.

I have  met  with  this  species  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States  which  I
have  visited ; and  as  my  rambles  have  been  extended  over  a very  large
portion  of  that  country,  I am  surprised  that  I have  not  met  with  more
than  two  species  of  Titmice,  although  I am  of  opinion  that  several  others
will  yet  be  discovered.

The  species  of  Pine,  on  a twig  of  which  you  see  a pair  these  birds,  is
the  White  Pine  (^Pinus  Strohus),  a tree  of  great  beauty,  of  which  indivi-
duals have  been  observed  of  the  enormous  height  of  180  feet,  with  a dia^
meter  at  the  base  of  from  six  to  eight  feet.  The  trunk  is  branchless  for
two-thirds  of  its  height,  and  affords  the  most  valuable  wood  perhaps  of
any  tree  in  the  United  States.

Parus  bicolor,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  544. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  567.

— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  100.

Crested  Titmouse,  Parus  bicolor,  Wils.Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  137?  PI*  8.  fig»  5.

Toupet  Titmouse,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  544.


CRESTED  TITMOUSE.


201


Adult  Male.  Plate  XXXIX.  Fig  1.

Bill  short,  straight,  rather  robust,  compressed,  acute ; both  mandi-
bles, with  the  dorsal  outline  arched,  the  upper  slightly  declinate  at  the
tip.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  concealed  by  the  recumbent  feathers.
Head  large.  Neck  and  body  robust.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather
robust ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  scutellate,  a little  longer  than  the
middle  toe ; outer  toe  slightly  united  at  the  base,  hind  one  much  stronger ;
claws  rather  large,  much  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  tufty  ; feathers  of  the  upper  part  of  the  head  elon-
gated into  a crest.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  the  second,  third,  and
fourth  quills  nearly  equal  and  longest.  Tail  long,  even,  of  ten  rather
narrow,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  lead-colour.  The  general  co-
lour of  the  upper  parts  is  a dull  leaden  blue  ; the  forehead  black  ; sides
of  the  head  lighter,  and  tinged  with  brown.  Under  parts  greyish- white,
sides  tinged  with  yellowish-brown.

Length  0^  inches,  extent  of  wings  9 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  i ; tarsus  middle  toe  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XXXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  hardly  differs  from  the  male  in  external  appearance,  be-
ing equally  crested,  and  having  the  same  tints.


The  White  Pine.

PiNUS  Strobus,  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  vol.  iv.  p.  501.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  644.
Mich.  Arb.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  i p.  104.  PI.  x.— Moncecia  Mona-
DELPHiA,  Linn.  Conifers,  Juss.

This  species,  which  is  a true  Pine,  has  the  leaves  very  slender,  five
together,  with  very  short  sheaths,  and  is  further  characterized  by  its  cy-
lindrical, pendulous  cones,  which  are  longer  than  the  leaves,  and  have
their  scales  lax.  It  grows  in  rich  soil,  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States
from  Canada  to  Virginia,  and  affords  the  best  timber  for  masts,  as  well
as  for  other  purposes.  In  Britain,  where  it  has  long  been  planted,  it  is
generally  known  by  the  name  of  Weymouth  Pine,  or  Lord  Weymouth’s
Pine,  from  the  name  of  the  nobleman  who  introduced  it.


( 202  )


THE  AMERICAN  REDSTART.

Mvscicapa  Ruticilla,  Linn.

PLATE  XL.  Male  and  Female.

This  is  one  of  the  most  lively,  as  well  as  one  of  the  handsomest,  of  our
Fly-catchers,  and  ornaments  our  woods  during  spring  and  summer,  when
it  cannot  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  any  person  who  may  visit  the  in-
terior of  the  shady  forests.  It  is  to  be  met  with  over  the  whole  of  the
United  States,  where  it  arrives,  according  to  the  different  localities,  be-
tween the  beginning  of  March  and  the  1st  of  May.  It  takes  its  depart-
ure, on  its  way  southward,*  late  in  September,  and  in  the  beginning  of
October.

It  keeps  in  perpetual  motion,  hunting  along  the  branches  sidewise,
jumping  to  either  side  in  search  of  insects  and  larvae,  opening  its  beautiful
tail  at  every  movement  which  it  makes,  then  closing  it,  and  flirting  it  from
side  to  side,  just  allowing  the  transparent  beauty  of  the  feathers  to  be
seen  for  a moment.  The  wings  are  observed  gently  drooping  during
these  motions,  and  its  pleasing  notes,  which  resemble  the  sounds  of  Tetee-
wJiee,  Tetee-whee^  are  then  emitted.  Should  it  observe  an  insect  on  the
wing,  it  immediately  flies  in  pursuit  of  it,  either  mounts  into  the  air  in
its  wake,  or  comes  towards  the  ground  spirally  and  in  many  zig-zags.
The  insect  secured,  the  lovely  Redstart  reascends,  perches,  and  sings  a
different  note,  equally  clear,  and  which  may  be  expressed  by  the  syllables
wizz,  wizz,  wizz.  While  following  insects  on  the  wing,  it  keeps  its
bill  constantly  open,  snapping  as  if  it  procured  several  of  them  on  the
same  excursion.  It  is  frequently  observed  balancing  itself  in  the  air,
opposite  the  extremity  of  a bunch  of  leaves,  and  darting  into  the  midst
of  them  after  the  insects  there  concealed.

When  one  approaches  the  nest  of  this  species,  the  male  exhibits  the
greatest  anxiety  respecting  its  safety,  passes  and  repasses,  fluttering  and
snapping  its  bill  within  a few  feet,  as  if  determined  to  repel  the  intruder.
They  now  and  then  alight  on  the  ground,  to  secure  an  insect,  but  this
only  for  a moment.  They  are  more  frequently  seen  climbing  along  the
trunks  and  large  branches  of  trees  for  an  instant,  and  then  shifting  to  a
branch,  being,  as  I have  said,  in  perpetual  motion.  It  is  also  fond  of


AMERICAN  REDSTART.


203


giving  chase  to  various  birds,  snapping  at  them  without  any  eiFect,  as  if
solely  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  the  natural  liveliness  of  its  disposi-
tion.

The  young  males  of  this  species  do  not  possess  the  brilliancy  and
richness  of  plumage  which  the  old  birds  display,  until  the  second  year,
the  first  being  spent  in  the  garb  worn  by  the  females  ; but,  towards  the
second  autumn,  appear  mottled  with  pure  black  and  vermilion  on  their
sides.  Notwithstanding  their  want  of  full  plumage,  they  breed  and  sing
the  first  spring  like  the  old  males.

I have  looked  for  several  minutes  at  a time  on  the  ineffectual  attacks
which  this  bird  makes  on  wasps  while  busily  occupied  about  their  own
nests.  The  bird  approaches  and  snaps  at  them,  but  in  vain ; for  the
wasp  elevating  its  abdomen,  protrudes  its  sting,  which  prevents  its  being
seized.  The  male  bird  is  represented  in  the  plate  in  this  posture.

Its  nest  is  generally  made  on  a low  bush  or  sapling,  and  has  the  ap-
pearance of  hanging  to  the  twigs.  It  is  slight,  and  is  composed  of
lichens  and  dried  fibres  of  rank  weeds  or  grape  vines,  nicely  lined  with
soft  cottony  materials.  The  female  lays  from  four  to  six  white  eggs,
sprinkled  with  ash-grey  and  blackish  dots.  It  rears  only  a single  brood
in  a season.  The  old  birds,  I am  inclined  to  think,  leave  the  United
States  a month  or  three  weeks  before  the  young,  some  of  which  linger  in
the  deep  swamps  of  the  States  of  Mississippi  and  Louisiana  until  the
beginning  of  November.


Muscicapa  Ruticilla,  Linn»  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  L p.  2S6,m^Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  473.— Cfe.  BonapartCy  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  68.

American  Redstart,  Muscicapa  Ruticilla,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  i.  p.  103,
PI.  vi.  fig.  6.  adult  male ; vol.  v.  p.  119.  PI.  45,  fig.  2,  young.— Synops.
vol.  iv.  p.  427.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XL.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  depressed  at  the  base,  cr^npressed  toward  the
tip,  acute ; upper  mandible  ^slightly  notched,  and  deflected  at  the  tip  ;
lower  straight.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  linear.  Head  and  neck  of  mode-
rate size.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  moderately  long,  slender ; tarsus
covered  with  short  scutella  before,  with  a longitudinal  keeled  plate  be-
hind, longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; toes  slender,  free  ; claws  small,  weak,
slightly  arched,  compressed,  acute.


204


AMERICAN  REDSTART.


Plumage  blended,  soft,  glossy.  The  bill  margined  at  the  base  with
long  spreading  bristles.  Wings  of  moderate  length,  third  quill  longest,
second  and  first  little  shorter.  Tail  rather  long,  rounded.

Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  blackish.  Head,  neck,
fore  part  of  the  breast,  and  upper  parts,  black,  the  head,  neck,  and  back
glossed  with  blue.  Sides  of  the  breast,  and  under  wing-coverts  reddish-
orange  ; abdomen  white.  Quills  brownish-black,  their  anterior  half
orange,  forming  a broad  transverse  band  on  the  wing.  Two  middle  tail-
feathers  black,  the  rest  black  in  their  terminal  half,  yellow  in  the  basal
half.

Length  5 inches,  extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ^ ; tarsus  f , middle  toe  .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XL.  Fig.

Bill,  feet  and  iris,  as  in  the  male.  Head  and  upper  parts  brownish-
grey,  the  former  tinged  with  blue.  Under  parts  greyish- white,  the
breast  at  the  sides  dull  yellow.  Band  on  the  wings  and  at  the  base  of
the  tail,  pale  yellow,  tinged  with  green.

Dimensions  nearly  as  in  the  male.


The  Virginian  Hornbeam,  or  Iron- wood  Tree.

OsTRYA  viRGiNiCA,  Wild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  469.  Pursh.,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  623.

— Moncecia  Polyandria,  Linn.  Amentace^,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  ovato-oblong  leaves,  which  are
somewhat  cordate  at  the  base,  unequally  serrated  and  acuminate,  and  its
twin,  ovate,  acute  cones.  It  is  a small  tree,  attaining  a height  of  from
twenty  to  thirty  feet,  and  a diameter  of  about  one  foot.  The  wood  is
white,  and  close-grained.  The  common  name  in  America  is  Iron-wood^
which  it  receives  on  account  of  the  great  hardness  of  the  wood.


( 205  )


THE  COUGAR.

There  is  an  extensive  Swamp  in  the  section  of  the  State  of  Missis-
sippi which  lies  partly  in  the  Choctaw  territory.  It  commences  at  the
borders  of  the  Mississippi,  at  no  great  distance  from  a Chicasaw  village,
situated  near  the  mouth  of  a creek  known  by  the  name  of  Vanconnah,  and
partly  inundated  by  the  swellings  of  several  large  bayous,  the  principal
of  which,  crossing  the  swamp  in  its  whole  extent,  discharges  its  waters
not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  River.  This  famous  bayou  is  called
False  River.  The  swamp  of  which  I am  speaking  follows  the  windings
of  the  Yazoo,  until  the  latter  branches  off  to  the  north-east,  and  at  this
point  forms  the  stream  named  Cold  Water  River,  below  which  the  Y azoo
receives  the  draining  of  another  bayou  inclining  towards  the  north-west,
and  intersecting  that  known  by  the  name  of  False  River,  at  a short  dis-
tance from  the  place  where  the  latter  receives  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi.
This  tedious  account  of  the  situation  of  the  Swamp,  is  given  with  the
view  of  pointing  it  out  to  all  students  of  nature  who  may  chance  to  go
that  way,  and  whom  I would  earnestly  urge  to  visit  its  interior,  as  it
abounds  in  rare  and  interesting  productions : birds,  quadrupeds  and  rep-
tiles, as  well  as  molluscous  animals,  many  of  which,  I am  persuaded,  have
never  been  described.

In  the  course  of  one  of  my  rambles,  I chanced  to  meet  with  a squat-
ter’s cabin  on  the  banks  of  the  Cold  Water  River.  In  the  owner  of  this
hut,  like  most  of  those  adventurous  settlers  in  the  uncultivated  tracts  of
our  frontier  districts,  I found  a person  well  versed  in  the  chase,  and  ac-
quainted with  the  habits  of  some  of  the  larger  species  of  quadrupeds  and
birds.  As  he  who  is  desirous  of  instruction  ought  not  to  disdain  listen-
ing to  any  one,  who  has  knowledge  to  communicate,  however  humble
may  be  his  lot,  or  however  limited  his  talents,  I entered  the  squatter’s
cabin,  and  immediately  opened  a conversation  with  him  respecting  the
situation  of  the  swamp,  and  its  natural  productions.  He  told  me  he
thought  it  the  very  place  I ought  to  visit,  spoke  of  the  game  which  it
contained,  and  pointed  to  some  bear  and  deer  skins,  adding  that  the  in-
dividuals to  which  they  had  belonged  formed  but  a small  portion  of  the
number  of  those  animals  which  he  had  shot  within  it.  My  heart  swelled
with  delight,  and  on  asking  if  he  would  accompany  me  through  the  great


206


THE  COUGAR.


morass,  and  allow  me  to  become  an  inmate  of  his  humble  but  hospitable
mansion,  I was  gratified  to  find  that  he  cordially  assented  to  all  my  pro-
posals. So  I immediately  unstrapped  my  drawing  materials,  laid  up  my
gun,  and  sat  down  to  partake  of  the  homely  but  wholesome  fare  intended
for  the  supper  of  the  squatter,  his  wife,  and  his  two  sons.

The  quietness  of  the  evening  seemed  in  perfect  accordance  with  the
gentle  demeanour  of  the  family.  The  wife  and  children,  I more  than
once  thought,  seemed  to  look  upon  me  as  a strange  sort  of  person,  going
about,  as  I told  them  I was,  in  search  of  birds  and  plants ; and  were  I
here  to  relate  the  many  questions  which  they  put  to  me  in  return  for  those
which  I addressed  to  them,  the  catalogue  would  occupy  several  pages.
The  husband,  a native  of  Connecticut,  had  heard  of  the  existence  of  such
men  as  myself,  both  in  our  own  country  and  abroad,  and  seemed  greatly
pleased  to  have  me  under  his  roof.  Supper  over,  I asked  my  kind  host
what  had  induced  him  to  remove  to  this  wild  and  solitary  spot.  The
people  are  growing  too  numerous  now  to  thrive  in  New  England,’^  was
his  answer.  I thought  of  the  state  of  some  parts  of  Europe,  and  calcu-
lating the  denseness  of  their  population  compared  with  that  of  New  Eng-
land, exclaimed  to  myself,  “ How  much  more  difficult  must  it  be  for  men
to  thrive  in  those  populous  countries  !”  The  conversation  then  changed,
and  the  squatter,  his  sons  and  myself,  spoke  of  hunting  and  fishing,  until
at  length  tired,  we  laid  ourselves  down  on  pallets  of  bear  skins,  and  re-
posed in  peace  on  the  floor  of  the  only  apartment  of  which  the  hut  con-
sisted.

Day  dawned,  and  the  squatter’s  call  to  his  hogs,  which,  being  almost
in  a wild  state,  were  suffered  to  seek  the  greater  portion  of  their  food  in
the  woods,  awakened  me.  Being  ready  dressed,  I was  not  long  in  join-
ing him.  The  hogs  and  their  young  came  grunting  at  the  well  known
call  of  their  owner,  who  threw  them  a few  ears  of  corn,  and  counted  them,
but  told  me  that  for  some  weeks  their  number  had  been  greatly  diminish-
ed by  the  ravages  committed  upon  them  by  a large  Panther,  by  which
name  the  Cougar  is  designated  in  America,  and  that  the  ravenous  animal
did  not  content  himself  with  the  flesh  of  his  pigs,  but  now  and  then  car-
ried off  one  of  his  calves,  notwithstanding  the  many  attempts  he  had
made  to  shoot  it.  The  Painter,  as  he  sometimes  called  it,  had  on  several
occasions  robbed  him  of  a dead  deer  ; and  to  these  exploits  the  squatter
added  several  remarkable  feats  of  audacity  which  it  had  performed,  to
give  me  an  idea  of  the  formidable  character  of  the  beast.  Delighted  by


THE  COUGAR.


207


his  description,  I offered  to  assist  him  in  destroying  the  enemy,  at
which  he  was  highly  pleased,  but  assured  me  that  unless  some  of  his
neighbours  should  join  us  with  their  dogs  and  his  own,  the  attempt  would
prove  fruitless.  Soon  after,  mounting  a horse,  he  went  off  to  his  neigh-
bours, several  of  whom  lived  at  a distance  of  some  miles,  and  appointed
a day  of  meeting.

The  hunters,  accordingly,  made  their  appearance,  one  fine  morning,
at  the  door  of  the  cabin,  just  as  the  sun  was  emerging  from  beneath  the
horizon.  They  were  five  in  number,  and  fully  equipped  for  the  chase,
being  mounted  on  horses,  which  in  some  parts  of  Europe  might  appear
sorry  nags,  but  which  in  strength,  speed  and  bottom,  are  better  fitted  for
pursuing  a cougar  or  a bear  through  woods  and  morasses  than  any  in  that
country.  A pack  of  large  ugly  curs  were  already  engaged  in  making  ac-
quaintance with  those  of  the  squatter.  He  and  myself  mounted  his  two
best  horses,  whilst  his  sons  were  bestriding  others  of  inferior  quality.

Few  words  were  uttered  by  the  party  until  we  had  reached  the  edge
of  the  Swamp,  where  it  was  agreed  that  all  should  disperse  and  seek  for
the  fresh  track  of  the  Painter,  it  being  previously  settled  that  the  dis-
coverer should  blow  his  horn,  and  remain  on  the  spot,  until  the  rest
should  join  him.  In  less  than  an  hour,  the  sound  of  the  horn  was
clearly  heard,  and,  sticking  close  to  the  squatter,  off  we  went  through  the
thick  woods,  guided  only  by  the  now  and  then  repeated  call  of  the  dis^
tant  huntsmen.  We  soon  reached  the  spot,  and  in  a short  time  the  rest
of  the  party  came  up.  The  best  dog  was  sent  forward  to  track  the
Cougar,  and  in  a few  moments,  the  whole  pack  were  observed  diligently
traibng,  and  bearing  in  their  course  for  the  interior  of  the  Swamp.  The
rifles  were  immediately  put  in  trim,  and  the  party  followed  the  dogs,  at
separate  distances,  but  in  sight  of  each  other,  determined  to  shoot  at  no
other  game  than  the  Panther.

The  dogs  soon  began  to  mouth,  and  suddenly  quickened  their  pace.
My  companion  concluded  that  the  beast  was  on  the  ground,  and  putting
our  horses  to  a gentle  gallop,  we  followed  the  curs,  guided  by  their  voices.
The  noise  of  the  dogs  increased,  when,  all  of  a sudden  their  mode  of
barking  became  altered,  and  the  squatter,  urging  me  to  push  on,  told  me
that  the  beast  was  treed,  by  which  he  meant  that  it  had  got,  upon  some
low  branch  of  a large  tree  to  rest  for  a few  moments,  and  that  should  we
not  succeed  in  shooting  him  when  thus  situated,  we  might  expect  a long
chase  of  it.  As  we  approached  the  spot,  we  all  by  degress  united  into  a


208


THE  COUGAR.


body,  but  on  seeing  the  dogs  at  the  foot  of  a large  tree,  separated  again
and  galloped  off  to  surround  it.

Each  hunter  now  moved  with  caution,  holding  his  gun  ready,  and  al-
lowing the  bridle  to  dangle  on  the  neck  of  his  horse,  as  it  advanced  slow-
ly towards  the  dogs.  A shot  from  one  of  the  party  was  heard,  on  which
the  Cougar  was  seen  to  leap  to  the  ground,  and  bound  off  with  such  ve-
locity as  to  shew  that  he  was  very  unwilling  to  stand  our  fire  longer.
The  dogs  set  off  in  pursuit  with  great  eagerness  and  a deafening  cry.
The  hunter  who  had  fired  came  up  and  said  that  his  ball  had  hit  the
monster,  and  had  probably  broken  one  of  his  fore-legs  near  the  shoulder,
the  only  place  at  which  he  could  aim.  A slight  trail  of  blood  was  dis-
covered on  the  ground,  but  the  curs  proceeded  at  such  a rate  that  we
merely  noticed  this,  and  put  spurs  to  our  horses,  which  galloped  on  to-
wards the  centre  of  the  Swamp.  One  bayou  was  crossed,  then  another
still  larger  and  more  muddy  ; but  the  dogs  were  brushing  forward,  and
as  the  horses  began  to  pant  at  a furious  rate,  we  judged  it  expedient  to
leave  them  and  advance  on  foot.  These  determined  hunters  knew  that
the  Cougar  being  wounded,  would  shortly  ascend  another  tree,  where  in
all  probability  he  would  remain  for  a considerable  time,  and  that  it  would
be  easy  to  follow  the  track  of  the  dogs.  We  dismounted,  took  off  the
saddles  and  bridles,  set  the  bells  attached  to  the  horses’  necks  at  liberty
to  jingle,  hoppled  the  animals,  and  left  them  to  shift  for  themselves.

Now,  kind  reader,  follow  the  group  marching  through  the  swamp,
crossing  muddy  pools,  and  making  the  best  of  their  way  over  fallen
trees  and  amongst  the  tangled  rushes  that  now  and  then  covered  acres  of
ground.  If  you  are  a hunter  yourself,  all  this  will  appear  nothing  to
you ; but  if  crowded  assemblies  of  ‘‘  beauty  and  fashion,”  or  the  quiet
enjoyment  of  your  pleasure-grounds,”  alone  delight  you,  I must  mend
my  pen  before  I attempt  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  pleasure  felt  on  such
an  expedition.

After  marching  for  a couple  of  hours,  we  again  heard  the  dogs.
Each  of  us  pressed  forward,  elated  at  the  thought  of  terminating  the
career  of  the  cougar.  Some  of  the  dogs  were  heard  whining,  although
the  greater  number  barked  vehemently.  We  felt  assured  that  the  Cou-
gar was  treed,  and  that  he  would  rest  for  some  time  to  recover  from  his
fatigue.  As  we  came  up  to  the  dogs,  we  discovered  the  ferocious  animal
lying  across  a large  branch,  close  to  the  trunk  of  a cotton-wood  tree.

His  broad  breast  lay  towards  us ; his  eyes  were  at  one  time  bent  on  us

2


THE  COUGAR.


209


and  again  on  the  dogs  beneath  and  around  him ; one  of  his  fore  legs  hung
loosely  by  his  side,  and  he  lay  crouched,  with  his  ears  lowered  close  to  his
head,  as  if  he  thought  he  might  remain  undiscovered.  Three  balls  were
fired  at  him,  at  a given  signal,  on  which  he  sprang  a few  feet  from  the
branch,  and  tumbled  headlong  to  the  ground.  Attacked  on  all  sides  by
the  enraged  curs,  the  infuriated  Cougar  fought  with  desperate  valour  ;
but  the  squatter  advancing  in  front  of  the  party,  and  almost  in  the  midst
of  the  dogs,  shot  him  immediately  behind  and  beneath  the  left  shoulder.
The  Cougar  writhed  for  a moment  in  agony,  and  in  another  lay  dead.

The  sun  was  now  sinking  in  the  west.  Two  of  the  hunters  separated
from  the  rest,  to  procure  venison,  whilst  the  squatter’s  sons  were  ordered
to  make  the  best  of  their  way  home,  to  be  ready  to  feed  the  hogs  in  the
morning.  The  rest  of  the  party  agreed  to  camp  on  the  spot.  The
cougar  was  despoiled  of  its  skin,  and  its  carcass  left  to  the  hungry  dogs.
Whilst  engaged  in  preparing  our  camp,  we  heard  the  report  of  a gun,
and  soon  after  one  of  our  hunters  returned  with  a small  deer.  A fire
was  lighted,  and  each  hunter  displayed  his  'pone  of  bread,  along  with  a
flask  of  whisky.  The  deer  was  skinned  in  a trice,  and  slices  placed  on  sticks
before  the  fire.  These  materials  afforded  us  an  excellent  meal,  and  as
the  night  grew  darker,  stories  and  songs  went  round,  until  my  com-
panions, fatigued,  laid  themselves  down,  close  under  the  smoke  of  the
fire,  and  soon  fell  asleep.

I walked  for  some  minutes  round  the  camp,  to  contemplate  the  beau-
ties of  that  nature,  from  which  I have  certainly  derived  my  greatest
pleasures.  I thought  of  the  occurrences  of  the  day,  and  glancing  my
eye  around,  remarked  the  singular  effects  produced  by  the  phosphores-
cent qualities  of  the  large  decayed  trunks  which  lay  in  all  directions
around  me.  How  easy,  I thought,  would  it  be  for  the  confused  and  agi-
tated mind  of  a person  bewildered  in  a swamp  like  this,  to  imagine  in
each  of  these  luminous  masses  some  wondrous  and  fearful  being,  the  very
sight  of  which  might  make  the  hair  stand  erect  on  his  head.  The  thought
of  being  myself  placed  in  such  a predicament  burst  over  my  mind,  and
I hastened  to  join  my  companions,  beside  whom  I laid  me  down  and  slept,
assured  that  no  enemy  could  approach  us  without  first  rousing  the  dogs,
which  were  growling  in  fierce  dispute  over  the  remains  of  the  cougar.

At  daybreak  we  left  our  camp,  the  squatter  bearing  on  his  shoulder
the  skin  of  the  late  destroyer  of  his  stock,  and  retraced  our  steps  until
we  found  our  horses,  which  had  not  strayed  far  from  the  place  where  we


o


210


THE  COUGAR.


had  left  them.  These  we  soon  saddled,  and  jogging  along,  in  a direct
course,  guided  by  the  sun,  congratulating  each  other  on  the  destruction
of  so  formidable  a neighbour  as  the  panther  had  been,  we  soon  arrived
at  my  host’s  cabin.  The  five  neighbours  partook  of  such  refreshment  as
the  house  could  afford,  and  dispersing,  returned  to  their  homes,  leaving
me  to  follow  my  favourite  pursuits.


( 211  )


THE. RUFFED  GROUSE.

Tetrao  Umbellus,  Linn.

PLATE  XLI.  Male  and  Female.

Y ou  are  now  presented,  kind  reader,  with  a species  of  Grouse,  which,
in  my  humble  opinion,  far  surpasses  as  an  article  of  food  every  other
land-bird  which  we  have  in  the  United  States,  except  the  Wild  Turkey,
when  in  good  condition.  You  must  not  be  surprised  that  I thus  express
an  opinion  contradictory  to  that  of  our  Eastern  epicures,  who  greatly
prefer  the  flesh  of  the  Pinnated  Grouse  to  that  of  the  present  species,  for
I have  had  abundant  opportunity  of  knowing  both.  Perhaps,  after  all,
the  preference  may  depend  upon  a peculiarity  in  my  own  taste  ; or  I may
give  the  superiority  to  the  Ruffed  Grouse,  because  it  is  as  rarely  met
with  in  the  Southern  States,  where  I have  chiefly  resided,  as  the  Pinnated
Grouse  is  in  the  Middle  Districts  ; and  were  the  bon-vivants  of  our  eastern
cities  to  be  occasionally  satiated  with  the  latter  birds,  as  I have  been,
they  might  possibly  think  their  flesh  as  dry  and  flavourless  as  I do.

The  names  of  Pheasant  and  Partridge  have  been  given  to  the  pre-
sent species  by  our  forefathers,  in  the  different  districts  where  it  is  found.
To  the  west  of  the  Alleghanies,  and  on  these  mountains,  the  first  name
is  generally  used.  The  same  appellation  is  employed  in  the  Middle  Dis-
tricts, to  the  east  of  the  mountains,  and  until  you  enter  the  State  of  Con-
necticut ; after  which  that  of  Partridge  prevails.

The  Ruffed  Grouse,  although  a constant  resident  in  the  districts  which
it  frequents,  performs  partial  sorties  at  the  approach  of  autumn.  These
are  not  equal  in  extent  to  the  peregrinations  of  the  Wild  Turkey,  our
little  Partridge,  or  the  Pinnated  Grouse,  but  are  sufficiently  so  to  become
observable  during  the  seasons  when  certain  portions  of  the  mountainous
districts  which  they  inhabit  become  less  abundantly  supplied  with  food
than  others.  These  partial  movings  might  not  be  noticed,  were  not  the
birds  obliged  to  fly  across  rivers  of  great  breadth,  as  whilst  in  the  moun-
tain lands  their  groups  are  as  numerous  as  those  which  attempt  these  mi-
grations; but  on  the  north-west  banks  of  the  Ohio  and  Susquehanna
rivers,  no  one  who  pays  the  least  attention  to  the  manners  and  habits  of
our  birds,  can  fail  to  observe  them.  The  Grouse  approach  the  banks  of

o ^


212


RUFFED  GROUSE.


the  Ohio  in  parties  of  eight  or  ten,  now  and  then  of  twelve  or  fifteen,
and,  on  arriving  there,  linger  in  the  woods  close  by  for  a week  or  a fort-
night, as  if  fearful  of  encountering  the  danger  to  be  incurred  in  crossing
the  stream.  This  usually  happens  in  the  beginning  of  October,  when
these  birds  are  in  the  very  best  order  for  the  table,  and  at  this  period
great  numbers  of  them  are  killed.  If  started  from  the  ground,  with  or
without  the  assistance  of  a dog,  they  immediately  alight  on  the  nearest
trees,  and  are  easily  shot.  At  length,  however,  they  resolve  upon  cross-
ing the  river ; and  this  they  accomplish  with  so  much  ease,  that  I never
saw  any  of  them  drop  into  the  water.  Not  more  than  two  or  three  days
elapse  after  they  have  reached  the  opposite  shore,  when  they  at  once  pro-
ceed to  the  interior  of  the  forests,  in  search  of  places  congenial  to  the
general  character  of  their  habits.  They  now  resume  their  ordinary  man-
ner of  living,  which  they  continue  until  the  approach  of  spring,  when
the  males,  as  if  leading  the  way,  proceed  singly  towards  the  country  from
which  they  had  retreated.  The  females  follow  in  small  parties  of  three
or  four.  In  the  month  of  October  1820,  I observed  a larger  number  of
Ruffed  Grouse  migrating  thus  from  the  States  of  Ohio,  Illinois  and  In-
diana into  Kentucky,  than  I had  ever  before  remarked.  During  the
short  period  of  their  lingering  along  the  north-west  shore  of  the  Ohio
that  season,  a great  number  of  them  was  killed,  and  they  were  sold  in
the  Cincinnati  market  for  so  small  a sum  as  12^  cents  each.

Although  these  birds  are  particularly  attached  to  the  craggy  sides  of
mountains  and  hills,  and  the  rocky  borders  of  rivers  and  small  streams,
thickly  mantled  with  evergreen  trees  and  small  shrubs  of  the  same  nature,
they  at  times  remove  to  low  lands,  and  even  enter  the  thickest  cane-brakes,
where  they  also  sometimes  breed.  I have  shot  some,  and  have  heard  them
drumming  in  such  places,  when  there  were  no  hills  nearer  than  fifteen  or
twenty  miles.  The  lower  parts  of  the  State  of  Indiana  and  also  those  of
Kentucky,  are  amongst  the  places  where  I have  discovered  them  in  such
situations.

The  charming  groves  which  here  and  there  contrast  so  beautifully
with  the  general  dull  appearance  of  those  parts  of  Kentucky  and  Tennes-
see, to  which  the  name  of  Barrens  is  given,  are  sought  by  the  Ruffed
Grouse.  These  groves  afford  them  abundant  food  and  security.  The
gentle  coolness  that  prevails  in  them  during  the  summer  heat  is  agreeable
and  beneficial  to  these  birds,  and  the  closeness  of  their  undergrowth  in
other  spots  moderates  the  cold  blasts  of  winter.  There  this  species  breeds.


RUFFED  GROUSE.


213


and  is  at  all  times  to  be  found.  Their  drumming  is  to  be  heard  issuing
from  these  peaceful  retreats  in  early  spring,  at  the  same  time  that  the
booming  of  their  relative,  the  Pinnated  Grouse,  is  recognised,  as  it  reaches
the  ear  of  the  traveller,  from  the  different  parts  of  the  more  open  country
around.  In  such  places  as  the  groves  just  mentioned,  the  species  now  be-
fore you,  kind  reader,  is  to  be  met  with,  as  you  travel  towards  the  south,
through  the  whole  of  Tennessee  and  the  Choctaw  Territory  ; but  as  you
approach  the  city  of  Natchez  they  disappear,  nor  have  I ever  heard  of
one  of  these  birds  having  been  seen 'in  the  State  of  Louisiana.

The  mountainous  parts  of  the  Middle  States  being  more  usually  the
chosen  residence  of  this  species,  I shall,  with  your  permission,  kind  read-
er, return  to  them,  and  try  to  give  you  an  account  of  this  valuable  Grouse.

The  flight  of  the  Ruffed  Grouse  is  straight-forward,  rather  low,  un-
less when  the  bird  has  been  disturbed,  and  seldom  protracted  beyond  a
few  hundred  yards  at  a time.  It  is  also  stiff,  and  performed  with  a con-
tinued beating  of  the  wings  for  more  than  half  its  duration,  after  which
the  bird  sails  and  seems  to  balance  its  body  as  it  proceeds  through  the  air,
in  the  manner  of  a vessel  sailing  right  before  the  wind.  When  this  bird
rises  from  the  ground  at  a time  when  pursued  by  an  enemy,  or  tracked
by  a dog,  it  produces  a loud  whirring  sound,  resembling  that  of  the  whole
tribe,  excepting  the  Black  Cock  of  Europe,  which  has  less  of  it  than  any
other  species.  This  whirring  sound  is  never  heard  when  the  Grouse  rises
of  its  own  accord,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  from  one  place  to  another  ;
nor,  in  similar  circumstances,  is  it  commonly  produced  by  our  little  Par-
tridge. In  fact,  I do  not  believe  that  it  is  emitted  by  any  species  of  Grouse,
unless  when  surprised  and  forced  to  rise.  I have  often  been  lying  on  the
ground  in  the  woods  or  the  fields  for  hours  at  a time,  for  the  express  pur-
pose of  observing  the  movements  and  habits  of  different  birds,  and  have
frequently  seen  a Partridge  or  a Grouse  rise  on  wing  from  within  a few
yards  of  the  spot  in  which  I lay  unobserved  by  them,  as  gently  and  softly
as  any  other  bird,  and  without  producing  any  whirring  sound.  Nor  even
when  this  Grouse  ascends  to  the  top  of  a tree,  does  it  make  any  greater
noise  than  other  birds  of  the  same  size  would  do.

I have  said  this  much  respecting  the  flight  of  Grouse,  because  it  is  a
prevalent  opinion,  both  among  sportsmen  and  naturalists,  that  the  whirr-
ing sound  produced  by  birds  of  that  genus,  is  a necessary  effect  of  their
usual  mode  of  flight.  But  that  this  is  an  error,  I have  abundantly  sat’ s-
fled  myself  by  numberless  observations.


214


RUFFED  GROUSE.


On  the  ground,  where  the  RufFed  Grouse  spends  a large  portion  of  its
time,  its  motions  are  peculiarly  graceful.  It  walks  with  an  elevated  firm
step,  opening  its  beautiful  tail  gently  and  with  a well-markM  jet,  holding
erect  its  head,  the  feathers  of  which  are  frequently  raised,  as  are  the  vel-
vety tufts  of  its  neck.  It  poises  its  body  on  one  foot  for  several  seconds  at
a time,  and  utters  a soft  chich,  which  in  itself  implies  a degree  of  confi-
dence in  the  bird  that  its  tout  ensemble  is  deserving  of  the  notice  of  any
bystander.  Should  the  bird  discover  that  it  is  observed,  its  step  immedi-
ately changes  to  a rapid  run,  its  head  is  lowered,  the  tail  is  more  widely
spread,  and  if  no  convenient  hiding-place  is  at  hand,  it  immediately  takes
flight  with  as  much  of  the  whirring  sound  as  it  can  produce,  as  if  to  prove
to  the  observer,  that,  when  on  wing,  it  cares  as  little  about  him  as  the
deer  pretends  to  do,  when,  on  being  started  by  the  hound,  he  makes  se-
veral lofty  bounds,  and  erects  his  tail  to  the  breeze.  Should  the  Grouse,
however,  run  into  a thicket,  or  even  over  a place  where  many  dried  leaves
lie  on  the  ground,  it  suddenly  stops,  squats,  and  remains  close  until  the
danger  is  over,  or  until  it  is  forced  by  a dog  or  the  sportsman  himself  to
rise  against  its  wish.

The  shooting  of  Grouse  of  this  species  is  precarious,  and  at  times  very
difficult,  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  places  which  they  usually  pre-
fer. Should,  for  instance,  a covey  of  these  birds  be  raised  from  amongst
Laurels  {Kalmia  lati/olid)  or  the  largest  species  of  Bay  {Rhododendron
maocimum),  these  shrubs  so  intercept  the  view  of  them,  that,  unless  the
sportsman  proves  quite  an  adept  in  the  difficult  art  of  pulling  the  trigger
of  his  gun  at  the  proper  moment,  and  quickly,  his  first  chance  is  lost,  and
the  next  is  very  uncertain.  I say  still  more  uncertain,  because  at  this
putting  up  of  the  birds,  they  generally  rise  higher  over  the  bushes,  flying
in  a straight  course,  whereas  at  the  second  start,  they  often  fly  among  the
laurels,  and  rise  above  them  in  a circuitous  manner,  when  to  follow  them
along  the  barrel  of  the  gun  is  considerably  more  difficult.  Sometimes,
when  these  birds  are  found  on  the  sides  of  a steep  hill,  the  moment  they
start,  they  dive  towards  the  foot  of  the  declivity,  take  a turn,  and  ffy  off
in  a direction  so  different  from  the  one  expected,  that  unless  the  sportsman
is  aware  of  the  trick,  he  may  not  see  them  again  that  day.  The  young
birds  often  prove  equally  difficult  to  be  obtained,  for  as  they  are  raised
from  amongst  the  closely  tangled  laurels,  they  only  fly  a few  yards,  and
again  drop  among  them.  A smart  cur-dog  generally  proves  the  best  kind
on  these  occasions;  for  no  sooner  does  he  start  a covey  of  Ruffed  Grouse


RUFFED  GROUSE.


215


than  his  barking  alarms  the  birds  as  much  as  the  report  of  a gun,  and
causes  them  to  rise  and  alight  on  the  nearest  trees,  on  which  they  may  be
shot  at  with  great  success.

This  leads  me  to  remark,  that  the  prevailing  notion  which  exists  in  al-
most every  district  where  these  birds  are  numerous,  that  on  firing  at  the
lowest  bird  perched  on  a tree,  the  next  above  will  not  fly,  and  that  by
continuing  to  shoot  at  the  lowest  in  succession,  the  whole  may  be  killed,
is  contradicted  by  my  experience ; for  on  every  attempt  which  I have
made  to  shoot  several  in  this  manner  on  the  same  tree,  my  efforts  have
proved  unsuccessful,  unless  indeed  during  a fall  of  snow,  when  I have
killed  three  and  sometimes  four.  The  same  cause  produces  the  same  ef-
fect on  different  birds.  It  may  happen,  however,  that  in  districts  covered
with  deep  snow  for  several  weeks,  during  severe  winters,  these  birds,  be-
coming emaciated  and  weak,  may  stand  a repetition  of  shots  from  a person
determined  to  shoot  Grouse  even  when  they  are  good  for  nothing ; but,
kind  reader,  this  barbarous  taste  is,  I hope,  no  more  yours  than  it  is  mine.

During  spring,  and  towards  the  latter  part  of  autumn,  at  which  times
the  Ruffed  Grouse  is  heard  drumming  from  different  parts  of  the  woods
to  which  it  resorts,  I have  shot  many  a fine  cock  by  imitating  the  sound
of  its  own  wings  striking  against  the  body,  which  I did  by  beating  a large
infiated  bullock’s  bladder  with  a stick,  keeping  up  as  much  as  possible  the
same  time  as  that  in  which  the  bird  beats.  At  the  sound  produced  by
the  bladder  and  the  stick,  the  male  Grouse,  inflamed  with  jealousy,  has
flown  directly  towards  me,  when,  being  prepared,  I have  easily  shot  it.
An  equally  successful  stratagem  is  employed  to  decoy  the  males  of  our
little  Partridge  by  imitating  the  call-note  of  the  female  during  spring
and  summer ; but  in  no  instance,  after  repeated  trials,  have  I been  able
to  entice  the  Pinnated  Grouse  to  come  towards  me,  whilst  imitating  the
booming  sounds  of  that  bird.

Early  in  spring,  these  birds  are  frequently  seen  feeding  on  the  tender
buds  of  different  trees,  and  at  that  season  are  more  easily  approached  than
at  any  other.  Unfortunately,  however,  they  have  not  by  this  time  re-
covered their  flesh  sufficiently  to  render  them  worthy  of  the  attention  of
a true  sportsman,  although  their  flavour,  has  already  improved.  When
our  mountains  are  covered  with  a profusion  of  Huckleberries  and  Whortle-
berries, about  the  beginning  of  September,  then  is  the  time  for  shooting
this  species,  and  enjoying  the  delicious  food  which  it  affords.

The  Ruffed  Grouse,  on  alighting  upon  a tree,  after  being  raised  from


216


RUFFED  GROUSE.


the  ground,  perches  amongst  the  thickest  parts  of  the  foliage,  and,  assum-
ing at  once  an  erect  attitude,  stands  perfectly  still,  and  remains  silent  un-
til all  appearance  of  danger  has  vanished.  If  discovered  when  thus
perched,  it  is  very  easily  shot.  On  rising  from  the  ground,  the  bird
utters  a cackling  note  repeated  six  or  seven  times,  and  before  taking
wing  emits  a lisping  sort  of  whistle,  which  seems  as  if  produced  by  the
young  of  another  bird,  and  is  very  remarkable.

When  the  ground  is  covered  with  snow  sufficiently  soft  to  allow  this
bird  to  conceal  itself  under  it,  it  dives  headlong  into  it  with  such  force  as
to  form  a hole  several  yards  in  length,  re-appears  at  that  distance,  and
continues  to  elude  the  pursuit  of  the  sportsman  by  flight.  They  are
sometimes  caught  while  beneath  the  snow.  Many  of  them  are  taken  alive
in  trap  boxes  during  winter,  although  the  more  common  method  of  catch-
ing or  rather  destroying  them  is  by  setting  dead  falls  with  a figure-of-four
trigger.

Early  in  April,  the  Ruffed  Grouse  begins  to  drum  immediately  after
dawn,  and  again  towards  the  close  of  day.  As  the  season  advances,  the
drumming  is  repeated  more  frequently  at  all  hours  of  the  day ; and  where
these  birds  are  abundant,  this  curious  sound  is  heard  from  all  parts  of  the
woods  in  which  they  reside.  The  drumming  is  performed  in  the  follow-
ing manner.  The  male  bird,  standing  erect  on  a prostrate  decayed  trunk,
raises  the  feathers  of  its  body,  in  the  manner  of  a Turkey-cock,  draws
its  head  towards  it  tail,  erecting  the  feathers  of  the  latter  at  the  same
time,  and  raising  its  ruff  around  the  neck,  suffers  its  wings  to  droop,  and
struts  about  on  the  log.  A few  moments  elapse,  when  the  bird  draws
the  whole  of  its  feathers  close  to  its  body,  and  stretching  itself  out,  beats
its  sides  with  its  wings,  in  the  manner  of  the  domestic  Cock,  but  more
loudly,  and  with  such  rapidity  of  motion,  after  a few  of  the  first  strokes,
as  to  cause  a tremor  in  the  air  not  unlike  the  rumbling  of  distant  thunder.
This,  kind  reader,  is  the  “ drumming^''  of  the  Pheasant.  In  perfectly
calm  weather,  it  may  be  heard  at  the  distance  of  two  hundred  yards,  but
might  be  supposed  to  proceed  from  a much  greater  distance.  The  female,
which  never  drums,  flies  directly  to  the  place  where  the  male  is  thus  en-
gaged, and,  on  approaching  him,  opens  her  wings  before  him,  balances
her  body  to  the  right  and  left,  and  then  receives  his  caresses.

The  same  trunk  is  resorted  to  by  the  same  birds  during  the  season,  un-
less they  are  frequently  disturbed.  These  trunks  are  easily  known  by  the
quantity  of  excrements  and  feathers  about  them.  The  males  have  the


RUFFED  GROUSE.


217


liberty  of  promiscuous  concubinage,  although  not  to  such  an  extent  as
those  of  the  Pinnated  Grouse.  They  have  frequent  and  severe  battles
at  this  season,  which,  although  witnessed  by  the  females,  are  never  inter-
rupted by  them.  The  drumming  sounds  of  these  birds  lead  to  their  de-
struction, every  young  sportsman  taking  the  unfair  advantage  of  approach-
ing them  at  this  season,  and  shooting  them  in  the  act.

About  the  beginning  of  May,  the  female  retires  to  some  thicket  in  a
close  part  of  the  woods,  where  she  forms  a nest.  This  is  placed  by  the
side  of  a prostrate  tree,  or  at  the  foot  of  a low  bush,  on  the  ground,  in  a
spot  where  a heap  of  dried  leaves  has  been  formed  by  the  wind.  The  nest
is  composed  of  dried  leaves  and  herbaceous  plants.  The  female  lays  from
five  to  twelve  eggs,  which  are  of  a uniform  dull  yellowish  colour,  and  are
proportionate  in  size  to  the  bird.  The  latter  never  covers  them  on  leav-
ing the  nest,  and  in  consequence,  the  Raven  and  the  Crow,  always  on  the
look  out  for  such  dainties,  frequently  discover  and  eat  them.  When  the
female  is  present,  however,  she  generally  defends  them  with  great  obstinacy,
striking  the  intruder  with  her  wings  and  feet,  in  the  manner  of  the  Com-
mon Hen.

The  young  run  about  and  follow  the  mother,  the  moment  after  they
leave  the  egg.  They  are  able  to  fly  for  a few  yards  at  a time,  when  only
six  or  seven  days  old,  and  still  very  small.  The  mother  leads  them  in
search  of  food,  covers  them  at  night  with  her  wings,  and  evinces  the
greatest  care  and  affection  towards  them  on  the  least  appearance  of  danger,
trying  by  every  art  in  her  power  to  draw  the  attention  of  her  enemies  to
herself,  feigning  lameness,  tumbling  and  rolling  about  as  if  severely
wounded,  and  by  this  means  generally  succeeding  in  saving  them*  The
little  ones  squat  at  the  least  chuck  of  alarm  from  the  mother,  and  lie  so
close  as  to  suffer  one  to  catch  them  in  the  hand,  should  he  chance  to  dis-
cover them,  which,  however,  it  is  very  difficult  to  do.  The  males  are  then
beginning  to  associate  in  small  parties,  and  continue  separated  from  the
females  until  the  approach  of  winter,  when  males,  females,  and  young,
mingle  together.  During  summer,  these  birds  are  fond  of  dusting  them-
selves, and  resort  to  the  roads  for  that  purpose,  as  well  as  to  pick  up  gra-
vel. I have  observed  this  species  copulating  towards  autumn,  but  have
not  been  able  to  account  for  this  unseasonable  procedure,  as  only  one
brood  is  raised  in  the  season.

These  birds  have  various  enemies  besides  man.  Different  species  of
Hawks  destroy  them,  particularly  the  Red-tailed  Hawk  and  the  Stanley


218


RUFFED  GROUSE.


Hawk.  The  former  watches  their  motions  from  the  tops  of  trees,  and
falls  upon  them  with  the  swiftness  of  thought,  whilst  the  latter  seizes  up-
on them  as  he  glides  rapidly  through  the  woods.  Pole-cats,  weasels,
raccoons,  oppossums,  and  foxes,  are  all  destructive  foes  to  them.  Of
these,  some  are  content  with  sucking  their  eggs,  while  others  feed  on
their  flesh.

I have  found  these  birds  most  numerous  in  the  States  of  Pennsylvania
and  New  York.  They  are  brought  to  the  markets  in  great  numbers,
during  the  winter  months,  and  sell  at  from  75  cents  to  a dollar  a^-piece,
in  the  eastern  cities.  At  Pittsburg  I have  bought  them,  some  years  ago,
for  121  cents  the  pair.  It  is  said  that  when  they  have  fed  for  several
weeks  on  the  leaves  of  the  Kalmia  latifolia,  it  is  dangerous  to  eat  their
flesh,  and  I believe  laws  have  been  passed  to  prevent  their  being  sold  at
that  season.  I have,  however,  eaten  them  at  all  seasons,  and  although  I
have  found  their  crops  distended  with  the  leaves  of  the  Kalmia,  have
never  felt  the  least  inconvenience  after  eating  them,  nor  even  perceived
any  difference  of  taste  in  their  flesh.  I suspect  it  is  only  when  the  birds
have  been  kept  a long  time  undrawn  and  unplucked,  that  the  flesh  be-
comes impregnated  with  the  juice  of  these  leaves.

The  food  of  this  species  consists  of  seeds  and  berries  of  all  kinds,  ac-
cording to  the  season.  It  also  feeds  on  the  leaves  of  several  species  of
evergreens,  although  these  are  only  resorted  to  when  other  food  has  be-
come scarce.  They  are  particularly  fond  of  fox-grapes  and  winter-grapes,
as  well  as  strawberries  and  dewberries.  To  procure  the  latter,  they  issue
from  the  groves  of  the  Kentucky  Barrens,  and  often  stray  to  the  distance
of  a mile.  They  roost  on  trees,  amongst  the  thickest  parts  of  the  fo-
liage, sitting  at  some  distance  fi*om  each  other,  and  may  easily  be  smoked
to  death,  by  using  the  necessary  precautions.

I cannot  conclude  this  article,  kind  reader,  without  observing  how  de-
sirable the  acquisition  of  this  species  might  be  to  the  sportsmen  of  Europe,
and  especially  to  those  of  England,  where  I am  surprised  it  has  not  yet
been  introduced.  The  size  of  these  birds,  the  beauty  of  their  plumage,
the  excellence  of  their  flesh,  and  their  peculiar  mode  of  flying,  would  ren-
der them  valuable,  and  add  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  already  diversi-
fied sports  of  that  country.  In  England  and  Scotland  there  are  thou-
sands of  situations  that  are  by  nature  perfectly  suited  to  their  habits,
and  i have  not  a doubt  that  a few  years  of  attention  would  be  sufficient
to  render  them  quite  as  common  as  the  Grey  Partridge.


RUFFED  GROUSE.


219


Tetrao  Umbellus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  275. — Lath.  Ind.  Orn.  vol.  ii.  p.  638. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  126.

Ruffed  Grouse,  Tetrao  Umbeluus,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  45.  PI.  49.
Male — Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  738.

Shoulder-knot  Grouse. — Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  737*

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLI.  Fig.  1,  2.

Bill  short,  robust,  slightly  arched,  rather  obtuse,  the  base  covered  by
feathers ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  straight  in  the  feathered
part,  convex  towards  the  end,  the  edges  overlapping,  the  tip  declinate  ;
under  mandible  somewhat  bulging  toward  the  tip,  the  sides  convex.
Nostrils  concealed  among  the  feathers.  Head  and  neck  small.  Body
bulky.  Feet  of  ordinary  length ; tarsus  feathered,  excepting  at  the  lower
part  anteriorly,  where  it  is  scutellate,  spurless  ; toes  scutellate  above,  pec-
tinated on  the  sides  ; claws  arched,  depressed,  obtuse.

Plumage  compact,  glossy.  Feathers  of  the  head  narrow  and  elon-
gated into  a curved  tuft.  A large  space  on  the  neck  destitute  of  feathers,
but  covered  over  by  an  erectile  ruff  of  elongated  feathers,  of  which  the
upper  are  silky,  shining,  and  curved  forwards  at  the  end,  which  is  very
broad  and  rounded.  Wings  short,  broad,  much  rounded  and  curved,  the
third  and  fourth  quills  longest.  Tail  long,  ample,  rounded,  of  eighteen
feathers.

Bill  horn-colour,  brownish-black  towards  the  tip.  Iris  hazel.  Feet
yellowish-grey.  Upper  part  of  the  head  and  hind  part  of  the  neck  bright
yellowish-red.  Back  rich  chestnut,  marked  with  oblong  white  spots,  mar-
gined with  black.  Upper  wing-coverts  similar  to  the  back.  Quills
brownish-dusky,  their  outer  webs  pale  reddish,  spotted  with  dusky.  Upper
tail-coverts  banded  with  black.  Tail  reddish-yellow,  barred  and  minutely
mottled  with  black,  and  terminated  by  a broad  band  of  the  latter  colour,
between  two  narrow  bands  of  bluish-white,  of  which  one  is  terminal.  A
yellowish- white  band  from  the  upper  mandible  to  the  eye,  beyond  which
it  is  prolonged.  Throat  and  lower  part  of  the  neck  light  brownish-yel-
low. Lower  ruff  feathers  of  the  same  colour,  barred  with  reddish-brown,
the  upper  black  with  blue  reflections.  A tuft  of  light  chestnut  feathers
under  the  wings.  The  rest  of  the  under  parts  yellowish- white,  with  broad
transverse  spots  of  brownish-red ; the  abdomen  yellowish-red ; and  the
under  tail-coverts  mottled  with  brown.


220


RUFFED  GROUSE.


Length  18  inches,  extent  of  wings  2 feet ; bill  along  the  ridge  f,  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  middle  toe  If.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XLI.  Fig.  8.

The  plumage  of  the  female  is  less  developed  and  inferior  in  beauty.
The  feathers  of  the  head  and  ruff  are  less  elongated,  the  latter  of  a
duller  black.  The  tints  of  the  plumage  generally  are  lighter  than  in
the  male.


( 221  )


THE  ORCHARD  ORIOLE.

Icterus  spvrius,  Bonap.

PLATE  XLII.  Male  in  different  states,  Adult  Female  and  Nest.

The  plumage  of  many  species  of  our  birds  undergoes  at  times  very
extraordinary  changes.  Some,  such  as  the  male  Tanagers,  which  during
the  summer  months  exhibit  the  most  vivid  scarlet  and  velvety  black,  as-
sume a dingy  green  before  they  leave  the  country,  on  their  way  south-
ward. The  Goldfinch  nearly  changes  to  the  same  colour,  after  having
been  seen  in  a gay  apparel  of  yellow  and  black.  The  Rice  Bird  loses
its  lively  brightness  until  the  return  of  spring.  Others  take  several  years
before  they  complete  their  plumage,  so  as  to  shew  the  true  place  which
they  hold  amongst  the  other  species,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Ibis,  the
Flamingo,  and  many  other  Waders,  as  well  as  with  several  of  our  land
birds,  among  which,  kind  reader,  the  species  now  under  your  considera-
tion is  probably  that  in  which  these  gradual  improvements  are  most  ob-
servable by  such  persons  as  reside  in  the  country  inhabited  by  them.

The  plumage  of  the  young  birds  of  this  species,  when  they  leave  the
nest,  resembles  that  of  the  female  parent,  although  rather  less  decided  in
point  of  colouring,  and  both  males  and  females  retain  this  colour  until
the  approach  of  the  following  spring,  when  the  former  exhibit  a portion
of  black  on  the  chin,  the  females  never  altering.  In  birds  kept  in  cages,
this  portion  of  black  remains  without  farther  augmentation  for  two  years ;
but  in  those  which  are  at  liberty,  a curious  mixture  of  dull  orange  or
deep  chestnut  peeps  out  through  a considerable  increase  of  black-co-
loured feathers  over  the  body  and  wings,  intermixed  with  the  yellowish-
green  hue  which  the  bird  had  when  it  left  the  nest.  The  third  spring
brings  him  nearer  towards  perfection,  as  at  that  time  the  deep  chestnut
colour  has  taken  possession  of  the  lower  parts,  the  black  has  deepened  on
the  upper  parts,  and  over  the  whole  head,  as  well  as  on  the  wings  and
tail-feathers.  Yet  the  garb  with  which  it  is  ultimately  to  be  covered
requires  another  return  of  spring  before  it  is  completed,  after  which  it
remains  as  exhibited  in  the  adult  male,  represented  in  the  plate.

These  extraordinary  changes  are  quite  sufficient  of  themselves  to  lead
naturalists  abroad  into  error,  as  they  give  rise  to  singular  arguments  even


222


ORCHARD  ORIOLE.


with  some  persons  in  America,  who  maintain  that  the  differences  of  colour
are  indicative  of  different  species.  But,  since  the  habits  of  these  birds
under  all  these  singular  changes  of  plumage  are  ascertained  to  be  pre-
cisely the  same,  the  argument  no  longer  holds  good.  I shall  now  en-
deavour to  describe  these  habits  with  all  the  accuracy  supplied  by  long
observation.

The  migration  of  the  Orchard  Oriole  from  south  to  north  is  performed
by  day,  and  singly,  as  is  that  of  its  relative  the  Baltimore  Oriole,  the
males  appearing  a week  or  ten  days  sooner  than  the  females.  Their
flight  is  lower  than  that  of  the  Baltimore,  and  considerably  shorter  in  its
continuance,  the  Orchard  Oriole  alighting  more  frequently  on  the  tops  of
the  trees,  to  rest  or  to  feed.  They  exhibit  a greater  repetition  of  motions  of
the  wings,  although  sliding  through  the  air  for  a few  yards  only  at  a time,
and  whilst  about  to  alight,  as  well  as  afterwards,  perform  strong  and  well
marked  jettings  of  the  tail.  This  the  Baltimore  seldom  does.  No  sooner
have  they  reached  the  portion  of  the  country  in  which  they  intend  to  re-
main during  the  time  of  raising  their  young,  than  these  birds  exhibit  all
the  liveliness  and  vivacity  belonging  to  their  nature.  The  male  is  seen
rising  in  the  air  for  ten  or  twenty  yards  in  an  indirect  manner,  jerking
his  tail  and  body,  flapping  his  wings,  and  singing  with  remarkable  im-
petuosity, as  if  under  the  influence  of  haste,  and  anxious  to  return  to  the
tree  from  which  he  has  departed.  He  accordingly  descends  with  the
same  motions  of  the  body  and  tail,  repeating  his  pleasant  song  as  he
alights.  These  gambols  and  carollings  are  performed  frequently  during
the  day,  the  intervals  being  employed  in  ascending  or  descending  along
the  branches  and  twigs  of  different  trees,  in  search  of  insects  or  larvae.
In  doing  this,  they  rise  on  their  legs,  seldom  without  jetting  the  tail,
stretch  their  neck,  seize  the  prey,  and  emit  a single  note,  which  is  sweet
and  mellow,  although  in  power  much  inferior  to  that  of  the  Baltimore.
At  other  times,  it  is  seen  bending  its  body  downwards,  in  a curved  pos-
ture, with  the  head  greatly  inclined  upwards,  to  peep  at  the  under  parts
of  the  leaves,  so  as  not  to  suffer  any  grub  to  escape  its  vigilance.  It  now
alights  on  the  ground,  where  it  has  spied  a crawling  insect,  and  again
flies  towards  the  blossoms,  in  which  many  are  lurking,  and  devours
hundreds  of  them  each  day,  thus  contributing  to  secure  to  the  farmer  the
hopes  which  he  has  of  the  productiveness  of  his  orchard.

The  arrival  of  the  females  is  marked  with  all  due  regard,  and  the
males  immediately  use  every  effort  in  their  power  to  procure  from  them


ORCHARD  ORIOLE.


223


a return  of  attention.  Their  singings  and  tricks  are  performed  with  re-
doubled ardour,  until  they  are  paired,  when  nidification  is  attended  to
with  the  utmost  activity.  They  resort  to  the  meadows,  or  search  along
the  fences  for  the  finest,  longest,  and  toughest  grasses  they  can  find,  and
having  previously  fixed  on  a spot  either  on  an  Apple  Tree,  or  amidst
the  drooping  branches  of  the  Weeping  Willow,  they  begin  by  attaching
the  grass  firmly  and  neatly  to  the  twigs  more  immediately  around  the
chosen  place.  The  filaments  are  twisted,  passed  over  and  under,  and  inter-
woven in  such  a manner  as  almost  to  defy  the  eye  of  man  to  follow  their
windings.  All  this  is  done  by  the  bill  of  the  bird,  in  the  manner  used
by  the  Baltimore  Oriole.  The  nest  is  of  a hemispherical  form,  and
is  supported  by  the  margin  only.  It  seldom  exceeds  three  or  four
inches  in  depth,  is  open  almost  to  the  full  extent  of  its  largest  diameter
at  the  top  or  entrance,  and  finished  on  all  sides,  as  well  as  within,  with
the  long  slender  grasses  already  mentioned.  Some  of  these  go  round
the  nest  several  times,  as  if  coarsely  woven  together.  This  is  the  man-
ner in  which  the  nest  is  constructed  in  Louisiana ; in  the  Middle  Districts
it  is  usually  lined  with  soft  and  warm  materials.  The  female  lays  from
four  to  six  eggs  of  a bluish-white  tint,  sprinkled  with  dark  brown,  and
raises  only  a single  brood  in  the  season.  The  young  follow  the  parents
for  several  weeks,  and  many  birds  congregate  towards  autumn,  but  the
males  soon  separate  from  the  females,  and  set  out  by  themselves  as  they
arrived  in  spring.

The  sociality  of  the  Orchard  Oriole  is  quite  remarkable,  and  in  this
respect  that  bird  differs  widely  from  the  Baltimore,  which  will  not  suffer
any  other  bird  of  its  species  to  build  a nest,  or  to  remain  within  a con-
siderable distance  from  the  spot  which  it  has  selected  for  its  own  ; whereas
many  nests  of  the  species  now  before  you  may  be  observed  in  the  same
garden  or  orchard,  and  often  within  a few  yards  of  the  house.  I have
counted  as  many  as  nine  of  these  nests  on  a few  acres  of  ground,  and  the
different  pairs  to  which  they  belonged  lived  in  great  harmony.

Although  the  food  of  the  Orchard  Orioles  consists  principally  of  in-
sects of  various  kinds,  it  is  not  composed  exclusively  of  them.  They  are
fond  of  different  sorts  of  fruits  and  berries.  Figs  are  also  much  relished
by  them,  as  well  as  mulberries  and  strawberries,  but  not  to  such  a degree
as  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  gardener  or  husbandman  towards  their
depredations.


224


ORCHARD  ORIOLE.


This  species  makes  its  first  appearance  in  Louisiana  early  in  March,
and  remains  until  October,  being  seen  for  several  weeks  after  the  Balti-
more Oriole  has  set  out.  In  reaches  the  Middle  Districts  in  the  begin-
ning of  April.  I have  met  with  it  as  far  as  the  province  of  Maine  and
the  head  waters  of  the  Mississippi.  It  is  fond  of  high  ground  and  the
neighbourhood  of  mountains  during  the  breeding  season,  after  which  it
removes  to  the  meadows  and  prairies  in  considerable  numbers.  Whilst
in  these  meadows,  it  feeds  principally  upon  a small  species  of  cricket,
ground  spiders  and  small  grasshoppers.  Their  flesh  is  very  good  at
that  late  season,  and  is  much  esteemed  by  the  Creoles  of  Louisiana.

The  French  of  that  State  give  it  the  name  of  Pape  de  Prairie,  while
they  designate  the  Baltimore  Oriole  by  that  of  Pape  de  Bois,  which  arises
no  doubt  from  the  marked  preference  which  the  former  manifests  to  the
plains  in  autumn,  where  a great  number  are  shot  or  caught  in  trap  cages.
It  is  easily  kept  in  cages,  where  it  sings  with  all  the  liveliness  which  it
shews  in  its  wild  state,  and  may  be  fed  on  rice  and  dry  fruits,  when  fresh
ones  cannot  be  procured.  I have  known  one  of  these  birds,  a beautiful
male,  kept  for  upwards  of  four  years  by  a friend  of  mine  at  New  Orleans.
It  had  been  raised  from  the  nest,  and  having  passed  through  the  different
changes  of  its  plumage,  had  become  perfect,  was  full  of  action,  and  sung
delightfully.

The  nest  represented  in  the  plate  was  drawn  in  Louisiana,  and  was
entirely  composed  of  grass.  It  may  be  looked  upon  as  a sample  of  the
usual  form  and  construction.  The  branch  of  Honey  Locust  on  which
you  see  these  birds  belongs  to  a tree  which  sometimes  grows  to  a great
height,  without  much  apparent  choice  of  situation.  It  is  more  abundant
to  the  west  of  the  Alleghanies,  and  towards  the  Southern  Districts,  than  in
the  Middle  States.  The  wood  is  brittle  and  seldom  used.  The  trunk  and
branches  are  frequently  covered  with  innumerable  long,  sharp,  and  ex-
tremely hard  spines,  protruded  in  every  direction,  and  in  some  instances
placed  so  near  to  each  other  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  any  person’s
climbing  them.  It  bears  a long  pod,  containing  a sweet  substance,  not
unlike  that  of  the  honey  of  bees,  and  which  is  eaten  by  children,  when  it
becomes  quite  ripe.  The  spines  are  made  use  of  by  tobacconists  for  the
purpose  of  fastening  together  the  different  twists  of  their  rolls.


1


ORCHARD  ORIOLE.


225


Icterus  spurius,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  51.

Oriolus  spurius,  Gm'eL  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  389. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  180»

Bastard  Baltimore,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  433.

Orchard  Oriole,  Oriolus  mutatus,  Wils.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  64.  PI.  iv.
fig.  1,  2,  3,  4.

Male  in  complete  plumage.  Plate  XLII.  Fig.  1,  2.

Bill  conical,  slender,  longish,  compressed,  a little  curved,  very  acute,
with  inflected  acute'margins  ; upper  mandible  obtuse  above,  lower  broad-
ly obtuse  beneath.  Nostrils  oval,  covered  by  a membrane  above,  basal.
Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary
length  ; tarsus  a little  longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; inner  toe  little  shorter
than  the  outer ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  hind  toe
twice  the  size  of  the  others.  :

Plumage  soft,  blended,  glossy.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  second
and  third  primaries  longest.  Tail  long,  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded
feathers.

Bill  black  above  with  light  blue  margins,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris
reddish-brown.  Feet  light  blue.  Head,  neck,  and  upper  back  black  ;
the  rest  of  the  body  dusky  orange-red,  approaching  to  chestnut.  Quills
and  larger  coverts  black,  margined  with  yellow,  the  latter  tipped  with
yellowish- white  ; tail  black.

Length  6^  inches,  extent  of  wings  9 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  f ; tarsus  1,  middle  toe  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  XLII.  Fig.  5.

Bill,  feet  and  iris,  as  in  the  male.  Head  and  upper  parts  brownish-
green.  Wings  and  tail  greenish-brown  ; wing-coverts  tipped  with  white ;
throat  white,  sides  of  the  neck  and  under  parts  generally  greyish-yellow.
The  young  of  both  sexes  resemble  the  female.

Male,  first  autumn  and  spring.  Plate  XLII.  Fig.  3.

A patch  of  black  on  the  throat,  continued  upwards  over  the  lore  and
forehead.  Head  and  upper  parts  brownish-green  ; fore  part  of  the  back
orange  ; a yellow  band  over  the  eye.  Under  parts  light  yellow.  Wings
and  tail  as  in  the  female,  but  the  coverts  tipped  with  yellow.

F


226


ORCHARD  ORIOLE.


Male  in  the  second  year.  Plate  XLII.  Fig  4.

Irregularly  spotted  with  black,  yellow,  and  reddish  orange,  on  the
head,  neck,  and  back  ; the  other  parts  nearly  as  in  the  adult  male.


The  Honey  Locust.

Gleditschia  triacanthos,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  1097.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.
vol.  i.  p.  221.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  vol.  iii.  p.  164.  PI.  10. — Polygamia  Dkecia,
Linn.  Leguminos.®,  Juss.

This  tree,  when  growing  in  situations  most  favourable  to  it,  sometimes
attains  a height  of  sixty  or  eighty  feet,  and  a diameter  of  three  or  four.
The  bark  is  detached  in  large  plates,  and  the  trunk  is  marked  with  seve-
ral broad  furrows.  The  flowers,  which  are  small  and  of  a greenish
colour,  are  succeeded  by  long,  flat,  pendent,  generally  tortuous  pods,  of
a brown  colour.  The  wood  is  very  hard,  but  porous  and  brittle.  This
species  is  distinguished  by  its  numerous,  generally  tripartite  spines,  its
linear-oblong  leaflets,  and  its  many-seeded,  compressed  legumes.


( 227  )


THE  CEDAR  BIRD.

BoMBYCILLA  CAEOLINENSISy  BrISS.

PLATE  XLIII.  Male  and  Female.

Louisiana  affords  abundance  of  food  and  pleasant  weather  to  this
species,  for  nearly  four  months  of  the  year,  as  the  Cedar  Birds  reach
that  State  about  the  beginning  of  November,  and  retire  towards  the
Middle  Districts  in  the  beginning  of  March.  The  Holly,  the  Vines,
the  Persimon,  the  Pride-of-China,  and  various' other  trees,  supply  them
with  plenty  of  berries  and  fruits,  on  which  they  fatten,  and  become  so
tender  and  juicy  as  to  be  sought  by  every  epicure  for  the  table.  I have
known  an  instance  of  a basketful  of  these  little  birds  having  been  for-
warded to  New  Orleans  as  a Christmas  present.  The  donor,  however,
was  disappointed  in  his  desire  to  please  his  friend  in  that  city,  for  it  was
afterwards  discovered  that  the  steward  of  the  steamer,  in  which  they  were
shipped,  made  pies  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  passengers.

The  appetite  of  the  Cedar  Bird  is  of  so  extraordinary  a nature  as  to
prompt  it  to  devour  every  fruit  or  berry  that  comes  in  its  way.  In  this
manner  they  gorge  themselves  to  such  excess  as  sometimes  to  be  unable
to  fly,  and  suffer  themselves  to  be  taken  by  the  hand.  Indeed  I have
seen  some  which,  although  wounded  and  confined  in  a cage,  have  eaten
of  apples  until  suffocation  deprived  them  of  life  in  the  course  of  a few
days.  When  opened  afterwards,  they  were  found  to  be  gorged  to  the
mouth.

It  is  a beautiful  bird,  but  without  any  song,  even  during  the  breed-
ing season,  having  only  a note  which  it  uses  for  the  purpose  of  calling  or
rallying  others  of  its  species.  This  note  is  feeble,  and  as  it  were  lisping,
yet  perfectly  effectual,  for  when  uttered  by  one  in  a flock  within  hearing
of  another  party,  the  latter  usually  check  their  flight,  and  alight  pell-
mell  on  the  same  tree.

Their  flight  is  easy,  continued,  and  often  performed  at  a considerable
height.  The  birds  move  in  close  bodies,  sometimes  amounting  to  large
flocks,  making  various  circumvolutions  before  they  alight,  and  then  com-
ing down  in  such  numbers  together  as  to  seem  to  be  touching  each  other.
At  this  particular  moment,  or  while  performing  their  evolutions,  some

p


CEDAR  BIRD.


dozens  may  be  killed  at  a single  shot ; but  if  this  opportunity  is  lost,
the  next  moment  after  they  alight,  the  whole  group  is  in  motion,  dispers-
ing over  every  bough  to  pick  the  berries  which  attracted  them  from  the
air.  Their  crest  is  now  erected,  their  wings  are  seen  constantly  moving,
and  so  eagerly  do  they  grasp  at  the  berries  that  they  sulfer  many  of  them
to  fall.  Every  flock  passing  within  hearing  is  invited  to  join  in  the
feast,  and  in  a few  hours  the  tree  is  entirely  stripped  of  its  fruit.  In
this  manner  they  search  the  whole  of  the  forests,  and  towards  winter  are
even  satisfied  with  the  berries  of  the  Dog-wood.  As  the  cherries  and
mulberries  ripen  in  the  Middle  Districts,  the  Cedar  Bird  pays  them
frequent  visits,  and  when  these  are  out  of  season,  the  blackberries  and
huckleberries  have  their  turn.  After  this,  the  Cedars  supply  a new
and  favourite  food.  I think  the  name  of  FruiUdevourers  would  be  more
applicable  to  these  birds  than  that  of  Chatterers,  which  they  bear  among
naturalists.  ^

They  are  excellent  fly-catchers  also,  spending  much  of  their  time  in
the  pursuit  of  winged  insects.  This  is  by  way  of  dessert,  and  is  not  ma-
naged with  the  vivacity  or  suddenness  of  true  Fly-catchers,  but  with  a
kind  of  listlessness.  They  start  from  the  branches,  and  give  chase  to  the
insects,  ascending  after  them  for  a few  yards,  or  move  horizontally  to-
Avards  them,  perhaps  rather  farther  than  when  ascending,  and  as  soon  as
the  prey  is  secured,  return  to  the  spot,  where  they  continue  watching
with  slow  motions  of  the  head.  Towards  evening,  this  amusement  is
carried  on  for  half  an  hour,  or  an  hour  at  a time,  and  is  continued
longer  at  the  approach  of  autumn,  the  berries  then  becoming  scarcer.

These  birds  come  from  the  north,  but  the  furthest  place  from  which
they  have  started  I am  unable  to  tell.  They  reach  the  Middle  Districts
about  the  beginning  of  April,  and  begin  to  pair  in  the  beginning  of
June,  when  thousands  of  young  birds  of  other  species  have  already
left  the  nest.  Their  favourite  place  for  their  nest  is  generally  the  branch
of  an  Apple-tree  in  the  Orchard,  its  horizontal  direction  being  apparent-
ly best  adapted  for  their  taste,  although  here  they  are  frequently  very
insecure,  the  nest  being  seldom  higher  than  ten  feet  from  the  ground,  and
often  so  low  as  to  be  seen  into.  It  is  composed  of  coarse"  grasses  exter-
nally, and  is  lined  with  a finer  kind.  The  female  usually  lays  four  eggs,
of  a purplish  white,  marked  with  black  spots,  which  are  larger  towards
the  great  end.  The  young  are  at  first  fed  on  insects,  but  after  a week
tlie  parents  procure  different  kinds  of  fruits  for  them.  The  Cedar  Bird


CEDAR  BIRD.


229


nestles  less  frequently  in  the  low  lands  than  it  does  in  the  upper  parts  of  the
country,  preferring  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  mountains.  These
birds  are  more  careful  of  themselves  during  the  intrusion  of  strangers  to
their  nest,  than  perhaps  any  other  species,  and  sneak  off,  in  a very  unpa-
rental  manner,  quite  out  of  sight,  without  ever  evincing  the  least  appear-
ance of  sorrow  on  the  occasion.  I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whe-
ther they  raise  more  than  one  brood  in  a season.

When  wounded  by  a shot,  they  fall  to  the  ground  as  if  dead,  and  re-
main there  in  a stiffened  posture,  as  if  absolutely  stupid.  When  taken
up  in  the  hand,  they  merely  open  their  bill,  without  ever  attempting  to
bite,  and  will  suffer  a person  to  carry  them  in  the  open  hand,  without
endeavouring  to  make  off.  Their  crest  at  such  times  is  laid  flat  and
close  to  the  head.  It  is  lowered  or  raised  at  the  will  of  the  bird,  but
more  usually  stands  erect.  Their  plumage  is  silky.  The  females  do
not  exhibit  the  waxen  appendages  on  the  wings  so  soon  as  the  males  ; but
these  appendages  form  no  criterion  as  tq  the  sex.  I have  seen  males  and
females  with  them,  both  at  the  extremities  of  the  scapulars  and  tail-
feathers,  seldom  more  than  two  or  three  attached  to  the  latter,  whilst
there  were  five  or  six  at  the  former.  Very  few  of  these  birds  remain  the
whole  winter  in  the  Middle  States.

Now,  kind  reader,  can  you  give  a reason  why  these  birds  are  so  tardy
in  laying  their  eggs  and  rearing  their  young .?  It  cannot  be  through
want  of  fruit  for  the  food  of  their  progeny,  as  the  young  birds,  being  at
first  fed  on  insects,  might  continue  to  be  so,  at  a season  when  these
abound,  and  as  the  old  birds  themselves  evince  pleasure  at  seizing  them
on  the  wing  on  all  occasions.

Bombycilla  CAB.OLINENSIS,  Bnss.  vol.  ii.  p.  337. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds
of  the  United  States,  p.  59.

Ampelis  garrulus,  var.  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  297. — Lath.  Ind,  Ornith.
vol.  i.  p.  364.

Chatterer  of  Carolina,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  93.

Cedar  Bird,  Ampelis  Americana,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  107.  Fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  straightish,  broader  than  deep  at  the  base,  compressed  to-
wards the  end ; upper  mandible  convex  in  its  dorsal  outline,  with  the
-edges  sharp,  overlapping,  and  marked  with  a notch  close  upor  the  dec]  i-


230


CEDAR  BIRD.


nate,  acute  tip ; lower  mandible  nearly  straight,  a little  bulging  toward
the  end.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  partially  concealed  by  the  recumbent
feathers.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  bulky.  Legs  rather
short ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  scutellate ; toes  scutellate  above,
the  outer  toe  united  at  the  base  to  the  middle  one,  the  inner  shorter  than
the  outer ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  silky;  an  erectile  tuft  on  the  head.
Wings  rather  long,  the  first  quill  longest.  Tail  slightly  rounded,  of
twelve  straight,  broad  feathers.

Bill,  eyes,  and  feet,  brownish-black.  A black  band  on  the  forehead,
passing  backwards,  tapering  behind  the  eye,  to  the  occiput,  and  margined
above  and  below  by  a narrow  white  band.  Head,  neck,  and  breast  yel-
lowish-brown, or  fawn  colour,  fading  into  yellow  on  the  abdomen,  and
yellowish-white  under  the  tail.  Chin  black.  Back  and  wing-coverts
greyish-brown,  passing  on  the  lower  back  into  light  bluish-grey,  of  which
colour  are  the  tail-coverts.  Quills  brownish-black,  some  of  the  secon-
daries tipped  with  a small  flat,  oblong  appendage,  of  the  colour  of  red
sealing-wax.  Of  these  appendages  there  are  also  frequently  some  on  the
tail,  which  is  greyish  at  the  base,  passing  into  brownish-black,  and  ter-
minated by  a band  of  pale  yellow.

Length  6|  inches,  extent  of  wings  11  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  J ; tarsus  f ,

Adult  Female.  Plate  XLIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  slightly  smaller,  and  in  external  appearance  differs
from  the  male  only  in  being  a little  lighter  in  the  tints  of  the  plumage,
and  in  having  the  crest  shorter.  The  waxen  appendages  also  occur  in
the  female.


The  Red  Cedar.

JUNIPERUS  VIRGINIAN  A,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  863.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de
I’Amer.  Septent.  vol.  iii.  p.  42.  PI.  5.— .Dkecia  Monadelphia,  Linn.  Co=
nifera;,  Juss.

This  plant  is  very  generally  distributed  in  the  United  States,  and  fre-
quently attains  a height  of  from  forty  to  fifty  feet,  with  a diameter  of  a


CEDAR  BIRD.


231


foot  or  fifteen  inches  at  the  base.  It  is  distinguished  by  its  ternate  leaves,
which  are  adnate  at  the  base,  and  imbricated.  The  berries  are  oval,
small,  and  of  a bluish  colour.  The  wood  is  red,  close-grained,  very  du-
rable, and  has  a strong  scent.  Its  growth  is  extremely  slow,  and  this
circumstance,  together  with  the  great  destruction  of  the  tree  for  various
purposes,  has  rendered  it  difficult  to  procure  cedar-wood  of  tolerable  size
in  the  more  accessible  parts  of  the  country.


( ^232  )


THE  SUMMER  RED  BIRD.

Tan  AGRA  JESTIVA,  Gmel.

PLATE  XLIV.  Adult  Male,  Young  Male,  and  Female.

This  beautiful  species  is  destitute  of  song,  and  is  of  solitary  habits,
preferring  at  all  times  the  interior  of  the  forests,  but  not  the  densest
parts  of  them.  I have  observed  that  woods  interspersed  with  what  are
called  scruhhij  hickories  or  stunted  oaks,  are  favourite  resorts  of  the
Summer  Red  Birds.

Their  residence  in  the  United  States  scarcely  exceeds  four  months.
None  remain  in  any  of  the  more  southern  parts  of  our  districts.  Indeed,
by  the  middle  of  September,  it  would  be  difficult  to  see  a single  pair  in
the  forests  of  Louisiana.  So  very  tender  do  they  seem  to  be  in  regard  to
cold,  or  even  temperate  weather,  that  they  seldom  go  farther  north  than
Boston,  or  the  shores  of  Lake  Erie,  but  prefer  the  sandy  woodlands  all
along  the  eastern  shores,  as  far  as  Massachusets.

Their  flight  is  performed  in  a gliding  manner  when  passing  through
the  woods,  generally  amidst  the  top  branches  of  trees.  Whilst  migrat-
ing, they  rise  high  above  the  trees,  and  pursue  their  journeys  only  during
the  day,  diving  towards  dusk  into  the  thickest  parts  of  the  foliage  of  tall
trees,  from  which  their  usual  unmusical  but  well-known  notes  of  cMcky-
chucky-chuck  are  heard,  after  the  light  of  day  has  disappeared.  This
species  feeds  principally  on  insects,  and  especially  coleoptera,  some  of
which  are  often  of  larger  size  than  a bird  of  the  dimensions  of  the
Summer  Red  Bird  might  be  supposed  capable  of  swallowing.  It  seldom
alights  on  the  ground,  but  prefers  pursuing  insects  on  the  wing,  which  it
frequently  does  from  the  dried  twigs  at  the  extremity  of  the  branches.

The  construction  of  the  nest  of  this  richly  clad  species  is  nearly  the
same  in  all  parts  of  the  Union  in  which  it  breeds.  It  is  frequently  fixed
on  a bl  anch  crossing  a road,  or  an  opening  of  some  description,  or,  if
in  the  woods,  in  some  partially  cleared  space.  It  is  usually  placed  low
on  a horizontal  branch.  It  is  composed  externally  of  dried  stalks  of
weeds,  and  is  finished  within  with  fine  grass,  arranged  in  a slovenly  man-
ner. It  is  so  insecurely  fastened  to  tlie  branch,  that  it  may  be  shaken  off


SUMMER  RED  BIRD.


233


by  striking  the  latter  smartly.  The  female  lays  four  or  five  eggs  of  a
light  blue  colour.  The  male  and  female  sit  upon  them  alternately  for
twelve  days,  and  are  as  anxious  about  their  safety  as  most  species.  The
young  are  seen  about  the  beginning  of  June,  and  follow  their  parents
\mtil  the  time  of  the  migration  of  the  latter,  which  takes  place  a fort-
night earlier  than  that  of  the  young  birds.  They  raise  only  one  brood
in  a season.

The  alterations  of  plumage  which  appear  in  the  young  birds  between
the  period  at  which  they  leave  the  nest,  and  the  ensuing  spring,  are  as
great  as  those  of  the  Orchard  Oriole.  They  are  at  first  nearly  of  the
colour  of  the  female.  The  males  become  a little  mottled  with  dull  red-
dish-orange, towards  the  time  of  their  departure  for  the  south,  the
females  only  deepening  their  tints.  T.  he  following  spring,  the  male  ap-
pears either  spotted  all  over  the  body  with  bright  red  and  yellowish-
green,  or  only  partially  so,  having  sometimes  one  wing  of  a greenish  hue,
whilst  the  other  is  tinged  all  over  with  a dull  vermilion  tint.  All  these
spots  and  shades  of  colour  gradually  disappear,  giving  place  to  vermi-
lion, which,  however,  is  yet  dull ; nor  is  it  until  the  third  spring  that  the
full  brilliancy  of  the  plumage  is  attained.

I have  several  times  attempted  to  raise  the  young  from  the  nest,  but
in  vain.  Insects,  fruits,  and  eggs,  mixed  with  boiled  meat  of  various
kinds,  always  failed,  and  the  birds  generally  died  in  a very  few  days,
uttering  a dull  note,  as  if  elicited  by  great  suffering.  The  same  note  is
emitted  by  the  young  in  their  state  of  freedom,  when,  perched  on  a
branch,  they  await  the  appearance  of  their  parents  with  their  proper
food.

I have  represented  an  adult  male,  his  mate,  and  a young  bird  in  its
singularly  patched  state,  to  enable  you  to  judge  how  different  a family
of  these  birds  must  appear  to  the  eye  of  a person  unacquainted  with  the
peculiarity  of  these  differences  and  changes  of  plumage.

The  Vine  on  which  you  see  them  is  usually  called  the  Muscadine.  It
grows  everywhere  in  Louisiana,  and  the  State  of  Mississippi,  and  that
most  luxuriantly.  In  those  States  you  may  see  vines  of  this  species  fif-
teen inches  in  diameter  near  the  roots,  either  entwined  round  the  trunk
of  a large  tree,  and  by  this  means  reaching  the  top  branches  and  extend-
ing over  them  and  those  of  another  tree,  or,  as  if  by  magic,  swinging  in
the  air,  from  roots  attached  at  once  to  some  of  the  uppermost  branches.
In  favourable  seasons,  they  are  laden  with  grapes,  which  hang  in  small


234


SUMMER  RED  BIRD.


clusters  from  every  branch,  from  which,  when  they  are  fully  ripe,  a good
shake  will  make  them  fall  in  astonishing  quantity.  The  skin  is  thick
and  very  tough,  the  pulp  glutinous,  but  so  peculiarly  flavoured  as  to  be
very  agreeable  to  the  taste.  These  grapes  are  eaten  by  most  people,
although  an  idea  prevails,  in  Lower  Louisiana  particularly,  that  the  eat-
ing of  them  gives  rise  to  bilious  fevers.  For  my  part,  I can  well  say,
that  the  more  I have  eaten  of  them  the  better  I have  found  myself ; and
for  this  reason  seldom  lost  an  opportunity  of  refreshing  my  palate  with
some  of  them  in  all  my  rambles.  I am  equally  confident,  that  their  juice
would  make  an  excellent  wine.  Another  absurd  opinion  prevails  in
Louisiana,  which  is,  that  the  Common  Blackberries,  however  ripe  and
pleasant,  produce  boils ; although  the  country  people  make  use  of  a
strong  decoction  of  the  root  as  a cure  for  dysentery.


Tanagea  -ESTIVA,  Chnel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  889. — Lath.  Ind.  Orn.  vol.  1.  p.  422

Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  105.

Summer  Tanager,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  220.

Summer  Bed  Bird,  Tanagra  estiva,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  95,  PI.  vi.
fig.  3.  Male,  fig.  4.  Female.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  rather  short,  robust,  tapering,  compressed,  acute ; upper  mandi-
ble a little  convex  in  its  dorsal  outline,  convex  on  the  sides,  the  acute
edge  slightly  notched  near  the  tip,  which  is  a little  declinate;  lower
mandible  also  a little  convex  in  its  dorsal  outline,  with  the  edges  inflect-
ed. Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  round.  Head  large.  Body  rather  long.
Feet  shortish  ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  scutellate,  about  the  length
of  the  middle  toe ; outer  toe  united  at  the  base  to  the  middle  one ;
claws  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  glossy.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the
second  quiU  longest.  Tail  slightly  emarginate,  of  twelve  acute  feathers.

Bill  yellowish-brown  above,  bluish  below.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  and
claws  light  greyish-blue.  The  whole  plumage  is  vermilion,  brighter  on
the  lower  parts,  excepting  the  tips  and  inner  webs  of  the  quills,  which  are
tinged  with  brown.

Length  7:$  inches,  extent  of  wings  11  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  1 ; tarsus  f .


SUMMER  RED  BIRD.


235


Adult  Female.  Plate  XL IV.  Fig.  3.

The  general  colour  above  is  light  brownish-green,  the  sides  of  the
head  and  the  under  parts  generally  brownish-yellow ; larger  wing-coverts
dusky,  edged  with  yellow  ; quills  deep  brown,  externally  margined  with
yellowish-red ; tail-feathers  of  the  same  colour.  The  bill,  eyes  and  legs
are  of  the  same  tints  as  in  the  male.

Dimensions  nearly  the  same.

Young  Male.  Plate  XLIV.  Fig.  2.

Dull  vermilion,  spotted  with  dull  green.


The  Wild  Muscadine.

ViTis  ROTUNDiFOLiA,  Mwh.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  231.  Pursh^  Flor.  Ainer.  vol.  i.
p.  169. — Pentandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Vites,  Juss.

Leaves  between  hear1>shaped  and  kidney-shaped,  nearly  equally
toothed,  shining  on  both  sides.


( 236  )


TRAILL’S  FLY  CATCHER.

Muscicapa  Traillii.

PLATE  XI. V.  Male.

This  is  a species  which,  in  its  external  appearance,  is  so  closely  allied
to  the  Wood  Pewee^  and  the  small  Green-crested  Fly-catcher,  that  the
most  careful  inspection  is  necessary  to  establish  the  real  dijfFerences  exist-
ing between  these  three  species.  Its  notes,  however,  are  perfectly  dif-
ferent, as  are,  in  some  measure,  its  habits,  as  well  as  the  districts  in
which  it  resides.

The  notes  of  TrailFs  Fly-catcher  consist  of  the  sounds  ivheet^  xvheet^
which  it  articulates  clearly  while  on  wing.  It  resides  in  the  skirts  of  the
woods  along  the  prairie  lands  of  the  Arkansas  river,  where  alone  I have
been  able  to  procure  it.  When  leaving  the  top  branches  of  a low  tree,
this  bird  takes  long  flights,  skimming  in  zigzag  lines,  passing  close  over
the  tops  of  the  tall  grasses,  snapping  at  and  seizing  different  species  of
winged  insects,  and  returning  to  the  same  trees  to  alight.  Its  notes,  I
observed,  were  uttered  when  on  the  point  of  leaving  the  branch.  The
pair  chased  the  insects  as  if  acting  in  concert,  and  doubtless  had  a nest  in
the  immediate  neighbourhood,  although  I was  unable  to  discover  it.  It
being  in  the  month  of  April,  I suspected  the  female  had  not  begun  to  lay.
Five  of  the  eggs  in  the  ovary  were  about  the  size  of  green  pease.  I could
not  perceive  any  difference  in  the  colouring  of  the  plumage  between  the
sexes,  and  I have  represented  the  male  in  that  inclined  and  rather  crouch-
ing attitude  which  I observed  the  bird  always  to  assume  when  alighted.

I have  named  this  species  after  my  learned  friend  Dr  Thomas
Stewart  Traill  of  Liverpool,  in  evidence  of  the  gratitude  which  I
cherish  towards  that  benevolent  gentleman  for  all  his  kind  attentions  to
me.

The  Sweet  Gum,  on  a branch  of  which  I have  placed  Traill’s  Fly-
catcher, grows  in  almost  every  portion  of  the  western  and  southern  dis-
tricts of  the  United  States.  It  sometimes  attains  a great  size,  but  is
more  commonly  of  moderate  stature.  Its  wood  is  of  little  use.  This
tree  is  frequently  found  with  a cork-like  bark  protruding  in  shreds  from
its  branches.


TRAILL’S  FLY-CATCHER.


237


MuSCICAPA  TRAILLir.

Plate  XLV.  Adult  Male.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  depressed,  tapering  to  a point,  the  lateral  out-
lines a little  convex,  very  broad  at  the  base  ; the  gap  reaching  to  nearly
under  the  eye ; upper  mandible  with  the  edges  acute,  slightly  notched
close  upon  the  tip,  which  is  a little  deflected  and  acute ; lower  mandible
straight,  acute.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical.  Head  and  neck  of
moderate  size.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  of  moderate  length,  slender ;
tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  short  scutella,  and  longer  than
the  middle  toe ; toes  free,  scutellate  above  ; claws  compressed,  arched,
acute.

Plumage  soft  and  tufty  ; feathers  of  the  head  narrow  and  erectile.
Wings  of  moderate  length,  third  quill  longest.  Tail  longish,  slightly
forked  when  closed,  of  twelve  rather  narrow,  obtuse  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  yellow  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  brownish-
black.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  above  is  dull  brownish-olive,
the  two  rows  of  larger  wing-coverts  tipped  with  dull  white.  Throat
greyish- white,  as  is  a very  narrow  space  around  the  eye ; sides  of  the  head
and  neck,  and  fore  part  of  the  breast,  coloured  like  the  back,  but  lighter ;
the  rest  of  the  under  parts  dull  yellowish-white.

Length  5f  inches,  extent  of  wings  8^ ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
gap  I ; tarsus  •

As  already  mentioned,  this  species  bears  a very  close  resemblance  to
Muscicapa  acadica,  and  M.  virens,  more  especially  the  former.

Muscicapa  virms  has  the  tail  deeply  emarginate,  whereas  in  the  pre-
sent species  that  part  is  nearly  even.  The  colouring  is  nearly  the  same
in  both,  but  M.  virens  is  considerably  larger.

Muscicapa  acadica  is  also  similarly  coloured,  but  in  it  the  whitish
space  about  the  eye  is  larger,  the  throat  darker,  the  breast  and  abdomen
lighter.  The  tail  also  is  quite  even.  A decided  difference  exists  in  the
bill,  which,  in  place  of  being  convex  in  its  lateral  outlines,  is  a little
concave.


2


238


TRAILL’S  FLY-CATCHER.


The  Sweet  Gum.

Liquidambar  styraciflua,  JVi^d.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iv.  p.  476.  Ptcrsh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  635.  Mich.  Arhr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  iii,  p.  194,  PL  iv. — Moncecia

PoLYANDRIA,  Linn.  AMENTACE.fE,  JuSS.

. This  species,  which  is  the  only  one  that  grows  in  the  United  States,
is  distinguished  by  its  palmate  leaves,  the  lobes  of  which  are  toothed  and
acuminate,  the  axils  of  the  nerves  downy.  In  large  individuals,  the  bark
is  deeply  cracked.  The  wood  is  very  hard  and  fine  grained,  but  is  now
little  used,  although  formerly  furniture  of  various  kinds  was  made  of  it.
When  the  bark  is  removed,  a resinous  substance  exudes,  which  has  an
agreeable  smell,  but  is  only  obtained  in  very  small  quantity.


( 239  )


THE  EARTHQUAKE.

Travelling  through  the  Barrens  of  Kentucky  (of  which  I shall  give
you  an  account  elsewhere)  in  the  month  of  November,  I was  jogging  on
one  afternoon,  when  I remarked  a sudden  and  strange  darkness  rising
from  the  western  horizon.  Accustomed  to  our  heavy  storms  of  thunder
and  rain,  I took  no  more  notice  of  it,  as  I thought  the  speed  of  my  horse
might  enable  me  to  get  under  shelter  of  the  roof  of  an  acquaintance,
who  lived  not  far  distant,  before  it  should  come  up.  I had  proceeded
about  a mile,  when  I heard  what  I imagined  to  be  the  distant  rumbling
of  a violent  tornado,  on  which  I spurred  my  steed,  with  a wish  to  gallop
as  fast  as  possible  to  the  place  of  shelter ; but  it  would  not  do,  the  ani-
mal knew  better  than  I what  was  forthcoming,  and,  instead  of  going  fas-
ter, so  nearly  stopped,  that  I remarked  he  placed  one  foot  after  another
on  the  ground  with  as  much  precaution  as  if  walking  on  a smooth  sheet
of  ice.  I thought  he  had  suddenly  foundered,  and,  speaking  to  him,
was  on  the  point  of  dismounting  and  leading  him,  when  he  all  of  a sud-
den fell  a^groaning  piteously,  hung  his  head,  spread  out  his  four  legs,  as
if  to  save  himself  from  falling,  and  stood  stock  still,  continuing  to  groan.
I thought  my  horse  was  about  to  die,  and  would  have  sprung  from  his
back  had  a minute  more  elapsed,  but  at  that  instant  all  the  shrubs  and
trees  began  to  move  from  their  very  roots,  the  ground  rose  and  fell  in
successive  furrows,  like  the  ruffled  waters  of  a lake,  and  I became  be-
wildered in  my  ideas,  as  I too  plainly  discovered  that  all  this  awful  com-
motion in  nature  was  the  result  of  an  earthquake.

I had  never  witnessed  any  thing  of  the  kind  before,  although,  like
every  other  person,  I knew  of  earthquakes  by  description.  But  what  is
description  compared  with  the  reality  ? Who  can  tell  of  the  sensations
which  I experienced  when  I found  myself  rocking  as  it  were  on  my
horse,  and  with  him  moved  to  and  fro  like  a child  in  a cradle,  with  the
most  imminent  danger  around,  and  expecting  the  ground  every  moment
to  open,  and  present  to  my  eye  such  an  abyss  as  might  engulf  myself
and  all  around  me  ? The  fearful  convulsion,  however,  lasted  only  a few
minutes,  and  the  heavens  again  brightened  as  quickly  as  they  had  be-
come obscured ; my  horse  brought  his  feet  to  the  natural  position,  raised
his  head,  and  galloped  off  as  if  loose  and  frolicking  without  a rider.


240


THE  EARTHQUAKE.


I was  not,  however,  without  great  apprehension  respecting  my  fa^
mily,  from  which  I was  yet  many  miles  distant,  fearful  that  where  they
were  the  shock  might  have  caused  greater  havock  than  I had  witnessed.
I gave  the  bridle  to  my  steed,  and  was  glad  to  see  him  appear  as  anxious
to  get  home  as  myself.  The  pace  at  which  he  galloped  accomplished
this  sooner  than  T had  expected,  and  I found,  with  much  pleasure,  that
hardly  any  greater  harm  had  taken  place  than  the  apprehension  excited
for  my  own  safety.

Shock  succeeded  shock  almost  every  day  or  night  for  several  weeks,
diminishing,  however,  so  gradually  as  to  dwindle  away  into  mere  vibra-
tions of  the  earth.  Strange  to  say,  I for  one  became  so  accustomed  to
the  feeling  as  rather  to  enjoy  the  fears  manifested  by  others.  I never
can  forget  the  effects  of  one  of  the  slighter  shocks  which  took  place  when
I was  at  a friend’s  house,  where  1 had  gone  to  enjoy  the  merriment  that,
in  our  western  country,  attends  a wedding.  The  ceremony  being  per-
formed, supper  over,  and  the  fiddles  tuned,  dancing  became  the  order  of
the  moment.  This  was  merrily  followed  up  to  a late  hour,  when  the
party  retired  to  rest.  We  were  in  what  is  called,  with  great  propriety,
a Log-house,  one  of  large  dimensions,  and  solidly  constructed.  The
owner  was  a physician,  and  in  one  corner  were  not  only  his  lancets,  tour-
niquets, amputating-knives,  and  other  sanguinary  apparatus,  but  all  the
drugs  which  he  employed  for  the  relief  of  his  patients,  arranged  in  jars
and  phials  of  different  sizes.  These  had  some  days  before  made  a narrow
escape  from  destruction,  but  had  been  fortunately  preserved  by  closing
the  doors  of  the  cases  in  which  they  were  contained.

As  I have  said,  we  had  all  retired  to  rest,  some  to  dream  of  sighs  and
smiles,  and  others  to  sink  into  oblivion.  Morning  was  fast  approaching,
when  the  rumbling  noise  that  precedes  the  earthquake  began  so  loudly,
as  to  waken  and  alarm  the  whole  party,  and  drive  them  out  of  bed  in  the
greatest  consternation.  The  scene  which  ensued  it  is  impossible  for  me
to  describe,  and  it  would  require  the  humorous  pencil  of  Cruick shank
to  do  justice  to  it.  Fear  knows  no  restraints.  Every  person,  old  and
young,  filled  with  alarm  at  the  creaking  of  the  log-house,  and  appre-
hending instant  destruction,  rushed  wildly  out  to  the  grass  enclosure
fronting  the  building.  The  full  moon  was  slowly  descending  from  her
throne,  covered  at  times  by  clouds  that  rolled  heavily  along,  as  if  to  con-
ceal from  her  view  the  scenes  of  terror  which  prevailed  on  the  earth  be-
low. On  the  grass-plat  we  all  met,  in  such  condition  as  rendered  it  next


THE  EARTHQUAKE,


241


to  impossible  to  discriminate  any  of  the  party,  all  huddled  together  in  a
state  of  almost  perfect  nudity.  The  earth  waved  like  a field  of  corn  be-
fore the  breeze : the  birds  left  their  perches,  and  flew  about  not  knowing
whither ; and  the  Doctor,  recollecting  the  danger  of  his  gallipots,  ran  to
his  shop-room,  to  prevent  their  dancing  off  the  shelves  to  the  floor.
Never  for  a moment  did  he  think  of  closing  the  doors,  but,  spreading
his  arms,  jumped  about  the  front  of  the  cases,  pushing  back  here  and
there  the  falling  jars ; with  so  little  success,  however,  that  before*  the
shock  was  over,  he  had  lost  nearly  all  he  possessed.'

The  shock  at  length  ceased,  and  the  frightened  females,  now  sensible
of  their  dishabille,  fled  to  their  several  apartments.  The  earthquakes
produced  more  serious  consequences  in  other  places. ' Near  New  Madrid,
and  for  some  distance  on  the  Mississippi, , the  earth  was  rent  asunder  in
several  places,  one  or  two  islands  sunk  for  ever,  and  the  inhabitants  fled
in  dismay  towards  the  eastern  shores.


( 242  )


THE  BARRED  OWL

StBIX  NEBULOSJ,  LiNN.

PLATE  XL VI.  Male.

Should  you,  kind  reader,  find  it  convenient  or  agreeable  to  visit  the
noble  forests  existing  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  about
the  middle  of  October,  when  nature,  on  the  eve  of  preparing  for  ap-
proaching night,  permits  useful  dews  to  fall  and  rest  on  every  plant,
with  the  view  of  reviving  its  leaves,  its  fruits,  or  its  lingering  blossoms,
ere  the  return  of  morn ; when  every  night-insect  rises  on  buzzing  wings
from  the  ground,  and  the  fire-fly,  amidst  thousands  of  other  species,  ap-
pears as  if  purposely  to  guide  their  motions  through  the  sombre  atmo-
sphere ; at  the  moment  when  numerous  reptiles  and  quadrupeds  commence
their  nocturnal  prowlings,  and  the  fair  moon,  empress  of  the  night,  rises
peacefully  on  the  distant  horizon,  shooting  her  silvery  rays  over  the
heavens  and  the  earth,  and,  like  a watchful  guardian,  moving  slowly  and
majestically  along;  when  the  husbandman,  just  returned  to  his  home,
after  the  labours  of  the  day,  is  receiving  the  cheering  gratulations  of  his
family,  and  the  wholesome  repast  is  about  to  be  spread  out  for  master
and  servants  alike ; — it  is  at  this  moment,  kind  reader,  that  were  you,  as
I have  said,  to  visit  that  happy  country,  your  ear  would  suddenly  be
struck  by  the  discordant  screams  of  the  Barred  Owl.  Its  whah,  xvhah^
whah,  whah-aa  is  uttered  loudly,  and  in  so  strange  and  ludicrous  a man-
ner, that  I should  not  be  surprised  were  you,  kind  reader,  when  you  and
I meet,  to  compare  these  sounds  to  the  affected  bursts  of  laughter  which
you  may  have  heard  from  some  of  the  fashionable  members  of  our  own
species.

How  often,  when  snugly  settled  under  the  boughs  of  my  temporary
encampment,  and  preparing  to  roast  a venison  steak  or  the  body  of  a
squirrel,  on  a wooden  spit,  have  I been  saluted  with  the  exulting  bursts
of  this  nightly  disturber  of  the  peace,  that,  had  it  not  been  for  him,
would  have  prevailed  around  me,  as  well  as  in  my  lonely  retreat ! How
often  have  I seen  this  nocturnal  marauder  alight  within  a few  yards  of
me,  exposing  his  whole  body  to  the  glare  of  my  fire,  and  eye  me  in  such
a curious  manner  that,  had  it  been  reasonable  to  do  so,  I would  gladly


BARRED  OWL.


243


have  invited  him  to  walk  in  and  join  me  in  my  repast,  that  I might  have
enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  forming  a better  acquaintance  with  him.  The
liveliness  of  his  motions,  joined  to  their  oddness,  have  often  made  me
think  that  his  society  would  be  at  least  as  agreeable  as  that  of  many  of
the  buffoons  we  meet  with  in  the  world.  But  as  such  opportunities  of
forming  acquaintance  have  not  existed,  be  content,  kind  reader,  with  the
imperfect  information  which  I can  giv«  you  of  the  habits  of  this  Sancho
Pan9a  of  our  woods.

Such  persons  as  conclude,  when  looking  upon  owls  in  the  glare  of
day,  that  they  are,  as  they  then  appear,  extremely  dull,  are  greatly  mis-
taken. Were  they  to  state,  like  Buffon,  that  Woodpeckers  are  miser-
able beings,  they  would  be  talking  as  incorrectly ; and,  to  one  who  might
have  bved  long  in  the  woods,  they  would  seem  to  have  lived  only  in  their
libraries.

The  Barred  Owl  is  found  in  all  those  parts  of  the  United  States
which  I have  visited,  and  is  a constant  resident.  In  Louisiana  it  seems
to  be  more  abundant  than  in  any  other  state.  It  is  almost  impossible  to
travel  eight  or  ten  miles  in  any  of  the  retired  woods  there,  without  seeing
several  of  them  even  in  broad  day ; and,  at  the  approach  of  night,  their
cries  are  heard  proceeding  from  every  part  of  the  forest  around  the
plantations.  Should  the  weather  be  lowering,  and  indicative  of  the  ap^
proach  of  rain,  their  cries  are  so  multiplied  during  the  day,  and  especially
in  the  evening,  and  they  respond  to  each  other  in  tones  so  strange,  that
one  might  imagine  some  extraordinary  fete  about  to  take  place  among
them.  On  approaching  one  of  them,  its  gesticulations  are  seen  to  be  of
a very  extraordinary  nature.  The  position  of  the  bird,  which  is  gene-
rally erect,  is  immediately  changed.  It  lowers  its  head  and  inclines  its
body,  to  watch  the  motions  of  the  person  beneath,  throws  forward  the
lateral  feathers  of  its  head,  which  thus  has  the  appearance  of  being
surrounded  by  a broad  ruff,  looks  towards  him  as  if  half  blind,  and
moves  its  head  to  and  fro  in  so  extraordinary  a manner,  as  almost  to
induce  a person  to  fancy  that  part  dislocated  from  the  body.  It  follows
all  the  motions  of  the  intruder  with  its  eyes ; and  should  it  suspect  any
treacherous  intentions,  flies  off  to  a short  distance,  alighting  with  its  back
to  the  person,  and  immediately  turning  about  with  a single  jump,  to  re-
commence its  scrutiny.  In  this  manner,  the  Barred  Owl  may  be  follow-
ed to  a considerable  distance,  if  not  shot  at,  for  to  halloo  after  it  does
not  seem  to  frighten  it  much.  But  if  shot  at  and  missed,  it  removes  to  a

Q 2


244


BARRED  OWL.


considerable  distance,  after  which  its  wTiah-whah-whah  is  uttered  with
considerable  pomposity.  This  owl  will  answer  the  imitation  of  its  own
sounds,  and  is  frequently  decoyed  by  this  means.

The  flight  of  the  Barred  Owl  is  smooth,  light,  noiseless,  and  ca-
pable of  being  greatly  protracted.  I have  seen  them  take  their  departure
from  a detached  grove  in  a prairie,  and  pursue  a direct  course  towards
the  skirts  of  the  main  forest,  distant  more  than  two  miles,  in  broad  day-
light. I have  thus  followed  them  with  the  eye  until  they  were  lost  in
the  distance,  and  have  reason  to  suppose  that  they  continued  their  flight
until  they  reached  the  woods.  Once,  whilst  descending  the  Ohio,  not
far  from  the  well-known  Cave-m-rocTi,  about  two  hours  before  sunset,  in
the  month  of  November,  I saw  a Barred  Owl  teased  by  several  crows,  and
chased  from  the  tree  in  which  it  was.  On  leaving  the  tree,  it  gradually
rose  in  the  air,  in  the  manner  of  a Hawk,  and  at  length  attained  so  great
a height  that  our  party  lost  sight  of  it.  It  acted,  I thought,  as  if  it
had  lost  itself,  now  and  then  describing  small  circles,  and  flapping  its
wings  quickly,  then  flying  in  zigzag  lines.  This  being  so  uncommon  an
occurrence,  I noted  it  down  at  the  time.  I felt  anxious  to  see  the  bird
return  towards  the  earth,  but  it  did  not  make  its  appearance  again.  So
very  lightly  do  they  fly,  that  I have  frequently  discovered  one  passing
over  me,  and  only  a few  yards  distant,  by  first  seeing  its  shadow  on
the  ground,  during  clear  moon-light  nights,  when  not  the  faintest  rustling
of  its  wings  could  be  heard.

Their  power  of  sight  during  the  day  seems  to  be  rather  of  an  equi-
vocal character,  as  I once  saw  one  alight  on  the  back  of  a cow,  which  it
left  so  suddenly  afterwards,  when  the  cow  moved,  as  to  prove  to  me  that
it  had  mistaken  the  object  on  which  it  had  perched  for  something  else.
At  other  times,  I have  observed  that  the  approach  of  the  grey  squirrel
intimidated  them,  if  one  of  these  animals  accidentally  jumped  on  a branch
close  to  them,  although  the  Owl  destroys  a number  of  them  during  the
twilight.  It  is  for  this  reason,  kind  reader,  that  I have  represented  the
Barred  Owl  gazing  in  amazement  at  one  of  the  squirrels  placed  only  a
few  inches  from  him.

The  Barred  Owl  is  a great  destroyer  of  poultry,  particularly  of
chickens  when  half-grown.  It  also  secures  mice,  young  hares,  rabbits,
and  many  species  of  small  birds,  but  is  especially  fond  of  a kind  of  frog
of  a brown  colour,  very  common  in  the  woods  of  Louisiana.  I have
heard  it  asserted  that  this  bird  catches  fish,  but  never  having  seen  it  do


BARRED  OWL.


245


so,  and  never  having  found  any  portion  of  fish  in  its  stomach,  I cannot
vouch  for  the  truth  of  the  report.

About  the  middle  of  March,  these  Owls  begin  to  lay  their  eggs.
This  they  usually  do  in  the  hollows  of  trees,  on  the  dust  of  the  decom-
posed wood.  At  other  times  they  take  possession  of  the  old  nest  of  a
Crow  or  a Red-tailed  Hawk.  In  all  these  situations  I have  found  their
eggs  and  young.  The  eggs  are  of  a globular  form,  pure  white,  with  a
smooth  shell,  and  are  from  four  to  six  in  number.  So  far  as  I have  been
able  to  ascertain,  they  rear  only  one  brood  in  a season.  The  young,
like  those  of  all  other  Owls,  are  at  first  covered  with  a downy  substance,
some  of  which  is  seen  intermixed  with  and  protruding  from  the  feathers,
some  weeks  after  the  bird  is  nearly  fledged.  They  are  fed  by  the
parents  for  a long  time,  standing  perched,  and  emitting  a hissing  noise
in  lieu  of  a call.  This  noise  may  be  heard  in  a calm  night,  for  fifty  or
probably  a hundred  yards,  and  is  by  no  means  musical.  To  a person
lost  in  a swamp,  it  is,  indeed,  extremely  dismal.

The  plumage  of  the  Barred  Owl  difibrs  very  considerably,  in  respect
to  colour,  in  different  individuals,  more  so  among  the  males.  The  males
are  also  smaller  than  the  females,  but  less  so  than  in  some  other  species
During  the  severe  winters  of  our  Middle  Districts,  those  that  remain
there  suffer  very  much  ; but  the  greater  number,  as  in  some  other  species,
remove  to  the  Southern  States.  When  kept  in  captivity,  they  prove  ex
cellent  mousers.

The  antipathy  shewn  to  Owls  by  every  species  of  day  bird  is  extreme.
They  are  followed  and  pursued  on  all  occasions  ; and  although  few  of
the  day  birds  ever  prove  dangerous  enemies,  their  conduct  towards  the
Owls  is  evidently  productive  of  great  annoyance  to  them.  When  the
Barred  Owl  is  shot  at  and  wounded,  it  snaps  its  bill  sharply  and  fre-
quently, raises  all  its  feathers,  looks  towards  the  person  in  the  most  un-
couth manner,  but,  on  the  least  chance  of  escape,  moves  off  in  great
leaps  with  considerable  rapidity.

The  Barred  Owl  is  very  often  exposed  for  sale  in  the  New  Orleans
market.  The  Creoles  make  gumbo  of  it,  and  pronounce  the  flesh  pala-
table.


246


BARRED  OWL.


Strix  nebulosa,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  291. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  21.-—
Ch.  Boruiparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  38.

Barred  Owl,  Strix  nebulosa.  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  133 — Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.
vol.  iv.  p.  61.  PL  33.  fig.  2.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XIAI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  very  short,  compressed,  curved,  acute,  with  a small  cere  at  the
base ; upper  mandible  with  its  dorsal  outline  curved  from  the  base,  the
edges  acute,  the  point  trigonal,  very  acute,  deflected,  lower  mandible
with  the  edges  acute  and  inflected,  obtuse  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  roundish,
in  the  fore  part  of  the  cere,  concealed  by  the  recumbent  bristles.  Head
disproportionably  large,  as  are  the  eyes  and  external  ears.  Body  short.
Legs  long ; tarsus  feathered ; toes  feathered  at  the  base,  scutellate  above,
papillar  and  tubercular  beneath  ; claws  curved,  slender,  rounded,  ex-
tremely sharp.

Plumage  exceedingly  soft  and  downy,  somewhat  distinct  above,  tufty
and  loose  beneath.  Long  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  bill,  stretch-
ing forwards.  Eyes  surrounded  by  several  circles  of  compact  feathers ;
auricular  feathers  forming  a ruff,  and  with  those  of  the  head  and  neck  ca-
pable of  being  erected.  Wings  ample,  the  fourth  quill  longest,  the  first
short.  Tail  long,  large,  rounded,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  yellow,  the  under  mandible  tinged  with  blue  on  the  back.  Eyes
black.  Toes  yellow  ; claws  bluish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  up-
per parts  is  light  reddish-brown.  Face  and  greater  part  of  the  head
brownish-white,  the  feathers  of  the  latter  broadly  marked  with  brown,  of
which  a narrow  band  passes  from  the  bill  along  the  middle  of  the  head.
P'eathers  of  the  back  and  most  of  the  wing-coverts  largely  spotted  with
white.  Primary  coverts,  quills,  and  tail,  barred  with  light  brownish-red ;
wings  and  tail  tipped  with  greyish- white.  Under  parts  pale  brownish-
red,  longitudinally  streaked  with  brown,  excepting  the  neck  and  upper
breast,  which  are  transversely  marked,  the  abdomen,  which  is  yellowish-
white,  and  the  tarsal  feathers,  which  are  light  reddish.

Length  18  inches,  extent  of  wings  40.  Bill  along  the  ridge  1^  ; tar-
sus middle  toe  S.


BARRED  OWL.


247


The  Grey  Squirrel.

SciURUS  ciNEREUs,  Harlan^  Fauna  Americana,  p.  173.

The  Grey  Squirrel  is  too  well  known  to  require  any  description.  It
migrates  in  prodigious  numbers,  crossing  large  rivers  by  swimming  with
its  tail  extended  on  the  water,  and  traverses  immense  tracts  of  country,  in
search  of  the  places  where  food  is  most  abundant.  During  these  migra-
tions, the  Squirrels  are  destroyed  in  vast  quantities.  Their  flesh  is
white,  very  delicate,  .and  affords  excellent  eating,  when  the  animals  are
young.  In  1 749,”  says  Dr  Harlan,  in  the  work  above  referred  to,
“ a premium  of  three  pence  a-head  was  offered  for  their  destruction,  which
amounted  in  one  year  to  L.  8000  Sterling,  which  is  equal  to  about
] ,180,000  individuals  killed.”


( 248  )


THE  RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.

Trochilus  Colubris,  Linn.

PLATE  XLVII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Where  is  the  person  who,  on  seeing  this  lovely  little  creature  mov-
ing on  humming  winglets  through  the  air,  suspended  as  if  by  magic  in
it,  flitting  from  one  flower  to  another,  with  motions  as  graceful  as  they
are  light  and  airy,  pursuing  its  course  over  our  extensive  continent,  and
yielding  new  delights  wherever  it  is  seen ; — where  is  the  person,  I ask
of  you,  kind  reader,  who,  on  observing  this  glittering  fragment  of  the
rainbow,  would  not  pause,  admire,  and  instantly  turn  his  mind  with  re-
verence toward  the  Almighty  Creator,  the  wonders  of  whose  hand  we  at
every  step  discover,  and  of  whose  sublime  conceptions  we  everywhere  ob-
serve the  manifestations  in  his  admirable  system  of  creation  ? — There
breathes  not  such  a person  ; so  kindly  have  we  all  been  blessed  with  that
intuitive  and  noble  feeling — admiration  !

No  sooner  has  the  returning  sun  again  introduced  the  vernal  season,
and  caused  millions  of  plants  to  expand  their  leaves  and  blossoms  to  his
genial  beams,  than  the  little  Humming  Bird  is  seen  advancing  on  fairy
wings,  carefully  visiting  every  opening  flower-cup,  and,  like  a curious
florist,  removing  from  each  the  injurious  insects  that  otherwise  would  ere
long  cause  their  beauteous  petals  to  droop  and  decay.  Poised  in  the  air,
it  is  observed  peeping  cautiously,  and  with  sparkling  eye,  into  their  inner-
most recesses,  whilst  the  etherial  motions  of  its  pinions,  so  rapid  and  so
light,  appear  to  fan  and  cool  the  flower,  without  injuring  its  fragile  tex-
ture, and  produce  a delightful  murmuring  sound,  well  adapted  for  lulling
the  insects  to  repose.  Then  is  the  moment  for  the  Humming  Bird  to
secure  them.  Its  long  delicate  bill  enters  the  cup  of  the  flower,  and  the
protruded  double- tubed  tongue,  delicately  sensible,  and  imbued  with  a
glutinous  saliva,  touches  each  insect  in  succession,  and  draws  it  from  its
lurking  place,  to  be  instantly  swallowed.  All  this  is  done  in  a moment,
and  the  bird,  as  it  leaves  the  flower,  sips  so  small  a portion  of  its  liquid
honey,  that  the  theft,  we  may  suppose,  is  looked  upon  with  a grateful  feei-
ng by  the  flower,  which  is  thus  kindly  relieved  from  the  attacks  of  her
destroyers.

The  prairies,  the  fields,  the  orchards  and  gardens,  nay,  the  deepest


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.  249

shades  of  the  forests,  are  all  visited  in  their  turn,  and  everywhere  the  lit-
tle bird  meets  with  pleasure  and  with  food.  Its  gorgeous  throat  in  beauty
and  brilbancy  baffles  all  competition.  Now  it  glows  with  a fiery  hue,
and  again  it  is  changed  to  the  deepest  velvety  black.  The  upper  parts
of  its  delicate  body  are  of  resplendent  changing  green ; and  it  throws  itself
through  the  air  with  a swiftness  and  vivacity  hardly  conceivable.  It
moves  from  one  flower  to  another  like  a gleam  of  light,  upwards,  down-
wards, to  the  right,  and  to  the  left.  In  this  manner,  it  searches  the  ex-
treme northern  portions  of  our  country,  following  with  great  precaution
the  advances  of  the  season,  and  retreats  with  equal  care  at  the  approach
of  autumn.

I wish  it  were  in  my  power  at  this  moment  to  impart  to  you,  kind
reader,  the  pleasures  which  I have  felt  whilst  watching  the  movements,
and  viewing  the  manifestation  of  feelings  displayed  by  a single  pair  of
these  most  favourite  httle  creatures,  when  engaged  in  the  demonstration
of  their  love  to  each  other  : — how  the  male  swells  his  plumage  and
throat,  and,  dancing  on  the  wing,  whirls  around  the  delicate  female  ; how
quickly  he  dives  towards  a flower,  and  returns  with  a loaded  bill,  which
he  offers  to  her  to  whom  alone  he  feels  desirous  of  being  united  ; how  full
of  ecstacy  he  seems  to  be  when  his  caresses  are  kindly  received  ; how  his
little  wings  fan  her,  as  they  fan  the  flowers,  and  he  transfers  to  her  bill
the  insect  and  the  honey  which  he  has  procured  with  a view  to  please  her ;
how  these  attentions  are  received  with  apparent  satisfaction;  how,  soon
after,  the  blissful  compact  is  sealed ; how,  then,  the  courage  and  care^  of
the  male  are  redoubled ; how  he  even  dares  to  give  chase  to  the  Tyrant
Fly-catcher,  hurries  the  blue-Bird  and  the  Martin  to  their  boxes  ; and  how,
on  sounding  pinions,  he  joyously  returns  to  the  side  of  his  lovely  mate.
Reader,  all  these  proofs  of  the  sincerity,  fidelity,  and  courage,  with  which
the  male  assures  his  mate  of  the  care  he  will  take  of  her  while  sitting  on
her  nest,  may  be  seen,  and  have  been  seen,  but  cannot  be  portrayed  Or
described.

Could  you,  kind  reader,  cast  a momentary  glance  on  the  nest  of  the
Humming  Bird,  and  see,  as  I have  seen,  the  newly-hatched  pair  of  young,
little  larger  than  humble-bees,  naked,  blind,  and  so  feeble  as  scarcely
to  be  able  to  raise  their  little  bill  to  receive  food  from  the  parents  ; and
could  you  see  those  parents,  full  of  anxiety  and  fear,  passing  and  repars-
ing within  a few  inches  of  your  face,  alighting  on  a twig  not  more  than  a
yard  from  your  body,  waiting  the  result  of  your  unwelcome  visit  in  a


250


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.


state  of  the  utmost  despair, — you  could  not  fail  to  be  impressed  with  the
deepest  pangs  which  parental  affection  feels  on  the  unexpected  death  of  a
cherished  child.  Then  how  pleasing  is  it,  on  your  leaving  the  spot,  to
see  the  returning  hope  of  the  parents,  when,  after  examining  the  nest,
they  find  their  nurslings  untouched  ! You  might  then  judge  how  pleas-
ing it  is  to  a mother  of  another  kind,  to  hear  the  physician  who  has  at-
tended her  sick  child  assure  her  that  the  crisis  is  over,  and  that  her  babe
is  saved.  These  are  the  scenes  best  fitted  to  enable  us  to  partake  of  sor-
row and  joy,  and  to  determine  every  one  who  views  them  to  make  it  his
study  to  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  others,  and  to  refrain  from  wanton-
ly or  maliciously  giving  them  pain.

I have  seen  Humming  Birds  in  Louisiana  as  early  as  the  10th  of
March.  Their  appearance  in  that  State  varies,  however,  as  much  as  in
any  other,  it  being  sometimes  a fortnight  later,  or,  although  rarely,  a few
days  earlier.  In  the  Middle  Districts,  they  seldom  arrive  before  the  15th
of  April,  more  usually  the  beginning  of  May.  I have  not  been  able  to
assure  myself  whether  they  migrate  during  the  day  or  by  night,  but  am
inclined  to  think  the  latter  the  case,  as  they  seem  to  be  busily  feeding  at  all
times  of  the  day,  which  would  not  be  the  case  had  they  long  flights  to  per-
form at  that  period.  They  pass  through  the  air  in  long  undulations,  raising
themselves  for  some  distance  at  an  angle  of  about  40  degrees,  and  then
falling  in  a curve ; but  the  smallness  of  their  size  precludes  the  possibility
of  following  them  farther  then  fifty  or  sixty  yards  without  great  difficulty,
even  with  a good  glass.  A person  standing  in  a garden  by  the  side  of  a
Common  Althaea  in  bloom,  will  be  as  surprised  to  hear  the  humming  of
their  wings,  and  then  see  the  birds  themselves  within  a few  feet  of  him,
as  he  will  be  astonished  at  the  rapidity  with  which  the  little  creatures  rise
into  the  air,  and  are  out  of  sight  and  hearing  the  next  moment.  They
do  not  alight  on  the  ground,  but  easily  settle  on  twigs  and  branches,  where
they  move  sidewise  in  prettily  measured  steps,  frequently  opening  and
closing  their  wings,  pluming,  shaking  and  arranging  the  whole  of  their
apparel  with  neatness  and  activity.  They  are  particularly  fond  of  spread-
ing one  wing  at  a time,  and  passing  each  of  the  quill-feathers  through
their  bill  in  its  whole  length,  when,  if  the  sun  is  shining,  the  wing  thus
plumed  is  rendered  extremely  transparent  and  light.  They  leave  the
twig  without  the  least  difficulty  in  an  instant,  and  appear  to  be  possessed
of  superior  powers  of  vision,  making  directly  towards  a Martin  or  a Blue-
bird when  fifty  or  sixty  yards  from  them,  and  reaching  them  before  they


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.


251


are  aware  of  their  approach.  No  bird  seems  to  resist  their  attacks,  but
they  are  sometimes  chased  by  the  larger  kinds  of  humble-bees,  of  wh^ch
they  seldom  take  the  least  notice,  as  their  superiority  of  flight  is  sufficient
to  enable  them  to  leave  these  slow  moving  insects  far  behind  in  the  short
space  of  a minute.

The  nest  of  this  Humming  Bird  is  of  the  most  delicate  nature,  the  ex-
ternal parts  being  formed  of  a light  grey  lichen  found  on  the  branches  of
trees,  or  on  decayed  fence-rails,  and  so  neatly  arranged  round  the  whole
nest,  as  well  as  to  some  distance  from  the  spot  where  it  is  attached,  as  to
seem  part  of  the  branch  or  stem  itself.  These  little  pieces  of  lichen  are
glued  together  with  the  saliva  of  the  bird.  The  next  coating  consists  of
cottony  substance,  and  the  innermost  of  silky  fibres  obtained  from  various
plants,  all  extremely  delicate  and  soft.  On  this  comfortable  bed,  as  in
contradiction  to  the  axiom  that  the  smaller  the  species  the  greater  the
number  of  eggs,  the  female  lays  only  two,  which  are  pure  white  and  al-
most oval.  Ten  days  are  required  for  their  hatching,  and  the  birds  raise
two  broods  in  a season.  In  one  week  the  young  are  ready  to  fly,  but  are
fed  by  the  parents  for  nearly  another  week.  They  receive  their  food  di-
rectly from  the  bill  of  their  parents,  which  disgorge  it  in  the  manner  of
Canaries  or  Pigeons.  It  is  my  belief  that  no  sooner  are  the  young  able
to  provide  for  themselves  than  they  associate  with  other  broods,  and  per-
form their  migration  apart  from  the  old  birds,  as  I have  observed  twenty
or  thirty  young  Humming  Birds  resort  to  a group  of  Trumpet-flowers,
when  not  a single  old  male  was  to  be  seen.  They  do  not  receive  the  full
brilliancy  of  their  colours  until  the  succeeding  spring,  although  the  throat
of  the  male  bird  is  strongly  imbued  with  the  ruby  tints  before  they  leave
us  in  autumn.

The  Ruby-throated  Humming  Bird  has  a particular  liking  for  such
flowers  as  are  greatly  tubular  in  their  form.  The  Common  Jimpson-weed
or  Thorn-apple  (Datura  Stramonium)  and  the  Trumpet-flower  (Bignonia
radicans)  are  among  the  most  favoured  by  their  visits,  and  after  these,
Honeysuckle,  the  Balsam  of  the  gardens,  and  the  wild  species  which  grows
on  the  borders  of  ponds,  rivulets,  and  deep  ravines  ; but  every  flower,  down
to  the  wild  violet,  affords  them  a certain  portion  of  sustenance.  Their  food
consists  principally  of  insects,  generally  of  the  coleopterous  order,  these,
together  with  some  equally  diminutive  flies,  being  commonly  found  in  their
stomach.  The  first  are  procured  within  the  flowers,  but  many  of  the  lat-
ter on  wing.  The  Humming  Bird  might  therefore  be  looked  upon  as  an  ex-


252


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.


pert  fly-catcher.  The  nectar  or  honey  which  they  sip  from  the  different
flowers,  being  of  itself  insufficient  to  support  them,  is  used  more  as  if  to
allay  their  thirst.  I have  seen  many  of  these  birds  kept  in  partial  confine-
ment, when  they  were  supplied  with  artificial  flowers  made  for  the  pur-
pose, in  the  corollas  of  which  water  with  honey  or  sugar  dissolved  in  it
was  placed.  The  birds  were  fed  on  these  substances  exclusively,  but  sel-
dom lived  many  months,  and  on  being  examined  after  death,  were  found
to  be  extremely  emaciated.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  which  were  supplied
twice  a^day  with  fresh  flowers  from  the  woods  or  garden,  placed  in  a room
with  windows  merely  closed  with  moschetto  gauze-netting,  through  which
minute  insects  were  able  to  enter,  lived  twelve  months,  at  the  expiration
of  which  time  their  liberty  was  granted  them,  the  person  who  kept  them
having  had  a long  voyage  to  perform.  The  room  was  kept  artificially
warm  during  the  winter  months,  and  these,  in  Lower  Louisiana,  are  sel-
dom so  cold  as  to  produce  ice.  On  examining  an  orange-tree  which  had
been  placed  in  the  room  where  these  Humming  Birds  were  kept,  no  ap-
pearance of  a nest  was  to  be  seen,  although  the  birds  had  frequently  been
observed  caressing  each  other.  Some  have  been  occasionally  kept  con-
fined in  our  Middle  Districts,  but  I have  not  ascertained  that  any  one  sur-
vived a winter.

The  Humming  Bird  does  not  shun  mankind  so  much  as  birds  gene-
rally do.  It  frequently  approaches  flowers  in  the  windows,  or  even  in
rooms  when  the  windows  are  kept  open,  during  the  extreme  heat  of  the
day,  and  returns,  when  not  interrupted,  as  long  as  the  flowers  are  unfaded.
They  are  extremely  abundant  in  Louisiana  during  spring  and  summer,
and  wherever  a fine  plant  of  the  trumpet-flower  is  met  with  in  the  woods,
one  or  more  Humming  Birds  are  generally  seen  about  it,  and  now  and
then  so  many  as  ten  or  twelve  at  a time.  They  are  quarrelsome,  and  have
frequent  battles  in  the  air,  especially  the  male  birds.  Should  one  be
feeding  on  a flower,  and  another  approach  it,  they  are  both  immediately
seen  to  rise  in  the  air,  twittering  and  twirling  in  a spiral  manner  until  out
of  sight.  The  conflict  over,  the  victor  immediately  returns  to  the  flower.

If  comparison  might  enable  you,  kind  reader,  to  form  some  tolerably
accurate  idea  of  their  peculiar  mode  of  flight,  and  their  appearance  when
on  wing,  I would  say,  that  were  both  objects  of  the  same  colour,  a large
sphinx  or  moth,  when  moving  from  one  flower  to  another,  and  in  a direct
line,  comes  nearer  the  Humming  Bird  in  aspect  than  any  other  object  with
which  I am  acquainted.


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.


233


Having  heard  several  persons  remark  that  these  little  creatures  had
been  procured  with  less  injury  to  their  plumage,  by  shooting  them  with
water,  I was  tempted  to  make  the  experiment,  having  been  in  the  habit
of  killing  them  either  with  remarkably  small  shot,  or  with  sand.  How-
ever, finding  that  even  when  within  a few  paces,  I seldom  brought  one  to
the  ground  when  I used  water  instead  of  shot,  and  was  moreover  obliged
to  clean  my  gun  after  every  discharge,  I abandoned  the  scheme,  and  feel
confident  that  it  can  never  have  been  used  with  material  advantage.  I
have  frequently  secured  some  by  employing  an  insect-net,  and  were  this
machine  used  with  dexterity,  it  would  afford  the  best  means  of  procuring
Humming  Birds.

I have  represented  ten  of  these  pretty  and  most  interesting  birds,  in
various  positions,  flitting,  feeding,  caressing  each  other,  or  sitting  on  the
slender  stalks  of  the  trumpet-flower  and  pluming  themselves.  The  diver-
sity of  action  and  attitude  thus  exhibited,  may,  I trust,  prove  sufficient  to
present  a faithful  idea  of  their  appearance  and  manners.  A figure  of  the
nest  you  will  find  elsewhere.  The  nest  is  generally  placed  low,  on  the
horizontal  branch  of  any  kind  of  tree,  seldom  more  than  twenty  feet  from
the  ground.  They  are  far  from  being  particular  in  this  matter,  as  I have
often  found  a nest  attached  by  one  side  only  to  a twig  of  a rose-bush,
currant,  or  the  strong  stalk  of  a rank  weed,  sometimes  in  the  middle  of  the
forest,  at  other  times  on  the  branch  of  an  oak,  immediately  over  the  road,
and  again  in  the  garden  close  to  the  walk.

Trochilus  Colubris,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  191. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.
p.  312. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  98.

Red-throated  Humming  Bird,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  769.

Humming  Bird,  Trochilus  Colubris,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  26.  PI.  10.
fig.  3.  Male ; fig.  4.  Female.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLVII.  Fig.  1,  1,  1,  1.

Bill  long,  straight,  subulate,  depressed  at  the  base,  acute;  upper
mandible  rounded,  its  edges  overlapping.  Nostrils  basal,  linear.  Tongue
very  extensile,  filiform,  divided  towards  the  end  into  two  filaments.  Feet
very  short  and  feeble  ; tarsus  slender,  shorter  than  the  middle  toe,  partly
feathered  ; fore  toes  united  at  the  base ; claws  curved,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated  above  and  on  the  throat,  with  metallic
lustre,  blended  beneath.  Wings  long,  narrow,  a little  incurved  at  the


•254


RUBY-THROATED  HUMMING  BIRD.


tip,  the  first  quill  longest.  Tail  forked  when  closed,  when  spread  even
in  the  middle  and  laterally  rounded,  of  ten  broad  feathers,  the  outer  cur-
ved inwards.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Iris  of  the  same  colour.  Upper  parts  generally,
including  the  two  middle  tail-feathers,  green,  with  gold  reflections.  Quills
and  tail  purplish-brown.  Throat,  sides  of  the  head,  and  fore  neck,  car-
mine-purple, spotted  with  black,  varying  to  crimson,  orange,  and  deep
black.  Sides  of  the  same  colour  as  the  back  ; the  rest  of  the  under  parts
greyish- white,  mixed  with  green.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  4^  ; bill  along  the  ridge  f , along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XLVII.  Fig.  2,  S,  S.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  in  wanting  the  brilliant  patch  on  the
throat,  which  is  white,  as  are  the  under  parts  generally,  and  in  having  the
three  lateral  tail-feathers  tipped  with  the  same  colour.

Dimensions  the  same.

Young  Bird.  Plate  XLVII.  Fig.  3,  3.

The  young  birds  have  the  under  parts  brownish-white,  the  tail  tipped
with  white,  and  are  somewhat  lighter  in  their  upper  parts.  In  autumn
the  young  males  begin  to  acquire  the  red  feathers  of  the  throat.


The  Trumpet-flower,

Bignonia  radicals,  Wild.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iii.  p.  SOL  Pursh^  Flor,  Amer.  voL  ii.
p.  420. — Didynamia  Angiospermia,  Linn.  Bignonia,  Juss.

This  splendid  species  of  Bignonia,  which  grows  in  woods  and  on  the
banks  of  rivers  in  all  the  Middle  and  Southern  States,  climbing  on  trees
and  bushes,  is  distinguished  by  its  pinnate  leaves,  with  ovate,  widely  ser-
rate, acuminate  leaffets,  and  large  scarlet  ffowers,  of  which  the  funnel-
shaped  tube  of  the  corolla  is  thrice  the  length  of  the  calyx.  The  pods  are
of  a brown  colour,  from  four  to  seven  inches  long,  and  contain  a double
row  of  kidney-shaped  light  brown  seeds.


( 255  )


THE  AZURE  WARBLER.

Sylvia  azurea,  Steph.

PLATE  XL VIII.  Male  and  Female.

So  scarce  is  this  bird  in  the  Middle  Districts,  that  its  discovery  in  the
State  of  Pennsylvania  has  been  made  a matter  of  much  importance.  Its
habits  are  consequently  very  little  known,  even  at  the  present  day,  and
it  would  appear  that  only  two  individuals  have  been  seen  by  our  Ame-
rican ornithologists,  one  of  which,  a young  female,  has  been  figured  by
the  Prince  of  Musignano.

It  arrives  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  in  company
with  many  other  species  of  Warblers,  breeds  there  and  sets  out  again
about  the  beginning  of  October.  It  is  as  lively  as  most  species  of  its  ge-
nus, possesses  the  same  manner  of  flight,  moves  sidewise  up  and  down
the  branches  and  twigs,  frequently  changing  sides,  and  hangs  to  the  ex-
tremities of  bunches  of  leaves  or  berries,  on  which  it  procures  the  insects
and  larvae  of  which  its  food  is  principally  composed.  The  liveliness  of
its  notes  renders  it  conspicuous  in  those  parts  of  the  skirts  of  the  forests
which  it  frequents ; and  its  song,  although  neither  loud  nor  of  long  con-
tinuance, is  extremely  sweet  and  mellow.

I have  no  precise  recollection  of  the  time  when  I first  made  a draw-
ing of  this  pretty  little  bird,  but  know  this  well,  that  a drawing  which  I
had  of  it  was  one  of  the  unfortunate  collection  destroyed  by  the  rats  at
Henderson.  In  Louisiana,  where  it  is  as  numerous  as  other  Sylvias,  I
have  several  times  shot  five  or  six  during  a single  walk,  towards  the  end
of  August,  when  the  young  are  nearly  full  coloured.

The  nest  is  placed  in  the  forks  of  a low  tree  or  bush,  more  frequently
on  a Dog- wood  tree.  It  is  partly  pensile,  projecting  a little  above  the
twigs  to  which  it  is  attached,  and  extending  below  them  for  nearly  two
inches.  The  fibres  of  vines  and  of  the  stalks  of  rank  herbaceous  plants,
together  with  slender  roots,  compose  the  outer  part,  being  arranged  in  a
circular  manner.  The  lining  consists  entirely  of  the  dry  fibres  of  the
Spanish  Moss.  The  female  lays  four  or  five  eggs,  of  a pure  white  co-
lour, with  a few  reddish  spots  at  the  larger  end.  When  the  female  is
disturbed  during  incubation,  she  trails  along  the  twigs  and  branches.


•256


AZURE  WARBLER.


with  expanded  tail  and  drooping  wings,  and  utters  a plaintive  note,  re-
sembling in  all  these  circumstances  the  Blue-eyed  Warbler.  I am  not
sure  that  they  raise  more  than  one  brood  in  a season.  When  the  young
abandon  the  nest,  their  plumage  partakes  of  a greenish  tinge,  and  no  dif-
ference can  be  perceived  between  the  sexes  without  dissection.  The  little
family  move  and  hunt  together,  and  exhibit  much  pleasure  in  pursuing
small  insects  on  wing,  which  they  seize  without  any  clicking  sound  of
their  bill.  They  seem  at  this  period  to  evince  a great  partiality  for
trees  the  tops  of  which  are  thickly  covered  by  grape  vines,  amongst  the
broad  leaves  of  which  they  find  ample  supplies  of  food.  They  also  some-
times alight  on  the  tall  weeds,  and  pick  a few  of  their  seeds.  The  males
or  females  do  not  assume  the  full  brilliancy  of  their  plumage  until  the
following  spring.

I am  inclined  to  think  that  this  species  is  extremely  abundant  in  the
Mexican  dominions,  as  I have  observed  these  birds  more  numerous  to-
wards Natchitochez  and  along  the  waters  of  the  Red  River.  On  the
other  hand,  I have  not  observed  it  eastward  of  the  State  of  Tenessee.

The  twig  on  which  it  is  represented,  belongs  to  a small  tree  or  shrub,
which  grows  along  the  skirts  of  the  forests  in  the  State  of  Louisiana.
The  bark  is  easily  stripped  off,  when  the  wood  shews  a yellow,  resinous
colour.  It  is  brittle,  and  is  not  applied  to  any  use.  The  berries  are
eaten  by  different  species  of  birds.

Sylvia  azurea,  Stephens^  Cont.  Shaw’s  Zool.  vol.  i.  p.  653 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.
of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  85 ; and  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  27.  PI.  xi.
Fig.  2.  Young  female.

CtERULEAN  Warbler,  Sylvia  ccerulea,  Wilson,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  141.
PI.  xvii.  fig.  5.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  straight,  much  broader  than  deep  at  the  base,
tapering,  compressed  toward  the  acute  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  exposed.
Head  of  ordinary  size.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  longth,
slender ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  long  scutella,
acute  behind,  scarcely  longer  than  the  middle  toe ; toes  free,  scutellate
above ; claws  arched,  slender,  much  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft  and  blended,  glossy.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the
first  and  second  quills  longest.  Tail  longish,  even,  of  twelve  rather  nar-

2


AZURE  WARBLER.


257


row,  obtuse  feathers.  Short  bristle-pointed  feathers  at  the  base  of  the
upper  mandible.

Bill  bluish-black.  Iris  blackish-brown.  Feet  blue.  Head  and  up-
per parts  generally,  of  a fine  rich  blue,  the  back  marked  with  longitu-
dinal streaks  of  blackish,  and  a narrow  band  of  black  from  the  forehead
passing  along  the  lore  to  behind  the  eye.  Tips  of  the  two  rows  of  larger
wing-coverts  white,  forming  two  conspicuous  bands  across  the  wing.
Quills  black,  externally  margined  with  blue.  Tail  of  the  same  colour,
each  feather  having  a patch  of  white  on  the  inner  web,  near  the  end,  ex-
cepting the  two  middle  ones ; all  externally  margined  with  blue.  Under
parts  white,  as  well  as  a streak  over  the  eye,  above  which  is  a streak  of
blackish.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  A?  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  f , middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XLVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male,  chiefly  in  having  the  colours  paler.


The  Bear-berry.

Ilex  Dahoon,  Mich.  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  228.  Pursh.  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  117*
— Tetrandria  Tetragynia,  Linn.  Rhamni,  Juss.

This  species  of  Holly  is  distinguished  by  its  elliptico-lanceolate  leaves,
which  are  thick,  leathery,  shining,  and  reflected  at  the  margin,  and  its
corymboso-paniculate,  lateral  and  terminal  peduncles.  The  berries  are
globular  and  bright  red.


R


c 258  )


THE  BLUE-GREEN  WARBLER.

Sylvia  RARA^  Wils.

PLATE  XLIX.  Male.

The  Blue-green  Warbler  so  resembles  the  young  of  the  Azure  War-
bler, that  were  not  the  form  of  its  bill,  and  some  of  its  habits,  consider-
ably different,  I should  be  tempted  to  consider  it  a mere  variety  of  that
bird.  It  is  equally  rare  in  the  Middle  Districts,  where  I have  shot  only
a few,  and  these  in  the  dark  recesses  of  the  Great  Pine  Swamp.

On  its  passage  through  the  States,  it  is  found  in  Louisiana,  where  it
appears  in  the  beginning  of  April.  This  lateness  of  its  arrival  indicates
its  coming  from  a great  distance,  most  of  the  other  species  appearing
several  weeks  earlier.  They  seem  to  disperse  soon  after,  as  on  their  first
appearance  several  may  be  procured  in  one  day,  as  well  as  during  their
equally  short  stay  in  autumn,  when,  again,  I have  shot  six  or  seven  from
a single  tree,  on  which  they  appeared  as  busily  engaged  as  if  so  many  Tit-
mice. I have  met  with  them  singly  and  far  apart  in  Kentucky,  in  Ohio,
upon  the  Missouri,  and  along  Lake  Erie,  but  I have  never  found  their  nest.

In  spring  it  has  a soft  and  mellow  song,  which  is  not  heard  beyond
the  distance  of  a few  paces.  It  is  performed  at  intervals  between  the
times  at  which  the  bird  secures  an  insect,  which  it  does  with  great  ex-
pertness, either  on  wing,  or  amongst  the  leaves  of  the  trees  and  bushes.
The  tops  of  trees,  however,  appear  to  please  them  best,  the  reverse  being
the  case  with  the  Azure  Warbler.

The  Blue-green  Warbler  has  a peculiar  cunning  manner  of  leaning
downwards  to  view  a person,  or  while  searching  for  an  insect,  and  which
is  very  different  from  that  of  any  other  bird,  although  I am  unable  to
describe  it.  While  thus  leaning,  it  moves  its  head  sidewise  so  very
slowly  that  the  motion  is  hardly  perceptible,  unless  much  attention  is
paid  to  it.  After  this,  it  either  starts  off  and  flies  to  some  distance  from
the  observer,  or  darts  towards  the  prey  that  had  attracted  its  notice.
While  catching  an  insect  on  the  wing,  it  produces  a slight  clicking  sound
with  its  bill,  and  in  this  respect  approaches  the  Vireos.  Like  some  of
them  also,  it  descends  from  the  highest  tops  of  the  trees  to  low  bushes,  and
eats  small  berries,  particularly  towards  autumn,  when  insects  begin  to  fail.

Its  flight  is  performed  in  zigzag  lines  of  a few  yards,  as  if  it  were


BLUE-GREEN  WARBLER.


259


undetermined  where  to  alight.  I have  found  no  difference  between  the
sexes  as  to  external  appearance.

The  plant  on  which  I have  figured  a male  is  found  in  Louisiana,
growing  along  the  skirts  of  woods  and  by  fences.  It  is  called  the  Spa-
nish Mulberry.  It  is  a herbaceous  perennial  plant,  attaining  a height  of
from  four  to  eight  feet.  The  fruits  are  eaten  by  children,  but  are  insipid.

Sylvia  rara,  Blue-green  Warbler,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.'p.  119.  PI.  27.
fig.  2.— CA.  Bonaparte j Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  82.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XLIX.

Bill  longish,  nearly  straight,  depressed  at  the  base,  tapering  to  a
point.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  half  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  and
neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  ovate.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather
slender ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  long  scutella,
acute  behind,  rather  longer  than  the  middle  toe ; toes  scutellate  abovCj
free ; claws  arched,  slender,  much  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  tufty.  Wings  longish,  little  curved,  the
first  and  second  quills  longest.  Tail  shortish,  rounded,  of  twelve  rather
acute  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet
light  blue.  General  colour  of  the  upper  parts  light  greenish-blue,  of  the
under  parts  white.  A white  streak  over  the  eyes.  Tips  of  the  two  first
rows  of  wing-coverts  white,  forming  two  bands  across  the  wing.  Quills
blackish-brown,  their  outer  margins  blue.  Tail  blackish-brown,  the  outer
feathers  having  a white  patch  on  the  inner  web  near  the  end.

Length  4f  inches,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  |,  along
the  gap  ^ ; tarsus  f .


The  Spanish  Mulberry.

Callicarpa  AMERICANA,  Willd.  Sp.  PL  vol.  i.  p.  619.  Purshj  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  97 — Tetrandria  Monogynia,  Limi.  Titices,  Jtcss.

A perennial  herbaceous  plant,  with  oval,  serrate  leaves,  which  are
downy  beneath ; sessile  cymes  of  red  flowers,  and  globular  red  berries,
arranged  apparently  in  dense  whorls.  It  grows  in  dry  gravelly  or  sandy
soil,  in  Virginia,  Carolina,  and  Louisiana.

R 2


( 260  )


THE  BLACK  AND  YELLOW  WARBLER.

Sylvia  maculosa,  Lath.

PLATE  L.  Young  Male.

This  little  bird  was  by  mistake  engraved,  and  named  after  my  friend
W.  Swain  SON,  Esq.,  during  my  absence  from  London,  one  drawing
having  been  accidentally  substituted  for  another.  It  is  in  reality  the
young  of  the  Black  and  Yellow  Warbler,  and  was  intended  to  form  part
of  the  Plate  which  will  represent  the  adult  male  and  female  of  that  spe-
cies. My  good  friend  will,  I know,  excuse  this  mistake,  as  I have
honoured  a beautiful  new  species  with  his  name.

It  being  more  consistent  with  my  present  arrangement  to  give  a full
account  of  each  species,  as  it  is  represented  in  the  Plate  allotted  to  it,
and  its  different  states  of  plumage,  as  much  as  this  object  can  be  attained,
you  will  permit  me,  kind  reader,  to  postpone  the  habits  of  this  species  un-
til you  see  the  whole  group  together.  In  the  mean  time,  I shall  confine
myself  to  a description  of  the  immature  state  of  plumage  as  represented
in  my  illustrations.

Sylvia  maculosa,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  536. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  78.

Yellow-rumped  AVarbler,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  481.

Black  and  Yellow  Warbler,  Sylvia  magnolia,  Wils*  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.
p.  63.  PI.  23.  Male.

Young  Male.  Plate  L.

Bill  brown  above,  brownish-yellow  beneath.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Feet
brownish-yellow,  claws  yellow.  Head  and  hind-neck  light  greyish-blue,
blending  into  yellowish-green  on  the  back,  the  lower  part  of  which  is
spotted  with  black ; a broad  band  across  the  rump  yellow,  the  upper
tail-coverts  black.  Wings  bluish-grey  when  closed,  the  outer  webs  being
of  that  colour,  the  inner  brownish-black ; tips  of  the  two  larger  rows  of
coverts  white,  forming  two  bands  of  that  colour.  Tail  black,  with  a
broad  band  of  white  in  the  middle,  on  the  inner  webs,  excepting  on  the
two  middle  feathers,  which  are  margined  with  blue,  the  outer  webs  of  the
other  feathers  being  bluish- white ; the  under  parts  are  ochre-yellow,  the


BLACK  AND  YELLOW  WARBLER.


261


posterior  part  of  the  breast  and  sides  spotted  with  black.  Length  5
inches,  extent  of  wings  7^.


The  White  Oak.

Quercus  prinus,  IVilld.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv,  p.  439.  Pursh,  FL  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  633. —
Quercus  prinus  palustris,  Mich.  Arhr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  51.
PL  7* — Moncecia  Polyandria,  Linn.  Amentace^,  Juss.

Leaves  oblongo-oval,  acute,  largely  toothed,  the  teeth  nearly  equal,
dilated,  and  callous  at  the  tip ; cupule  crater  ate,  attenuated  at  the  base ;
acorn  ovate.  This  species  grows  in  low  shady  woods,  and  along  the
margins  of  rivers,  from  Pennsylvania  to  Florida.  The  wood  is  porous,
and  of  inferior  quality.


( 262  )


THE  HURRICANE.

Various  portions  of  our  country  have  at  different  periods  suffered
severely  from  the  influence  of  violent  storms  of  wind,  some  of  which  have
been  known  to  traverse  nearly  the  whole  extent  of  the  United  States,  and
to  leave  such  deep  impressions  in  their  wake  as  will  not  easily  be  forgot-
ten. Having  witnessed  one  of  these  awful  phenomena,  in  all  its  grandeur,
I shall  attempt  to  describe  it  for  your  sake,  kind  reader,  and  for  your
sake  only,  the  recollection  of  that  astonishing  revolution  of  the  etherial
element  even  now  bringing  with  it  so  disagreeable  a sensation,  that  I feel
as  if  about  to  be  affected  by  a sudden  stoppage  of  the  circulation  of  my
blood.

I had  left  the  village  of  Shawaney,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,
on  my  return  from  Henderson,  whicli  is  also  situated  on  the  banks  of  the
same  beautiful  stream.  The  weather  was  pleasant,  and  I thought  not
warmer  than  usual  at  that  season.  My  horse  was  jogging  quietly  along,
and  my  thoughts  were,  for  once  at  least  in  the  course  of  my  life,  entirely
engaged  in  commercial  speculations.  I had  forded  Highland  Creek,  and
was  on  the  eve  of  entering  a tract  of  bottom  land  or  valley  that  lay  be-
tween it  and  Canoe  Creek,  when  on  a sudden  I remarked  a great  differ-
ence in  the  aspect  of  the  heavens.  A hazy  thickness  had  overspread  the
country,  and  I for  some  time  expected  an  earthquake,  but  my  horse  ex-
hibited no  propensity  to  stop  and  prepare  for  such  an  occurrence.  I had
nearly  arrived  at  the  verge  of  the  valley,  when  I thought  fit  to  stop  near
a brook,  and  dismounted  to  quench  the  thirst  which  had  come  upon  me.

I was  leaning  on  my  knees,  with  my  lips  about  to  touch  the  water,
when,  from  my  proximity  to  the  earth,  I heard  a distant  murmuring
sound  of  an  extraordinary  nature.  I drank,  however,  and  as  I rose  on
my  feet,  looked  toward  the  south-west,  where  I observed  a yellowish  oval
spot,  the  appearance  of  which  was  quite  new  to  me.  Little  time  was  left
me  for  consideration,  as  the  next  moment  a smart  breeze  began  to  agitate
the  taller  trees.  It  increased  to  an  unexpected  height,  and  already  the
smaller  branches  and  twigs  were  seen  falling  in  a slanting  direction  to-
wards the  ground.  Two  minutes  had  scarcely  elapsed,  when  the  whole
forest  before  me  was  in  fearful  motion.  Here  and  there,  where  one  tree
pressed  against  another,  a creaking  noise  was  produced,  similar  to  that


THE  HURRICANE.


263


occasioned  by  the  violent  gusts  which  sometimes  sweep  over  the  country.
Turning  instinctively  toward  the  direction  from  which  the  wind  blew,  I
saw,  to  my  great  astonishment,  that  the  noblest  trees  of  the  forest  bent
their  lofty  heads  for  a while,  and  unable  to  stand  against  the  blast,  were
falling  into  pieces.  First,  the  branches  were  broken  off  with  a crackhng
noise  ; then  went  the  upper  part  of  the  massy  trunks  ; and  in  many  places
whole  trees  of  gigantic  size  were  falling  entire  to  the  ground.  So  rapid
was  the  progress  of  the  storm,  that  before  I could  think  of  taking  mea-
sures to  insure  my  safety,  the  hurricane  was  passing  opposite  the  place
where  I stood.  Never  can  I forget  the  scene  which  at  that  moment  pre-
sented itself.  The  tops  of  the  trees  were  seen  moving  in  the  strangest
manner,  in  the  central  ciirrent  of  the  tempest,  which  carried  along  with  it
a mingled  mass  of  twigs  and  foliage,  that  completely  obscured  the  view.
Some  of  the  largest  trees  were  seen  bending  and  writhing  under  the  gale ;
others  suddenly  snapped  across  ; and  many,  after  a momentary  resistance,
fell  uprooted  to  the  earth.  The  mass  of  branches,  twigs,  foliage  and  dust
that  moved  through  the  air,  was  whirled  onwards  like  a cloud  of  feathers,
and  on  passing,  disclosed  a wide  space  filled  with  fallen  trees,  naked
stumps,  and  heaps  of  shapeless  ruins,  which  marked  the  path  of  the  tem-
pest. This  space  was  about  a fourth  of  a mile  in  breadth,  and  to  my
imagination  resembled  the  dried-up  bed  of  the  Mississippi,  with  its
thousands  of  planters  and  sawyers,  strewed  in  the  sand,  and  inclined  in
various  degrees.  The  horrible  noise  resembled  that  of  the  great  cataracts
of  Niagara,  and  as  it  howled  along  in  the  track  of  the  desolating  tempest,
produced  a feeling  in  my  mind  which  it  were  impossible  to  describe.

The  principal  force  of  the  hurricane  was  now  over,  although  millions
of  twigs  and  small  branches,  that  had  been  brought  from  a great  distance,
were  seen  following  the  blast,  as  if  drawn  onwards  by  some  mysterious
power.  They  even  floated  in  the  air  for  some  hours  after,  as  if  supported
by  the  thick  mass  of  dust  that  rose  high  above  the  ground.  The  sky  had
now  a greenish  lurid  hue,  and  an  extremely  disagreeable  sulphureous
odour  was  diffused  in  the  atmosphere.  I waited  in  amazement,  having
sustained  no  material  injury,  until  nature  at  length  resumed  her  wonted
aspect.  For  some  moments,  I felt  undetermined  whether  I should  return
to  Morgantown,  or  attempt  to  force  my  way  through  the  wrecks  of  the
tempest.  My  business,  however,  being  of  an  urgent  nature,  I ventured
into  the  path  of  the  storm,  and  after  encountering  innumerable  difficul-
ties, succeeded  in  crossing  it.  I was  obliged  to  lead  my  horse  by  the


264


THE  HURRICANE.


bridle,  to  enable  him  to  leap  over  the  fallen  trees,  whilst  I scrambled
over  or  under  them  in  the  best  way  I could,  at  times  so  hemmed  in  by
the  broken  tops  and  tangled  branches,  as  almost  to  become  desperate.
On  arriving  at  my  house,  I gave  an  account  of  what  I had  seen,  when,
to  my  surprise,  I was  told  that  there  had  been  very  little  wind  in  the
neighbourhood,  although  in  the  streets  and  gardens  many  branches  and
twigs  had  fallen  in  a manner  which  excited  great  surprise.

Many  wondrous  accounts  of  the  devastating  effects  of  this  hurricane
were  circulated  in  the  country,  after  its  occurrence.  Some  log  houses,
we  were  told,  had  been  overturned,  and  their  inmates  destroyed.  One
person  informed  me  that  a wire-sifter  had  been  conveyed  by  the  gust  to
a distance  of  many  miles.  Another  had  found  a cow  lodged  in  the  fork
of  a large  half-broken  tree.  But,  as  I am  disposed  to  relate  only  what  I
have  myself  seen,  I shall  not  lead  you  into  the  region  of  romance,  but
shall  content  myself  with  saying  that  much  damage  was  done  by  this
awful  visitation.  The  valley  is  yet  a desolate  place,  overgrown  with
briars  and  bushes,  thickly  entangled  amidst  the  tops  and  trunks  of  the
fallen  trees,  and  is  the  resort  of  ravenous  animals,  to  which  they  betake
themselves  when  pursued  by  man,  or  after  they  have  committed  their  de-
predations on  the  farms  of  the  surrounding  district.  I have  crossed  the
path  of  the  storm,  at  a distance  of  a hundred  miles  from  the  spot  where
I witnessed  its  fury,  and,  again,  four  hundred  miles  farther  off,  in  the
State  of  Ohio.  Lastly,  I observed  traces  of  its  ravages  on  the  summits  of
the  mountains  connected  with  the  Great  Pine  Forest  of  Pennsylvania,
three  hundred  miles  beyond  the  place  last  mentioned.  In  all  these  differ-
ent parts,  it  appeared  to  me  not  to  have  exceeded  a quarter  of  a mile  in
breadth.


( 265  ;


-0

THE  RED-TAILED  HAWK.

FALCO  BQfiEALIS,  GmEL.

PLATE  LI.  Male  and  Female.

The  Red-tailed  Hawk  is  a constant  resident  in  the  United  States,  in
every  part  of  which  it  is  found.  It  performs  partial  migrations,  during  ^
severe  winters,  from  the  Northern  Districts  towards  the  Southern.  In  the
latter,  however,  it  is  at  all  times  more  abundant,  and  I shall  endeavour
to  present  you  with  a full  account  of  its  habits,  as  observed  there.

Its  flight  is  firm,  protracted,  and  at  times  performed  at  a great  height.

It  sails  across  the  whole  of  a large  plantation,  on  a level  with  the  tops  of
the  forest-trees  which  surround  it,  without  a single  flap  of  its  wings,  and
is  then  seen  moving  its  head  sidewise  to  inspect  the  objects  below.  This
flight  is  generally  accompanied  by  a prolonged  mournful  cry,  which  may
be  heard  at  a considerable  distance,  and  consists  of  a single  sound  resem-
bling the  monosyllable  Kae,  uttered  in  such  a manner  as  to  continue  for
three  or  four  minutes,  without  any  apparent  inflection  or  difference  of  in-
tensity, It  would  seem  as  if  uttered  for  the  purpose  of  giving  notice  to
the  living  objects  below  that  he  is  passing,  and  of  thus  inducing  them  to
bestir  themselves  and  retreat  to  a hiding-place,  before  they  attain  which
he  may  have  an  opportunity  of  pouncing  upon  some  of  them.  When  he
spies  an  animal,  while  he  is  thus  sailing  over  a field,  I have  observed  him
give  a slight  check  to  his  flight,  as  if  to  mark  a certain  spot  with  ac-
curacy, and  immediately  afterwards  alight  on  the  nearest  tree.  He  would
then  instantly  face  about,  look  intensely  on  the  object  that  had  attracted
his  attention,  soon  after  descend  towards  it  with  wings  almost  close  to  his
body,  and  dart  upon  it  with  such  accuracy  and  rapidity  as  seldom  to  fail
in  securing  it.

When  passing  over  a meadow,  a cotton-field,  or  one  planted  with  su-
gar-canes,  he  performs  his  flight  close  over  the  grass  or  plants,  uttering
no  cry,  but  marking  the  prey  in  the  manner  above  described,  and  on
perceiving  it,  ascending  in  a beautiful  curved  line  to  the  top  of  the  near-
est tree,  after  which  he  watches  and  dives  as  in  the  former  case.  Should
he  not  observe  any  object  worthy  of  his  attention,  while  passing  over  a
meadow  or  a field,  he  alights,  shakes  his  feathers,  particularly  those  of


266


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


the  tail,  and  after  spending  a few  minutes  in  pluming  himself,  leaves  the
perch,  uttering  his  usual  cry,  and  ascending  in  the  air,  performs  large  and
repeated  circular  flights,  carefully  inspecting  the  field,  to  assure  himself
that  there  is  in  reality  nothing  in  it  that  may  be  of  use  to  him.  He  then
proceeds  to  another  plantation.  At  other  times,  as  if  not  assured  that
his  observations  have  been  duly  made,  he  rises  in  circles  over  the  same
field  to  an  immense  height,  where  he  looks  like  a white  dot  in  the
heavens.  Yet  from  this  height  he  must  be  able  to  distinguish  the  objects
on  the  ground,  even  when  these  do  not  exceed  our  little  partridge  or  a
young  hare  in  size,  and  although  their  colour  may  be  almost  the  same  as
that  of  surrounding  bodies  ; for  of  a sudden  his  circlings  are  checked,  his
wings  drawn  close  to  his  body,  his  tail  contracted  to  its  smallest  breadth,
and  he  is  seen  to  plunge  headlong  towards  the  earth,  with  a rapidity
which  produces  a loud  rustling  sound  nearly  equal  to  that  of  an  Eagle
on  a similar  occasion.

Should  he  not  succeed  in  discovering  the  desired  object  in  the  fields,
he  enters  the  forest  and  perches  on  some  detached  tree,  tall  enough  to
enable  him  to  see  to  a great  distance  around.  His  posture  is  now  erect,
he  remains  still  and  silent,  moving  only  his  head,  as  on  all  other  oc-
casions, to  enable  his  keen  eye  to  note  the  occurrences  which  may  take
place  in  his  vicinity.  The  lively  Squirrel  is  seen  gaily  leaping  from  one
branch  to  another,  or  busily  employed  in  searching  for  the  fallen  nuts  on
the  ground.  It  has  found  one.  Its  bushy  tail  is  beautifully  curved
along  its  back,  the  end  of  it  falling  oiff  with  a semicircular  bend  ; its
nimble  feet  are  seen  turning  the  nut  quickly  round,  and  its  teeth  are  al-
ready engaged  in  perforating  the  hard  shell ; when,  quick  as  thought,
the  Red-tailed  Hawk,  which  has  been  watching  it  in  all  its  motions,  falls
upon  it,  seizes  it  near  the  head,  transfixes  and  strangles  it,  devours  it  on
the  spot,  or  ascends  exultingly  to  a branch  with  the  yet  palpitating  vic-
tim in  his  talons,  and  there  feasts  at  leisure.

As  soon  as  the  little  King-bird  has  raised  its  brood,  and  when  its  cour-
age is  no  longer  put  in  requisition  for  the  defence  of  its  young  or  its
mate,  the  Red-tailed  Hawk  visits  the  farm-houses,  to  pay  his  regards  to
the  poultry.  This  is  done  without  much  precaution,  for,  while  sailing
over  the  yard  where  the  chickens,  the  ducklings,  and  the  young  turkeys
are,  the  Hawk  plunges  upon  any  one  of  them,  and  sweeps  it  off  to  the
nearest  wood.  When  impelled  by  continued  hunger,  he  now  and  then
manages  to  elude  the  vigilance  of  the  Martins,  Swallows  and  King-birds,


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


267


and  watching  for  a good  opportunity,  falls  upon  and  seizes  an  old  fowl,
the  dying  screams  of  which  are  heard  by  the  farmer  at  the  plough,  who
swears  vengeance  against  the  robber.  He  remembers  that  he  has  ob-
served the  Hawk’s  nest  in  the  woipds,  and  full  of  anger  at  the  recollection
of  the  depredations  which  the  plunderer  has  already  committed,  and  at
the  anticipation  of  its  many  visits  during  the  winter,  leaves  his  work  and
his  horses,  strides  to  his  house,  and  with  an  axe  and  a rifle  in  his  hands
proceeds  towards  the  tree,  where  the  hopes  of  the  Red-tailed  Hawk  are
snugly  nestled  among  the  tall  branches.  The  farmer  arrives,  eyes  the
gigantic  tree,  thinks  for  a moment  of  the  labour  which  will  be  required
for  felling  it,  but  resolves  that  he  shall  not  be  overreached  by  a Hawk.
He  throws  aside  his  hat,  rolls  up  his  sleeves,  and  applies  himself  to  the
work.  His  brawny  arms  give  such  an  impulse  to  the  axe,  that  at  every
stroke  large  chips  are  seen  to  fall  off  on  all  sides.  The  poor  mother-bird,
well  aware  of  the  result,  sails  sorrowfully  over  and  around.  She  would
fain  beg  for  mercy  towards  her  young.  She  alights  on  the  edge  of  the
nest,  and  would  urge  her  offspring  to  take  flight.  But  the  farmer  has
watched  her  motions.  The  axe  is  left  sticking  in  the  core  of  the  tree,  his
rifle  is  raised  to  his  shoulder  in  an  instant,  and  the  next  moment  the  whiz-
zing ball  has  pierced  the  heart  of  the  Red-tailed  Hawk,  which  falls  un-
heeded to  the  earth.  The  farmer  renews  his  work,  and  now  changes  sides.
A whole  hour  has  been  spent  in  the  application  of  ceaseless  blows.  He
begins  to  look  upwards,  to  judge  which  way  the  giant  of  the  forest  will
fall,  and  having  ascertained  this,  he  redoubles  his  blows.  The  huge  oak
begins  to  tremble.  Were  it  permitted  to  speak,  it  might  ask  why  it  should
suffer  for  the  deeds  of  another  ; but  it  is  now  seen  slowly  to  incline,  and
soon  after  with  an  awful  rustling  produced  by  all  its  broad  arms,  its
branches,  twigs  and  leaves,  passing  like  lightning  through  the  air,  the
noble  tree  falls  to  the  earth,  and  almost  causes  it  to  shake.  The  work
of  revenge  is  now  accomplished : the  farmer  seizes  the  younglings,  and
carries  them  home,  to  be  tormented  by  his  children,  until  death  termk
nates  their  brief  career.

Notwithstanding  the  very  common  occurrence  of  such  acts  of  retribu-
tion between  man  and  the  Hawk,  it  would  be  difficult  to  visit  a planta-
tion in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  without  observing  at  least  a pair  of  this
species  hovering  about,  more  especially  during  the  winter  months.
Early  in  February,  they  begin  to  build  their  nest,  which  is  usually
placed  within  the  forest,  and  on  the  tallest  and  largest  tree  in  the  n^igh-


268


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


bourhood.  The  male  and  female  are  busily  engaged  in  carrying  up  dried
sticks,  and  other  materials,  for  eight  or  ten  days,  during  which  time  their
cry  is  seldom  heard.  The  nest  is  large,  and  is  fixed  in  the  centre  of  a
triply  forked  branch.  It  is  of  a flattish  form,  constructed  of  sticks,  and
finished  with  slender  twigs  and  coarse  grasses  or  Spanish  moss.  The  fe-
male lays  four  or  five  eggs,  of  a dull  white  colour,  splatched  with  brown
and  black,  with  a very  hard,  smooth  shell.  The  male  assists  the  female
in  incubating,  but  it  is  seldom  that  the  one  brings  food  to  the  other  while
thus  employed.

I have  seen  one  or  two  of  these  nests  built  in  a large  tree  which  had
been  left  standing  in  the  middle  of  a field  ; but  occurrences  of  this  kind
are  rare,  on  account  of  the  great  enmity  shewn  to  this  species  by  the
farmers.  The  young  are  abundantly  supplied  with  food  of  various  kinds,
particularly  grey  squirrels,  which  the  parents  procure  while  hunting  in
pairs,  when  nothing  can  save  the  squirrel  from  their  attacks  excepting  its
retreat  into  the  hole  of  a tree ; for  should  the  animal  be  observed  ascending
the  trunk  or  branch  of  a tree  by  either  of  the  Hawks,  this  one  immediately
plunges  toward  it,  while  the  other  watches  it  from  the  air.  The  little
animal,  if  placed  against  the  trunk,  when  it  sees  the  Hawk  coming  towards
it,  makes  swiftly  for  the  opposite  side  of  the  trunk,  but  is  there  immediate-
ly dived  at  by  the  other  Hawk,  and  now  the  murderous  pair  chase  it  so
closely,  that  unless  it  immediately  finds  a hole  into  which  to  retreat,  it  is
caught  in  a few  minutes,  killed,  carried  to  the  nest,  torn  in  pieces,  and
distributed  among  the  young  Hawks.  Small  hares,  or,  as  we  usually  call
them,  rabbits,  are  also  frequently  caught,  and  the  depredations  of  the
Red-tailed  Hawks  at  this  period  are  astonishing,  for  they  seem  to  kill  every
thing,  fit  for  food,  that  comes  in  their  way.  They  are  great  destroyers
of  tame  Pigeons,  and  woe  to  the  Cock  or  Hen  that  strays  far  from  home,
for  so  powerful  is  this  Hawk,  that  it  is  able  not  only  to  kill  them,  but  to
carry  them  off  in  its  claws  to  a considerable  distance.

The  continued  attachment  that  exists  between  Eagles  once  paired,  is
not  exhibited  by  these  birds,  which,  after  rearing  their  young,  become
as  shy  towards  each  other  as  if  they  had  never  met.  This  is  carried
to  such  a singular  length,  that  they  are  seen  to  chase  and  rob  each
other  of  their  prey,  on  all  occasions.  I have  seen  a couple  thus  engaged,
when  one  of  them  had  just  seized  a young  rabbit  or  a squirrel,  and  was
on  the  eve  of  rising  in  the  air  with  it,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  it  off  to
a place  of  greater  security.  The  one  would  attack  the  other  with  merci-


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


269


less  fury,  and  either  force  it  to  abandon  the  prize,  or  fight  with  the  same
courage  as  its  antagonist,  to  prevent  the  latter  from  becoming  the  sole
possessor.  They  are  sometimes  observed  flying  either  one  after  the  other
with  great  rapidity,  emitting  theh:  continued  cry  of  IcaCy  or  performing
beautiful  evolutions  through  the  air,  until  one  or  other  of  them  becomes
fatigued,  and  giving  way,  makes  for  the  earth,  where  the  battle  continues
until  one  is  overpowered  and  obliged  to  make  off.  It  was  after  witness-
ing such  an  encounter  between  two  of  these  powerful  marauders,  fighting
hard  for  a young  hare,  that  I made  the  drawing  now  before  you,  kind
reader,  in  which  you  perceive  the  male  to  have  greatly  the  advantage  over
the  female,  although  she  still  holds  the  hare  firmly  in  one  of  her  talons,
even  while  she  is  driven  towards  the  earth,  with  her  breast  upwards.

I have  observed  that  this  species  will  even  condescend  to  pounce  on
wood-rats  and  meadow-mice ; but  I never  saw  one  of  these  birds  seize
even  those  without  first  alighting  on  a tree  before  committing  the  act.

During  the  winter  months,  the  Red-tailed  Hawk  remains  perched
for  hours  together,  when  the  sun  is  shining  and  the  weather  calm.  Its
breast  is  opposed  to  the  sun,  and  it  then  is  seen  at  a great  distance,  the
pure  white  of  that  portion  of  its  plumage  glittering  as  if  possessed  of  a silky
gloss.  They  return  to  their  roosting-places  so  late  in  the  evening,  that  I
have  frequently  heard  their  cry  after  sun-set,  mingling  with  the  jovial  notes
of  Chuck- willVwidow,  and  the  ludicrous  laugh  of  the  Barred  Owl.  In
the  State  of  Louisiana,  the  Red- tailed  Hawk  roosts  amongst  the  tallest
branches  of  the  Magnolia  grandijloray  a tree  which  there  often  attains  a
height  of  a hundred  feet,  and  a diameter  of  from  three  to  four  feet  at  the
base.  It  is  also  fond  of  roosting  on  the  tall  Cypress-trees  of  our  swamps,
where  it  spends  the  night  in  security,  amidst  the  mosses  attached  to  the
branches.

The  Red-tailed  Hawk  is  extremely  wary,  and  difficult  to  be  approach-
ed by  any  one  bearing  a gun,  the  use  of  which  it  seems  to  understand
perfectly  ; for  no  sooner  does  it  perceive  a man  thus  armed  than  it  spreads
its  wings,  utters  a loud  shriek,  and  sails  off  in  an  opposite  direction.  On
the  other  hand,  a person  on  horseback,  or  walking  unarmed,  may  pass
immediately  under  the  branch  on  which  it  is  perched,  when  it  merely
watches  his  motions  as  he  proceeds.  It  seldom  alights  on  fences,  or  the
low  branches  of  trees,  but  prefers  the  highest  and  most  prominent  parts  of
the  tallest  trees.  It  alights  on  the  borders  of  clear  streams  to  drink.  I
have  observed  it  in  such  situations,  immersing  its  bill  up  to  the  eyes,  and
swallowing  as  much  as  was  necessary  to  quench  its  thirst  at  a single  draught.


270


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


I have  seen  this  species  pounce  on  soft-shelled  tortoises,  and  amusing
enough  it  was  to  see  the  latter  scramble  towards  the  water,  enter  it,  and
save  themselves  from  the  claws  of  the  Hawk  by  immediately  diving.  I
am  not  aware  that  this  Hawk  is  ever  successful  in  these  attacks,  as  I have
not  on  any  occasion  found  any  portion  of  the  skin,  head,  or  feet  of  tor-
toises in  the  stomachs  of  the  many  Hawks  of  this  species  which  I have
killed  and  examined.  Several  times,  however,  I have  found  portions  of
bull-frogs  in  their  stomach.

All  our  Falcons  are  pestered  with  parasitic  flying  ticks.  Those  found
amongst  the  plumage  of  the  Red-tailed  Hawk,  like  all  others,  move
swiftly  sidewise  between  the  feathers,  issue  from  the  skin,  and  shift  from
one  portion  of  the  body  to  another  on  wing,  and  do  not  abandon  the  bird
for  a day  or  two  after  the  latter  is  dead.  These  ticks  are  large,  and  of
an  auburn  colour.

The  body  of  the  Red-tailed  Hawk  is  large,  compact,  and  muscular.
These  birds  protrude  their  talons  beyond  their  head  in  seizing  their  prey,
as  well  as  while  fighting  in  the  air,  in  the  manner  shown  in  the  Plate.  I
have  caught  several  birds  of  this  species  by  baiting  a steel-trap  with  a live
chicken.

The  animal  represented  as  held  in  one  of  the  feet  of  the  female,  is
usually  called  a rabbit  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  but  is  evidently
a true  hare.  It  never  burrows,  but  has  a form  to  rest  in,  and  to  which
it  returns  in  the  manner  of  the  common  hare  of  Europe.  I may  hereaf-
ter present  you,  kind  reader,  with  a full  account  of  this  American  species,
which  occurs  in  great  abundance  in  the  United  States.

I have  only  here  to  add,  that  amongst  the  American  farmers  the  com-
mon name  of  our  present  bird  is  the  Hen-liaivk^  while  it  receives  that  of
Grand  mangeur  de  ponies  from  the  Creoles  of  Louisiana.

Falco  borealis,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol-  i.  p.  2G6 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  25. —
Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  p.  32.

Amekicax  Buzzard,  Lath.  Synojis.  vol.  i.  p.  59.

Red-tailed  Hawk,  Falco  borealis,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith,  vol.  vi.  p.  75.  PL  52.
fig.  1.  Adult.

American  Buzzard,  or  White-breasted  Hawk,  Falco  leverianus,  Wils.
Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  78.  PL  51.  fig.  3.  Young.


Adult  Male.  Plate  LI.  Fig.  1.


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


271


Bill  short,  robust,  at  the  base  as  broad  as  deep^  compressed  towards
the  end,  cerate ; upper  mandible,  with  the  dorsal  outline,  convex  from  the
base,  rounded  on  the  sides,  the  edges  with  an  obtuse  lobe,  the  tip  trigo-
nal, descending  obliquely,  acute ; tower  mandible  involute  at  the  edges,
truncate  at  the  end,  broadly  rounded  on  the  back.  Nostrils  roundish,
nearly  dorsal,  in  the  fore  part  of  the  cere.  Head  large,  flat  above.  Neck
shortish,  robust.  Body  bulky.  Legs  rather  long,  very  robust ; tarsi
stout,  scutellate  before  and  behind,  the  sides  covered  with  hexagonal
scales  ; toes  scutellate  above,  scaly  on  the  sides,  scabrous  and  tubercular
beneath  ; claws  roundish,  strong,  curved,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact  and  firm  ; feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  rather  nar-
row, of  the  other  parts  broad  and  rounded.  Tarsus  feathered  anteriorly
about  one-third  down.  Wings  long,  ample,  rounded,  the  fourth  quill
longest,  the  first  short.  Tail  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers,  even,  and
of  ordinary  length.

Bill  light  blue,  blackish  at  the  tip,  greenish-yellow  on  the  margin  to-
wards the  base  ; cere  greenish-yellow.  Iris  hazel.  Tarsi  and  toes  yel-
low ; claws  brownish-black.  Upper  part  of  the  head  light  brownish-
grey.  Loral  space  and  under  eyelid  white.  A broad  band  of  dark
brown  from  the  angle  of  the  mouth  backwards.  Neck  above  and  on  the
sides  reddish-yellow,  with  large  deep  brown  spots.  Back  deep  brown ;
scapulars  of  the  same  colour,  broadly  margined  and  tipped  with  brownish-
white.  Lesser  wing-coverts  chocolate-brown ; larger  lighter  brown,  tip-
ped with  white.  Primary  quills  blackish-brown  ; secondaries  lighter,  tip-
ped with  brownish-white  ; all  barred  with  blackish.  Upper  tail-coverts
whitish,  barred  with  brown,  and  yellowish-red  in  the  middle.  Tail  bright
yellowish-red,  tipped  with  whitish,  and  having  a narrow  bar  of  black  near
the  end.  Lower  parts  brownish-white  ^ the  fore  part  of  the  breast  and
neck  light  yellowish-red,  the  former  marked  with  guttiform,  somewhat
sagittate  brown  spots  : abdomen  and  chin  white ; feathers  of  the  leg  and
tarsus  pale  reddish-yellow,  those  on  the  outside  indistinctly  spotted.

Length  20^  inches,  extent  of  wings  46  ; bill  along  the  back  1^,  along
the  gap  2 ; tarsus  3i,  middle  toe  2|.  Wings  when  closed  reaching  to
within  two  inches  of  the  tip  of  the  tail.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LI.  Fig.  2.

The  female,  which  is  considerably  larger,  agrees  with  the  male  in  the
general  distribution  of  its  colouring.  The  upper  parts  are  darker,  and


272


RED-TAILED  HAWK.


the  under  parts  nearly  white,  there  being  only  a few  narrow  streaks  on  the
sides  of  the  breast ; the  tibial  and  tarsal  feathers  as  in  the  male.  The
tail  is  of  a duller  red,  and  wants  the  black  bar.

Length  24  inches.


The  American  Hare.

Lepus  americanus,  Harlan^  Fauna  Americana,  p.  193.

The  Rabbit,  as  this  animal  is  named  in  the  United  States,  has  the
habits  of  the  European  Hare,  forming  a flat,  well-beaten,  oblong  space
among  the  grass,  on  which  it  rests  during  the  day.  It  never  burrows  like
the  Common  Rabbit  of  Europe,  although  it  resorts  for  safety  to  the  hol-
lows of  fallen  trunks,  or  those  frequently  existing  at  the  roots  of  standing
trees,  as  well  as  to  cavities  in  rocks.  It  feeds  principally  towards  the  ap-
proach of  night  and  early  in  the  morning,  and  spends  the  greater  part  of
the  day  in  its  form.  When  startled  by  a dog,  it  proceeds  in  a direct  man-
ner for  a considerable  way,  and  then  returns  nearly  by  the  same  course.
When  disturbed,  if  there  be  not  a dog  present,  it  runs  to  a short  distance,
stops,  raises  its  head,  erects  its  ears,  and  is  then  easily  discovered  and
shot.  When  the  period  of  parturition  approaches,  it  forms  a kind  of  nest
of  long  grass,  arranged  in  an  oblong  form.  Its  flesh  is  whiter  than  that
of  the  European  Hare,  but  resembles  it  in  flavour.  It  gnaws  the  bark  of
young  trees  in  the  orchards  as  well  as  in  the  forests,  and  is  in  many  parts
very  abundant.


( 273  )


CHUCK-WILL’S-WIDOW.

Caprimulgus  carolinensis,  Briss.

PLATE  LII.  Male  and  Female.

Our  Goatsuckers,  although  possessed  of  great  power  of  wing,  are  par-
ticularly attached  to  certain  districts  and  localities.  The  species  now  un-
der consideration  is  seldom  observed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Choctaw
Nation  in  the  State  of  Mississippi,  or  the  Carolinas,  on  the  shores  of  the
Atlantic,  and  may  with  propriety  be  looked  upon  as  the  southern  species
of  the  United  States.  Louisiana,  Florida,  the  lower  portions  of  Alabama
and  Georgia,  are  the  parts  in  which  it  most  abounds ; and  there  it  makes
its  appearance  early  in  spring,  coming  over  from  Mexico,  and  probably
still  warmer  climates.

About  the  middle  of  March,  the  forests  of  Louisiana  are  heard  to
echo  with  the  well-known  notes  of  this  interesting  bird.  No  sooner  has
the  sun  disappeared,  and  the  nocturnal  insects  emerge  from  their  bur-
rows, than  the  sounds,  chuck- wiirs-widow,^’'  repeated  with  great  clear-
ness and  power  six  or  seven  times  in  as  many  seconds,  strike  the  ear  of
every  individual,  bringing  to  the  mind  a pleasure  mingled  with  a certain
degree  of  melancholy,  which  I have  often  found  very  soothing.  The
sounds  of  the  Goatsucker,  at  all  events,  forebode  a peaceful  and  calm
night,  and  I have  more  than  once  thought,  are  conducive  to  lull  the  lis-
tener to  repose.

The  deep  ravines,  shady  swamps,  and  extensive  pine  ridges,  are  all
equally  resorted  to  by  these  birds ; for  in  all  such  places  they  find  ample
means  of  providing  for  their  safety  during  the  day,  and  of  procuring  food
under  night.  Their  notes  are  seldom  heard  in  cloudy  weather,  and
never  when  it  rains.  Their  roosting  places  are  principally  the  hollows  of
decayed  trees,  whether  standing  or  prostrate,  from  which  latter  they  are
seldom  raised  during  the  day,  excepting  while  incubation  is  in  progress.
In  these  hollows  I have  found  them,  lodged  in  the  company  of  several
species  of  bats,  the  birds  asleep  on  the  mouldering  particles  of  the  wood,
the  bats  clinging  to  the  sides  of  the  cavities.  When  surprised  in  such  si-
tuations, instead  of  trying  to  effect  their  escape  by  flying  out,  they  retire
backwards  to  the  farthest  corners,  ruffle  all  the  feathers  of  their  body,

s


274


CHUCK-WILL’S- WIDOW.


open  their  mouth  to  its  full  extent,  and  utter  a hissing  kind  of  murmur,
not  unlike  that  of  some  snakes.  When  seized  and  brought  to  the  light
of  day,  they  open  and  close  their  eyes  in  rapid  succession,  as  if  it  were
painful  for  them  to  encounter  so  bright  a light.  They  snap  their  little
bill  in  the  manner  of  Fly-catchers,  and  shuffle  along  as  if  extremely  de-
sirous of  making  their  escape.  On  giving  them  liberty  to  fly,  I have
found  them  able  to  proceed  until  out  of  my  sight.  They  passed  between
the  trees  with  apparently  as  much  ease  and  dexterity  as  if  it  had  been  twi-
light. I once  cut  two  of  the  quill-feathers  of  a wing  of  one  of  these  birds,
and  allowed  it  to  escape.  A few  days  afterwards  I found  it  in  the  same
log,  which  induces  me  to  believe  that  they,  like  many  other  birds,  resort
to  the  same  spot,  to  roost  or  spend  the  day.

The  flight  of  the  Chuck-will’s-widow  is  as  light  as  that  of  its  relative,
the  well-known  Whip-poor-will,  if  not  more  so,  and  is  more  graceful  as
well  as  more  elevated.  It  somewhat  resembles  the  flight  of  the  tlen-har-
rier,  being  performed  by  easy  flappings  of  the  wings,  interspersed  with
sailings  and  curving  sweeps,  extremely  pleasing  to  the  bystander.  At  the
approach  of  night,  this  bird  begins  to  sing  clearly  and  loudly,  and  con-
tinues its  notes  for  about  a quarter  of  an  hour.  At  this  time  it  is  perched
on  a fence-stake,  or  on  the  decayed  branch  of  a tree  in  the  interior  of  the
woods,  seldom  on  the  ground.  The  sounds  or  notes  which  it  emits  seem
to  Cause  it  some  trouble,  as  it  raises  and  lowers  its  head  in  quick  succes-
sion at  each  of  them.  This  over,  the  bird  launches  into  the  air,  and  is
seen  sweeping  over  the  cotton  fields  or  the  sugar  plantations,  cutting  all
sorts  of  figures,  mounting,  descending,  or  sailing,  with  so  much  ease  and
grace,  that  one  might  be  induced  to  call  it  the  Fairy  of  the  night.  If  it
passes  close  to  one,  a murmuring  noise  is  heard,  at  times  resembling  that
spoken  of  when  the  bird  is  caught  by  day.  It  suddenly  checks  its  course,
inclines  to  the  right  or  left,  secures  a beetle  or  a moth,  continues  its  flight
over  the  field,  passes  and  repasses  hundreds  of  times  over  the  same
ground,  and  now  and  then  alights  on  a fence-stake,  or  the  tallest  plant  in
the  place,  from  which  it  emits  its  notes  for  a few  moments  with  increased
vivacity.  Now,  it  is  seen  following  a road  or  a path  on  the  wing,  and
alighting  here  and  there  to  pick  up  the  beetle  emerging  from  its  retreat
in  the  ground ; again,  it  rises  high  in  air,  and  gives  chase  to  the  insects
that  are  flying  there,  perhaps  on  their  passage  from  one  wood  to  another.
At  other  times,  I have  seen  it  poise  itself  on  its  wings  opposite  the  trunk
of  a tree,  and  seize  with  its  bill  the  insects  crawling  on  the  bark,  in  this


CHUCK.WILL’S- WIDOW.


275


manner  inspecting  the  whole  tree,  with  motions  as  light  as  those  by  which
the  Humming  Bird  flutters  from  one  flower  to  another.  In  this  manner
Chuck-wilfs-widow  spends  the  greater  part  of  the  night.

The  greatest  harmony  appears  to  subsist  between  the  birds  of  this
species,  for  dozens  may  be  observed  flying  together  over  a field,  and
chasing  insects  in  all  directions,  without  manifesting  any  enmity  or  envy.
A few  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  male  birds,  the  females  make  their
appearance,  and  the  love  season  at  once  commences.  The  male  pays
his  addresses  to  the  female  with  a degree  of  pomposity  only  equalled  by
the  Tame  Pigeon.  The  female,  perched  lengthwise  on  a branch,  appears
coy  and  silent,  whilst  the  male  flies  around  her,  alights  in  front  of  her,
and  with  drooping  wings  and  expanded  tail  advances  quickly,  singing
with  great  impetuosity.  They  are  soon  seen  to  leave  the  branch  together
and  gambol  through  the  air.  A few  days  after  this,  the  female,  having
made  choice  of  a place  in  one  of  the  most  retired  parts  of  some  thicket,
deposits  two  eggs,  which  I think,  although  I cannot  be  certain,  are  all
that  she  lays  for  the  season.  This  bird  forms  no  nest.  A little  space  is
carelessly  scratched  amongst  the  dead  leaves,  and  in  it  the  eggs,  which
are  elliptical,  dull  olive,  and  speckled  with  brown,  are  dropped.  These
are  not  found  without  great  difficulty,  unless  when  by  accident  a person
passes  within  a few  feet  of  the  bird  whilst  sitting,  and  it  chances  to  fly
off.  Should  you  touch  or  handle  these  dear  fruits  of  happy  love,  and,
returning  to  the  place,  search  for  them  again,  you  would  search  in  vain ;
for  the  bird  perceives  at  once  that  they  have  been  meddled  with,  and
both  parents  remove  them  to  some  other  part  of  the  woods,  where  chance
only  could  enable  you  to  find  them  again.  In  the  same  manner,  they
also  remove  the  young  when  very  small.

This  singular  occurrence  has  as  much  occupied  my  thoughts  as  the
equally  singular  manner  in  which  the  Cozv  Bunting  deposits  her  eggs,
which  she  does,  like  the  Cdmmon  Cuckoo  of  Europe,  one  by  one,  in  the
nests  of  other  birds,  of  difierent  species  from  her  own.  I have  spent
much  time  in  trying  to  ascertain  in  what  manner  the  Chuck-wilfs-widow
removes  her  eggs  or  young,  particularly  as  I found,  by  the  assistance  of
an  excellent  dog,  that  neither  the  eggs  nor  the  young  were  to  be  met  with
within  at  least  a hundred  yards  from  the  spot  where  they  at  first  lay.
The  Negroes,  some  of  whom  pay  a good  deal  of  attention  to  the  habits  of
birds  and  quadrupeds,  assured  me  that  these  birds  push  the  eggs  or
young  with  their  bill  along  the  ground.  Some  farmers,  without  troubling

s 2


276


CHUCK-WILUS-WIDOW.


themselves  much  about  the  matter,  imagined  the  transportation  to  be  per-
formed under  the  wings  of  the  old  bird.  The  account  of  the  Negroes
appearing  to  me  more  likely  to  be  true  than  that  of  the  farmers,  I made
up  my  mind  to  institute  a strict  investigation  of  the  matter.  The  follow-
ing is  the  result.

When  the  Chuck-wilFs-widow,  either  male  or  female  (for  each  sits  al-
ternately) has  discovered  that  the  eggs  have  been  touched,  it  ruffles  its
feathers  and  appears  extremely  dejected  for  a minute  or  two,  after  which
it  emits  a low  murmuring  cry,  scarcely  audible  to  me,  as  I lay  concealed
at  a distance  of  not  more  than  eighteen  or  twenty  yards.  At  this  time  I
have  seen  the  other  parent  reach  the  spot,  flying  so  low  over  the  ground
that  I thought  its  little  feet  must  have  touched  it,  as  it  skimmed  along,
and  after  a few  low  notes  and  some  gesticulations,  all  indicative  of  great
distress,  take  an  egg  in  its  large  mouth,  the  other  bird  doing  the  same,
when  they  would  fly  off*  together,  skimming  closely  over  the  ground,  un-
til they  disappeared  among  the  branches  and  trees.  But  to  what  distance
they  remove  their  eggs,  I have  never  been  able  to  ascertain  ; nor  have  I
ever  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  the  removal  of  the  young.  Should
a person,  coming  upon  the  nest  when  the  bird  is  sitting,  refrain  from
touching  the  eggs,  the  bird  returns  to  them  and  sits  as  before.  This
fact  I have  also  ascertained  by  observation.

I wish  I could  have  discovered  the  peculiar  use  of  the  pectinated  claxv
which  this  bird  has  on  each  foot ; but,  reader,  this  remains  one  of  the
many  desiderata  in  ornithology,  and  I fear,  with  me  at  least,  will  continue
so.

The  Chuck-wilFs-widow  manifests  a strong  antipathy  towards  all
snakes,  however  harmless  they  may  be.  Although  these  birds  cannot  in
any  way  injure  the  snakes,  they  alight  near  them  on  all  occasions,  and  try
to  frighten  them  away,  by  opening  their  prodigious  mouth,  and  emitting
a strong  hissing  murmur.  It  was  after  witnessing  one  of  these  occur-
rences, which  took  place  at  early  twilight,  that  the  idea  of  representing
these  birds  in  such  an  occupation  struck  me.  The  beautiful  little  snake,
gliding  along  the  dead  branch,  between  two  Chuck- will’s- widows,  a male
and  a female,  is  commonly  called  the  Harlequin  Snake,  and  is,  I believe,
quite  harmless.

The  food  of  the  bird  now  under  consideration  consists  entirely  of  all
sorts  of  insects,  among  which  the  larger  species  of  moths  and  beetles  are
very  conspicuous.  The  long  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  mandibles


CHUCK-WILL’S-WIDOW.


■277


of  these  birds  no  doubt  contribute  greatly  to  prevent  the  insects  from
escaping,  after  any  portion  of  them  has  entered  the  mouth  of  the  bird.

These  birds  become  silent  as  soon  as  the  young  are  hatched,  but  are
heard  again  before  their  departure  towards  the  end  of  summer.  At  this
season,  however,  their  cry  is  much  less  frequently  heard  than  in  spring.
They  leave  the  United  States  all  of  a sudden,  about  the  middle  of  the
month  of  August.

Caprimulgus  CAROLiNEN&^is,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  1028. — Ijath.  Ind.  Ornith.
vol.  ii.  p.  584. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  61.

Carolina  Goatsucker,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  592.

Chuck- will’s-widow,  Caprimulgus  carolinensis,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.
p.  95.  PI.  54.  fig.  2.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  extremely  short,  feeble,  opening  to  beyond  the  eyes,  making  the
mouth  when  open  of  enormous  dimensions ; upper  mandible  arched  in
its  dorsal  outline,  very  broad  at  the  base,  suddenly  contracted  towards
the  tip,  which  is  compressed  and  rather  obtuse ; lower  mandible  a little
decurved  at  iiie  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  prominent,  covered  above  by  a
membrane.  Head  disproportionately  large.  Eyes  and  ears  very  large.
Neck  short.  Body  rather  slender.  Feet  very  short ; tarsus  partly
feathered,  anteriorly  scutellate  below ; fore  toes  three,  connected  to  the
second  joint  by  membranes,  scutellate  above ; claws  depressed,  arched,
that  of  the  middle  toe  with  the  inner  edge  expanded  and  pectinate.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  silky,  without  much  gloss.  Upper
mandible  margined  at  the  base  with  long,  stiff  bristles,  extending  for-
wards and  outwards.  Wings  long,  somewhat  falcate,  narrow,  the  second
and  third  quills  longest.  Tail  long,  ample,  even,  of  ten  broad,  rounded
feathers.

Bill  yellowish-brown,  the  tip  black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  yellowish-
brown,  tinged  with  purple.  Head  and  back  dark  brown,  minutely
mottled  with  yellowish-red,  and  longitudinally  streaked  with  black.
Three  lines  of  the  latter  colour  from  the  upper  mandible,  diverging  along
the  head.  A yellowish- white  line  over  the  eye.  Sides  of  the  head  and
chin  yellowish-red,  mottled  with  black.  Wings  barred  with  yellowish-
red  and  brownish-black,  and  minutely  sprinkled  with  the  latter  colour,
as  are  the  wing-coverts,  which,  together  with  the  scapulars,  are  largely


278


CHUCK- WILL’S-WIDOW.


spotted  with  black,  and  tinged  with  bluish-grey.  Tail  similarly  barred  and
sprinkled,  the  inner  webs  of  the  three  outer  feathers  white,  and  their  ex-
tremities light  yellowish-red,  more  minutely  sprinkled,  and  without  bars.
Under  parts  blackish,  sprinkled  with  yellowish-red,  the  belly  lighter,  and
a slight  band  of  whitish  across  the  fore-neck.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  back  J,  along
the  gap  2.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LII.  Fig.  2.

The  colouring  of  the  female  is  similar  to  that  of  the  male.  The
outer  tail-feathers  are  brownish  on  their  inner  webs,  yellowish-red,
out  dots,  at  the  tip,  with  a distinct  subterminal  bar  of  black.


The  Harlequin  Snake.

This  beautiful  Snake  is  rather  rare  in  the  United  States,  where  I
have  observed  it  only  in  the  south.  It  glides  through  the  grass  with
ease,  and  ascends  to  the  tops  of  bushes  and  among  the  branches  of  fallen
trees,  to  bask  in  the  sun.  Children  are  fond  of  catching  it  on  account  of
its  beauty.  It  feeds  principally  on  insects,  such  as  flies  and  small
Coleoptera.  Its  usual  size  is  that  represented  in  the  plate.


three

with-


( 279  )


THE  PAINTED  FINCH.

Fringilla  ClRIS,  Temm.

PLATE  LIIL  Male  in  diffeuent  states  of  Plumage,  and  Female.

About  the  middle  of  April,  the  orange  groves  of  the  lower  parts  of
Louisiana,  and  more  especially  those  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
City  of  New  Orleans,  are  abundantly  supplied  with  this  beautiful  little
Sparrow.  But  no  sooner  does  it  make  its  appearance  than  trap-cages  are
set,  and  a regular  business  is  commenced  in  the  market  of  that  city.
The  method  employed  in  securing  the  male  Painted  Finch  is  so  con-
nected with  its  pugnacious  habits,  that  I feel  inclined  to  describe  it,
especially  as  it  is  so  different  from  the  common  way  of  alluring  birds,
that  it  may  afford  you,  kind  reader,  some  amusement.

A male  bird  in  full  plumage  is  shot  and  stuffed  in  a defensive  atti-
tude, and  perched  among  some  grass  seed,  rice,  or  other  food,  on  the
same  platform,  as  the  trap-cage.  This  is  taken  to  the  fields  or  near  the
orangeries,  and  placed  in  so  open  a situation,  that  it  would  be  difficult
for  a living  bird  of  any  species  to  fly  over  it,  without  observing  it.  The
trap  is  set.  A male  Painted  Finch  passes,  perceives  it,  and  dives  to-
wards the  stuffed  bird,  with  all  the  anger  which  its  little  breast  can  con-
tain. It  alights  on  the  edge  of  the  trap  for  a moment,  and  throwing  its
body  against  the  stuffed  bird,  brings  down  the  trap,  and  is  made  pri-
soner. In  this  manner,  thousands  of  these  birds  are  caught  every  spring.
So  pertinacious  are  they  in  their  attacks,  that  even  when  the  trap  has
closed  upon  them,  they  continue  pecking  at  the  feathers  of  the  supposed
rival.  The  approach  of  man  seems  to  allay  its  anger  in  a moment.  The
live  bird  is  removed  to  the  lower  apartment  of  the  cage,  and  is  thereby
made  to  assist  in  decoying  others.

They  feed  almost  immediately  after  being  caught;  and  if  able  to
support  the  loss  of  liberty  for  a few  days,  may  be  kept  for  several  years.
I have  known  some  instances  of  their  being  kept  in  confinement  for  up-
wards of  ten  years.  Few  vessels  leave  the  port  of  New  Orleans  during
the  summer  months,  without  taking  some  Painted  Finches,  and  through
this  means  they  are  transported  probably  to  all  parts  of  Europe.  I have
seen  them  offered  for  sale  in  London  and  Paris,  with  the  trifling  differ-


^80


PAINTED  FINCH.


ence  of  value  on  each  individual,  which  converted  the  sixpence  paid  for
it  at  New  Orleans  to  three  guineas  in  London.

The  pugnacious  habits  of  this  species  are  common  in  a great  degree
to  the  whole  family  of  Sparrows.  Like  the  most  daring,  the  Common
House  Sparrow  of  Europe,  they  may  be  observed  in  spring  time,  in  little
groups  of  four,  five  or  six,  fighting  together,  moving  round  each  other  to
secure  an  advantageous  position,  pecking  and  pulling  at  each  other’s
feathers  with  all  the  violence  and  animosity  to  which  their  small  degree
of  strength  can  give  effect.

A group  thus  occupied  I have  attempted  to  represent  in  the  plate.  I
have  at  the  same  time  endeavoured  to  save  you  the  trouble  of  reading  a
long  description  of  the  changes  which  take  place  in  their  plumage,  from
the  time  at  which  the  young  leave  the  nest,  until  the  fourth  year  follow-
ing, when  the  males  attain  the  full  beauty  of  their  brilliant  livery.
Where  in  fact  would  be  the  necessity  of  telling  you  more,  than  that  the
young,  during  the  first  summer,  are  similar  in  colouring  to  the  female ;
that  the  next  spring,  the  head  of  the  males  only  has  become  of  a hand-
some blue  ; that,  the  spring  following,  the  same  bird  is  mottled  more  or
less  with  azure,  carmine,  yellow  and  green  ; and  that  it  requires  another
return  of  the  warm  season  before  all  these  colours  are  perfected  and  ren-
dered permanent ; when  at  a single  glance  you  can  determine  all  this  at
once.  Long  descriptions  of  this  kind  are  only  fit  to  be  read  to  the  blind.
Colours  speak  for  themselves.

The  flight  of  the  Pape,  by  which  name  the  Creoles  of  Louisiana
know  this  bird  best,  is  short,  although  regular,  and  performed  by  a nearly
constant  motion  of  the  wings,  which  is  rendered  necessary  by  their  con-
cave form.  It  hops  on  the  ground,  moving  forward  with  ease,  now  and
then  jetting  out  the  tail  a little,  and,  like  a true  Sparrow,  picking  up  and
carrying  off  on  wing  a grain  of  rice  or  a crumb  of  bread  to  some  dis-
tance, where  it  may  eat  in  more  security.  It  has  a sprightly  song,  often
repeated,  which  it  continues  even  when  closely  confined.  When  the  bird
is  at  liberty,  this  song  is  uttered  from  the  top  branches  of  an  orange-
tree,  or  those  of  a common  briar,  and  although  not  so  sonorous  as  that  of
the  Canary,  or  of  its  nearer  relative,  the  Indigo  Bunting,  is  not  far  from
equalling  either.  Its  song  is  continued  during  the  greatest  heats  of  the
day,  which  is  also  the  case  with  that  of  the  Indigo  Bird.

The  nest  of  this  pretty  bird  is  generally  placed  in  a low  situation,  in
an  orange-tree,  frequently  within  a few  paces  of  the  house,  or  far  from  it


PAINTED  FINCH.


281


on  the  edge  of  the  fences,  where  briars  are  convenient.  It  raises  two
broods  each  season.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a beautiful  pearly,
rather  bluish  colour,  speckled  with  blackish,  and  are  deposited  in  a sim-
ply constructed  nest,  lined  with  fine  fibrous  roots  or  horse-hair,  and  ex-
ternally formed  of  fine  grass.  They  readily  breed  in  confinement,  if  their
prison  is  rendered  tolerably  comfortable.  The  young  are  fed  at  first  in
the  manner  of  Canaries,  but  at  the  end  of  ten  or  twelve  days  are  taught
to  swallow  grains  of  rice,  insects  or  berries.  No  sooner  are  figs  or  grapes
ripe  than  these  birds  attack  them,  feeding  for  some  time  almost  entirely
upon  them.  Towards  evening,  they  also  pursue  insects  on  wing.

Some  persons  give  the  name  of  Nonpareil  to  this  species,  but  it  is
more  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Pape,  which,  in  fact,  is  a general
appellation  given  by  the  inhabitants  of  Louisiana  to  all  the  smaller  spe-
cies of  thick-billed  birds.

The  Painted  Finches  do  not  proceed  far  eastward,  nor,  indeed,  up
the  Mississippi,  being  seldom  seen  above  the  City  of  Natchez,  on  that
river,  or  farther  to  the  east  than  the  Carolinas.  It  retires  southward  in
the  beginning  of  October.

The  Chickasaw  Wild  Plum,  on  a twig  of  which  I have  represented  a
group  of  these  birds,  is  found  growing  abundantly  in  the  country  where
the  birds  occur.  It  is  a small  shrub,  the  fruit  of  which  is  yellow  when
ripe,  and  excellent  eating.


Fringilla  Ciris,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  107.

Emberiza  Ciris,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  p.  313 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  416.

Painted  Bunting,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  206. — Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  68.

PI.  xxiv.  fig.  1.  Male ; Fig.  2.  Female.

Adult  Male,  in  full  plumage.  Plate  LI II.  Fig  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  conical,  somewhat  bulging,  straight,  acute ; upper
mandible  broader,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip ; gap-line  a little  declinate
at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  partly  concealed  by  the  frontal
feathers.  Head  and  neck  rather  large.  Body  full.  Feet  of  moderate
length ; tarsus  a little  longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; toes  free,  the  lateral
ones  nearly  equal ; claws  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  tufty,  somewhat  compact  on  the  head  and  back.
Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  third  quill  longest.  Tail  shortish,  even,
of  twelve  rounded  feathers.


282


PAINTED  FINCH.


Bill  dark  brown  above,  light-blue  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  light  blue.
Head  and  upper  neck  pure  azure,  a circle  of  carmine  round  the  eye.
Back  and  lesser  wing-coverts  yellowish-green.  Lower  back  and  under
parts  deep  carmine.  Quills  and  tail  purplish-brown  ; secondary  coverts
green.

Length  5 J,  extent  of  wings  7^  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the
gap  ^ ; tarsus  f , middle  toe  f .

Male  in  the  third  year.  Plate  LI  1 1.  Fig.  2.

Head  and  under  parts  as  in  the  full-plumaged  male.  Back  mottled
with  yellow  and  light  green  ; upper  wing- coverts  patched  with  green,
yellow  and  brown.

Male  in  the  second  year.  Plate  LI II.  Fig.  4.

Bill  and  upper  part  of  the  head  as  in  the  adult.  Upper  parts  gene-
rally olive-green  ; under  parts  dull  orange,  paler  behind.

Male  in  the  first  year.  Plate  LIII.  Fig.  3.

Under  mandible  blue ; in  other  respects  similar  to  the  female.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LIII.  Fig.  5.

Bill  brown.  Feet  light  blue.  Upper  parts  in  general  light  olive
green  ; under  parts  dull  orange,  paler  behind.


The  Chickasaw  Plum.

Prunus  Chicasa,  Mich.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  284.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  332.

— IcosANDRiA  Monogynia,  Linn.  Rosacea:,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  oblongo-elliptical,  acuminate,
serrulate  leaves  ; smooth  spinescent  branches  ; flowers  in  pairs,  with  very
short  pedicels,  and  glabrous  calyces;  and  its  broadly  oval  fruits.  It
flowers  in  April  and  May.


( 283  )


THE  RICE  BIRD.

Icterus  agripennis,  Ch.  Bonap.

PLATE  LIV,  Male  and  Female.

Very  few  of  these  birds  pass  through  Louisiana  in  spring,  and  still
fewer,  on  their  return,  in  autumn ; for  which  reason  I am  inclined  to
think  that  they  do  not  spend  the  winter  months  so  much  in  the  Southern
parts  of  America  as  in  some' of  the  West  India  Islands.  Indeed,  I am
the  more  inclined  to  believe  this  to  be  the  case,  that  they  seldom  pene-
trate far  into  the  interior,  during  their  stay  with  us,  but  prefer  the  dis-
tricts bordering  upon  the  Atlantic,  through  which  they  pass  and  repass
in  incredible  numbers.

In  Louisiana,  small  detached  flocks  of  males  or  of  females  appear
about  the  middle  of  March  and  beginning  of  April,  alighting  in  the  mea-
dows and  grain-fields,  where  they  pick  up  the  grubs  and  insects  found
about  the  roots  of  the  blades.  I have  heard  it  asserted,  though  I can-
not give  it  as  a fact,  that  the  appearance  of  the  Rice  Bird  in  spring
forebodes  a bad  harvest.  The  idea  probably  originates  from  the  circum-
stance that  these  birds  do  not  pass  through  Louisiana  regularly  every
year,  there  being  sometimes  three  or  four  springs  in  succession  in  which
they  are  not  observed.

The  plumage  of  many  of  the  males  at  this  early  season  still  resembles
that  of  the  females,  but  it  changes  in  the  course  of  their  stay,  which  is
seldom  more  than  a fortnight.  I have  ascertained  this  fact  by  dissecting
many  at  this  period,  when,  notwithstanding  the  dull  colour  of  their  plu-
mage, I found  the  sexual  organs  greatly  developed,  which  is  not  the  case
in  autumn,  even  in  the  old  males.  I had  another  clew  to  the  discovery
of  this  fact.  No  sooner  did  a flock  of  females  make  its  appearance,  than
these  dull-looking  gentlemen  immediately  paid  them  such  particular  at-
tention, and  sang  so  vehemently,  that  the  fact  of  their  being  of  a different
sex  became  undeniable.

Here  they  pass  under  the  name  of  Meadow  Birds.  In  Pennsylvania
they  are  called  Reed  Birds^  in  Carohna  Rice  Buntings,  and  in  the  State
of  New  York  Bohlinhs.  The  latter  appellation  is  given  to  them  as  far
eastward  as  they  are  known  to  proceed  for  the  purpose  of  breeding.

During  their  sojourn  in  Louisiana,  in  spring,  their  song,  which  is


284


RICE  BIRD.


extremely  interesting,  and  emitted  with  a volubility  bordering  on  the
burlesque,  is  heard  from  a whole  party  at  the  same  time ; when,  as  each
individual  is,  of  course,  possessed  of  the  same  musical  powers  as  his
neighbours,  it  becomes  amusing  to  listen  to  thirty  or  forty  of  them  be-
ginning one  after  another,  as  if  ordered  to  follow  in  quick  succession,  af-
ter the  first  notes  are  given  by  a leader,  and  producing  such  a medley  as  it
is  impossible  to  describe,  although  it  is  extremely  pleasant  to  hear  it.
While  you  are  listening,  the  whole  flock  simultaneously  ceases,  which  ap-
pears equally  extraordinary.  This  curious  exhibition  takes  place  every
time  that  the  flock  has  alighted  on  a tree,  after  feeding  for  a while  on  the
ground,  and  is  renewed  at  intervals  during  the  day.

There  is  a very  remarkable  fact  in  the  history  of  this  species,  which
is,  that  while  moving  eastward,  during  their  migration,  in  spring,  they
fly  mostly  at  night ; whereas  in  autumn,  when  they  are  returning  south-
ward, their  flight  is  diurnal.  This,  kind  reader,  is  another  puzzle  to  me.

About  the  middle  of  May,  the  Boblinks  reach  the  State  of  New
York,  their  stay  in  the  intermediate  States  being  of  short  duration  at  that
season,  although  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  cause  great  injury  to  the
corn  fields  in  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania,  where  it  is  said,  al-
though I can  scarcely  give  credit  to  the  assertion,  that  they  cut  the
blade  near  the  root.  This  is  perhaps  laid  to  their  charge  for  the  pur-
pose of  aggravating  the  real  injury  which  they  afterwards  inflict  on  the
farmers,  by  feeding  on  the  grain  when  in  a milky  and  tender  state.
However,  they  reach  the  States  of  New  York  and  Connecticut,  and  ex-
tend their  journey  to  the  easternmost  of  our  districts,  proceeding  also  to
the  borders  of  Lake  Champlain,  Lake  Ontario,  and  the  St  Laurence.

By  this  time,  they  have  become  so  plentiful,  and  have  so  dispersed
all  over  the  country,  that  it  is  impossible  to  see  a meadow  or  a field  of
corn,  which  does  not  contain  several  pairs  of  them.  The  beauty,  or,  per-
haps more  properly,  the  variety  of  their  plumage,  as  well  as  of  their  song,
attracts  the  attention  of  the  bird-catchers.  Great  numbers  are  captured
and  exposed  for  sale  in  the  markets,  particularly  in  those  of  the  city  of
New  York.  They  are  caught  in  trap-cages,  and  feed  and  sing  almost
immediately  after.  Many  are  carried  to  Europe,  where  the  shipper  is
often  disappointed  in  his  profits,  as  by  the  time  they  reach  there,  the
birds  have  changed  their  colours  and  seem  all  females.

Whilst  the  love  season  lasts,  the  males  are  more  sprightly  than  ever.
Their  song  is  mostly  performed  in  the  air,  while  they  are  rising  and  fall-


RICE  BIRD.


285


ing  in  successive  jerks,  which  are  as  amusing  as  the  jingling  of  their  vo-
cal essays.  The  variety  of  their  colours  is  at  this  juncture  very  remark-
able. It  is  equally  so,  when,  on  rising  from  among  the  grass  and  flying
away  from  the  observer,  they  display  the  pure  black  and  white  of  their
wings  and  body.

The  nest  of  the  Rice  Bunting  is  placed  on  the  ground,  without  much
apparent  care  as  to  choice  of  situation,  but  always  amongst  the  grass,  or  in
a field  of  wheat  or  barley.  It  is  composed  of  coarse  dried  grasses  and
leaves  externally,  and  is  lined  with  finer  meadow  grass.  It  appears  large
for  the  size  of  the  bird.  The  female  lays  from  four  to  six  eggs,  of  a
white  colour,  strongly  tinged  with  dull  blue,  and  irregularly  spotted  with
blackish.  They  raise  only  one  brood  in  a season.

No  sooner  have  the  young  left  the  nest,  than  they  and  their  parents
associate  with  other  families,  so  that  by  the  end  of  July  large  flocks  be-
gin to  appear.  They  seem  to  come  from  every  portion  of  the  Eastern
States,  and  already  resort  to  the  borders  of  the  rivers  and  estuaries  to
roost.  Their  songs  have  ceased,  the  males  have  lost  their  gay  livery,  and
have  assumed  the  yellow  hue  of  the  females  and  young,  although  the
latter  are  more  firm  in  their  tints  than  the  old  males,  and  the  whole  be-
gin to  return  southward,  slowly  and  with  a single  clmk,  sufficient  how-
ever to  give  intimation  of  their  passage,  as  they  fly  high  in  long  files  dur-
ing the  whole  day.

Now  begin  their  devastations.  They  plunder  every  field,  but  are
shot  in  immense  numbers.  As  they  pass  along  the  sea  shores,  and  fol-
low the  muddy  edges  of  the  rivers,  covered  at  that  season  with  full
grown  reeds,  whose  tops  are  bent  down  with  the  weight  of  the  ripe  seeds,
they  alight  amongst  them  in  countless  multitudes,  and  afford  abundant
practice  to  every  gunner.

It  is  particularly  towards  sunset,  and  when  the  weather  is  fine,  that
the  sport  of  shooting  Reed  Birds  is  most  profitable.  They  have  then
fully  satiated  their  appetite,  and  have  collected  closely  for  the  purpose  of
roosting.  At  the  discharge  of  a gun,  a flock  sufficient  to  cover  several
acres  rises  en  masse,  and  performing  various  evolutions,  densely  packed,
and  resembling  a sultry  cloud,  passes  over  and  near  the  sportsman,  when  he
lets  fly,  and  finds  occupation  for  some  time  in  picking  up  the  dozens  which
he  has  brought  down  at  a single  shot.  One  would  think  that  every  gun
in  the  country  has  been  put  in  requisition.  Millions  of  these  birds  are  de-
stroyed, and  yet  millions  remain,  for  after  all  the  havock  that  has  been


286


RICE  BIRD.


made  among  them  in  the  Middle  Districts,  they  follow  the  coast,  and
reach  the  rice  plantations  of  the  Carolinas  in  such  astonishing  numbers,
that  no  one  could  conceive  their  flocks  to  have  been  already  thinned.
Their  flesh  is  extremely  tender  and  juicy.  The  markets  are  amply  sup-
plied, and  the  epicures  have  a glorious  time  of  it.

By  the  end  of  October,  few  are  found  remaining  in  the  States' of  New
York  and  Pennsylvania;  and  by  the  first  of  December  they  have  left  the
United  States.

The  food  of  these  birds  varies  according  to  the  seasons,  and  consists
of  grubs,  caterpillars,  insects  of  various  kinds,  such  as  beetles,  grass-
hoppers, crickets,  and  ground-spiders,  and  the  seeds  of  wild  oats,  wheat,
barley,  rice,  and  other  grasses.  They  cling  or  climb  along  the  stalks  of
rank  weeds,  reeds,  and  corn,  with  great  activity  and  ease,  and  when  at
roost  place  themselves  as  near  the  ground  as  possible.


Icterus  agripennis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  53.

Emberiza  ORYZivoRA,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  311. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  L
p.  408.

Rice  Bunting,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  188 — Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  48,
PI.  xii.  fig.  1,  2.

Plate  LIV.  Fig.  1.  Adult  Male  in  summer.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  robust,  conical,  compressed  ; upper  mandible
narrower,  inflected  at  the  edges,  the  dorsal  outline  a little  convex,  the
ridge  slightly  prolonged  on  the  forehead,  the  palate  furnished  with  a hard
tubercle ; under  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  convex,  as  are  the  sides,
the  edges  inflected ; the  gap  line  much  deflected  at  the  base,  straight.
Nostrils  basal,  oval,  in  a short  deep  grove,  nearly  concealed  by  the
feathers.  Head  large,  neck  thick,  body  full.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,
rather  strong ; tarsus  compressed,  anteriorly  covered  with  six  scutella,
posteriorly  acute ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  outer  united  at  the  base ;
claws  arched,  compressed,  acute,  the  hind  one  very  long.

Plumage  compact,  glossy.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  second
quill  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  composed  of  twelve  acuminate
feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  bluish-grey  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  light
reddish-brown.  Upper  and  fore  part  of  the  head,  cheeks,  tail,  quills,
and  the  whole  under  parts,  black.  Back  of  the  head  and  neck  brownish-


RICE  BIRD.


287


yellow.  Fore  part  of  the  back  black,  the  feathers  margined  with  yellow,
as  are  the  secondary  quills  and  coverts.  Lower  back,  tail-coverts  and
scapulars,  pure  white.

Length  7 inches,  extent  of  wings  11  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  1|,  middle  toe  1;^.

Adult  Female  in  summer.  Plate  LIV.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  somewhat  less  than  the  male,  and  differs  greatly  in  the
colours  of  the  plumage,  the  upper  parts  being  light  yellowish-brown,  lon-
gitudinally streaked  with  blackish-brown,  the  under  parts  pale  greyish-
yellow,  the  sides  longitudinally  marked  with  dark  brown.  There  is  a
broad  band  of  dark  brown  on  each  side  of  the  head,  beneath  which  is  a
yellowish  streak  over  the  eye,  and  a blackish  spot  behind  it.  The  quills
and  tail-feathers  are  wood-brown,  the  former,  as  well  as  the  coverts,  mar-
gined with  yellowish.

Notwithstanding  the  somewhat  greater  length  of  the  bill,  this  bird
evidently  approaches  very  nearly  to  the  genus  Emheriza,  or  is  one  of  the
connecting  links  between  it  and  the  genus  Icterus.  The  female  in  co-
louring bears  a striking  resemblance  to  Emheriza  miliaria.


The  Red  Maple.

Acer  rubrum,  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  vol.  iv.  p.  984  Pursh.)  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  265.
Mich.  Arb.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  210.  PL  14 — Octandria  Mono-
GYNiA,  Linn.  Acerinea:,  Juss.

This  species,  which  is  known  by  the  names  of  Red  Maple  and  Swamp
Maple.^  is  distinguished  by  its  five-lobed  or  three-lobed  leaves,  which  are
cordate  at  the  base,  unequally  and  deeply  toothed,  and  glaucous  beneath ;
its  sessile  umbels,  elongated  pedicels,  and  smooth  germens.  The  flowers
and  seeds  are  red.  It  is  very  extensively  distributed,  and  in  the  Swamps
of  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  attains  a height  of  from  sixty  to  eighty
feet.  When 'young,  the  bark  is  smooth,  and  covered  with  large  white
spots,  but  it  ultimately  cracks  and  becomes  brown.  The  wood  is  hard
and  close,  and  takes  a good  polish.  It  is  extensively  used  for  various
purposes.


( 288  )


CUVIER’S  REGULUS.

Regulus  Cuvierii.

PLATE  LV.  Male.

I HAVE  named  this  pretty  and  rare  species  after  Baron  Cuvier,  not
merely  by  way  of  acknowledgment  for  the  kind  attentions  which  I have
received  at  the  hands  of  that  deservedly  celebrated  naturalist,  but  more
as  a homage  due  by  every  student  of  nature  to  one  at  present  unrivalled
in  the  knowledge  of  General  Zoology.

I shot  the  bird  represented  in  the  Plate,  on  my  father-in-law’s  plan-
tation of  Fatland  Ford,  on  the  Skuylkill  River  in  Pennsylvania,  on  the
8th  June  1812,  while  on  a visit  to  my  honoured  relative  Mr  William
Bakewell.  The  drawing  which  I then  made  I have  kept  to  this  date,
without  having  described  the  bird  from  which  it  was  taken.  I killed  this
little  bird,  supposing  it  to  be  one  of  its  relatives,  the  Ruby-crested  Wren,
whilst  it  was  searching  for  insects  and  larvae  amongst  the  leaves  and  blos-
soms of  the  Kalmia  latifolia^  on  a branch  of  which  you  see  it  represented,
and  was  not  aware  of  its  being  a different  bird  until  I picked  it  up  from
the  ground.  I have  not  seen  another  since,  nor  have  I been  able  to  learn
that  this  species  has  been  observed  by  any  other  individual.  It  might,
however,  be  very  easily  mistaken  for  the  Ruby-crowned  Wren,  the  man-
ners of  which  appear  to  be  much  the  same.

My  excellent  friend  Charles  Lucian  Bonaparte,  to  whom  also  I
shewed  my  drawing  of  this  bird  in  London,  proposed  naming  it  Regulus
Carhunculus ; and  I should  probably  have  introduced  it  to  you,  kind
reader,  under  that  appellation,  had  I not  changed  it  for  that  of  Regulus
Cuvier  1%  on  my  fortunately  becoming  acquainted  with  the  highly  cele-
brated and  equally  kind  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  France.

The  Kalmia  latifolia  grows  in  great  profusion  in  the  State  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  along  the  range  of  the  Alleghanies,  in  all  rocky  and  liilly
situations.

Regulus  Cuvierii.

S


Plate  LV.  Male.


CUVIER’S  REGULUS.


289


Bill  short,  straight,  subulate,  very  slender,  compressed,  with  inflected
edges ; upper  mandible  nearly  straight  in  its  dorsal  outline,  the  edges
slightly  notched  close  upon  the  slightly  declinate  acute  tip ; lower  man-
dible straight,  acute.  Nostrils  basal,  elliptical,  half  closed  above  by  a
membrane,  covered  over  by  the  feathers.  The  whole  form  slender.  Legs
rather  long;  tarsus  slender,  much  compressed,  longer  than  the  middle
toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  indistinct  scutella  ; toes  scutellate,  the
lateral  ones  nearly  equal  and  free ; hind  toe  stouter  ; claws  weak,  com-
pressed, arched,  acute.

Plumage  very  loose  and  tufty  Bristles  at  the  base  of  the  bill ; a.
small  decomposed  feather  covering  the  nostril.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,
the  third  and  fourth  primaries  longest.  Tail  of  twelve  feathers,  emarginate.

Bill  black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  yellowish-brown.  The  general  colour
of  the  upper  parts  is  dull  greyish-olive.  Forehead,  lore,  and  a line  be-
hind the  eye,  black.  A semilunar  band  of  the  same  on  the  top  of  the
head,  the  middle  space  vermilion.  Wings  and  tail  dusky,  edged  with
greenish-yellow.  Secondary  coverts  tipped  with  greyish-white.  Under
parts  greyish-white.

Length  4^  inches,  extent  of  wings  6 ; bill  along  the  ridge  nearly
along  the  gap  nearly  J ; tarsus


The  Broad-leaved  Kalmia,  or  Laurel.

Kalmia  latifolia,  TVilld.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  600.  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  296. —
Decandria  Moxogyxia,  Linn.  Rhododexdra,  Juss.

This  beautiful  species  is  characterized  by  its  scattered,  petiolate,  el-
liptical leaves,  which  are  smooth,  and  nearly  of  the  same  colour  on  both
sides  ; and  its  terminal,  viscid,  and  pubescent  corymbs.  It  is  a middle-
sized  shrub,  sometimes  attaining  a height  of  eight  or  ten  feet.  The  leaves
are  evergreen,  as  in  the  other  species,  and  the  flowers  of  a delicate  pink.


T


( 290  )


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.

It  may  not  be  amiss,  kind  reader,  before  I attempt  to  give  you  some
idea  of  the  pleasures  experienced  by  the  sportsmen  of  Kentucky,  to  in-
troduce the  subject  with  a slight  description  of  that  State.

Kentucky  was  formerly  attached  to  Virginia,  but  in  those  days  the
Indians  looked  upon  that  portion  of  the  western  wilds  as  their  oAvn,  and
abandoned  the  district  only  when  forced  to  do  so,  moving  with  disconso-
late hearts  farther  into  the  recesses  of  the  unexplored  forests.  Doubtless
the  richness  of  its  soil,  and  the  beauty  of  its  borders,  situated  as  they  are
along  one  of  the  most  beautiful  rivers  in  the  world,  contributed  as  much
to  attract  the  Old  Virginians,  as  the  desire  so  generally  experienced  in
America,  of  spreading  over  the  uncultivated  tracts,  and  bringing  into
cultivation  lands  that  have  for  unknown  ages  teemed  with  the  wild  luxu-
riance of  untamed  nature.  The  conquest  of  Kentucky  was  not  performed
without  many  difficulties.  The  warfare  that  long  existed  between  the  in-
truders and  the  Redskins  was  sanguinary  and  protracted  ; but  the  for-
mer at  length  made  good  their  footing,  and  the  latter  drew  off  their  shat-
tered bands,  dismayed  by  the  mental  superiority  and  indomitable  courage
of  the  white  men.

This  region  was  probably  discovered  by  a daring  hunter,  the  renowned
Daniel  Boon.  The  richness  of  its  soil,  its  magnificent  forests,  its  number-
less navigable  streams,  its  salt  springs  and  licks,  its  saltpetre  caves,  its  coal
strata,  and  the  vast  herds  of  buffaloes  and  deer  that  browsed  on  its  hills  and
amidst  its  charming  valleys,  afforded  ample  inducements  to  the  new  set-
tler, who  pushed  forward  with  a spirit  far  above  that  of  the  most  un-
daunted tribes,  which  for  ages  had  been  the  sole  possessors  of  the  soil.

The  Virginians  thronged  towards  the  Ohio.  An  axe,  a couple  of
horses,  and  a heavy  rifle,  with  store  of  ammunition,  were  all  that  were  con-
sidered necessary  for  the  equipment  of  the  man,  who,  with  his  family,  re-
moved to  the  new  State,  assured  that,  in  that  land  of  exuberant  fertility,
he  could  not  fail  to  provide  amply  for  all  his  wants.  To  have  witnessed
the  industry  and  perseverance  of  these  emigrants,  must  at  once  have
proved  the  vigour  of  their  minds.  Regardless  of  the  fatigue  attending
every  movement  which  they  made,  they  pushed  through  an  unexplored
region  of  dark  and  tangled  forests,  guiding  themselves  by  the  sun  alone.


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.


291


and  reposing  at  night  on  the  bare  ground.  Numberless  streams  they
had  to  cross  on  rafts,  with  their  wives  and  children,  their  cattle  and  their
luggage,  often  drifting  to  considerable  distances  before  they  could  effect
a landing  on  the  opposite  shores.  Their  cattle  would  often  stray  amid
the  rice  pasturage  of  these  shores,  and  occasion  a delay  of  several  days.
To  these  troubles  add  the  constantly  impending  danger  of  being  mur-
dered, while  asleep  in  their  encampments,  by  the  prowling  and  ruthless
Indians ; while  they  had  before  them  a distance  of  hundreds  of  miles  to
be  traversed,  before  they  could  reach  certain  places  of  rendezvous  called
Stations.  To  encounter  difficulties  like  these  must  have  required  ener-
gies of  no  ordinary  kind;  and  the  reward  which  these  veteran  settlers
enjoy  was  doubtless  well  merited.

Some  removed  from  the  Atlantic  shores  to  those  of  the  Ohio  in  more
comfort  and  security.  They  had  their  waggons,  their  Negroes,  and  their
families.  Their  way  was  cut  through  the  woods  by  their  own  axemen,
the  day  before  their  advance,  and  when  night  overtook  them,  the  hunters
attached  to  the  party  came  to  the  place  pitched  upon  for  encamping,
loaded  with  the  dainties  of  which  the  forest  yielded  an  abundant  supply,
the  blazing  light  of  a huge  fire  guiding  their  steps  as  they  approached,
and  the  sounds  of  merriment  that  saluted  their  ears  assuring  them  that  all
was  well.  The  flesh  of  the  buffalo,  the  bear,  and  the  deer,  soon  hung  in
large  and  delicious  steaks,  in  front  of  the  embers  ; the  cakes  already  pre-
pared Avere  deposited  in  their  proper  places,  and  under  the  rich  drippings
of  the  juicy  roasts,  were  quickly  baked.  The  waggons  contained  the
bedding,  and  whilst  the  horses  which  had  drawn  them  were  turned  loose
to  feed  on  the  luxuriant  undergrowth  of  the  woods,  some  perhaps  hop-
pled,  but  the  greater  number,  merely  with  a light  bell  hung  to  their
neck,  to  guide  their  owners  in  the  morning  to  the  spot  where  they  might
have  rambledj  the  party  were  enjoying  themselves  after  the  fatigues  of
the  day.

In  anticipation  all  is  pleasure  ; and  these  migrating  bands  feasted  in
joyous  sociality,  unapprehensive  of  any  greater  difficulties  than  those  to
be  encountered  in  forcing  their  way  through  the  pathless  woods  to  the
land  of  abundance  ; and  although  it  took  months  to  accomplish  the  jour-
ney, and  a skirmish  now  and  then  took  place  between  them  and  the  In-
dians, who  sometimes  crept  unperceived  into  their  very  camp,  still  did
the  Virginians  cheerfully  proceed  towards  the  western  horizon,  until  the
various  groups  all  reached  the  Ohio,  when,  struck  with  the  beauty  of  that

T 2


292


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.


magnificent  stream,  they  at  once  commenced  the  task  of  clearing  land,
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a permanent  residence.

Others,  perhaps  encumbered  with  too  much  luggage,  preferred  de-
scending the  stream.  They  prepared  arhs  pierced  with  port-holes,  and
glided  on  the  gentle  current,  more  annoyed,  however,  than  those  who
marched  by  land,  by  the  attacks  of  the  Indians,  who  watched  their  mo-
tions. Many  travellers  have  described  these  boats,  formerly  called  arhs,
but  now  named  Jiat-hoats.  But  have  they  told  you,  kind  reader,  that  in
those  times  a boat  thirty  or  forty  feet  in  length,  by  ten  or  twelve  in
breadth,  was  considered  a stupendous  fabric ; that  this  boat  contained
men,  women  and  children,  huddled  together,  with  horses,  cattle,  hogs
and  poultry  for  their  companions,  while  the  remaining  portion  was
crammed  with  vegetables  and  packages  of  seeds  ? The  roof  or  deck  of
the  boat  was  not  unlike  a farm -yard,  being  covered  with  hay,  ploughs,
carts,  waggons,  and  various  agricultural  implements,  together  with  nu-
merous others,  among  which  the  spinning-wheels  of  the  matrons  were
conspicuous.  Even  the  sides  of  the  floating-mass  were  loaded  with  the
wheels  of  the  different  vehicles,  which  themselves  lay  on  the  roof.  Have
they  told  you  that  these  boats  contained  the  little  all  of  each  family  of
venturous  emigrants,  who,  fearful  of  being  discovered  by  the  Indians
under  night  moved  in  darkness,  groping  their  way  from  one  part  to
another  of  these  floating  habitations,  denying  themselves  the  comfort  of
fire  or  light,  lest  the  foe  that  watched  them  from  the  shore  should
rush  upon  them  and  destroy  them  ? Have  they  told  you  that  this  boat
was  used,  after  the  tedious  voyage  was  ended,  as  the  first  dwelling  of
these  new  settlers.?  No,  kind  reader,  such  things  have  not  been  related
to  you  before.  The  travellers  who  have  visited  our  country,  have  had
other  objects  in  view.

I shall  not  describe  the  many  massacres  which  took  place  among  the
different  parties  of  White  and  Red  men,  as  the  former  moved  down
the  Ohio ; because  I have  never  been  very  fond  of  battles,  and  indeed
have  always  wished  that  the  world  were  more  peaceably  inclined  than  it
is ; and  shall  merely  add,  that,  in  one  way  or  other,  Kentucky  was  wrested
from  the  original  owners  of  the  soil.  Let  us,  therefore,  turn  our  atten-
tion to  the  sports  still  enjoyed  in  that  now  happy  portion  of  the  United
States.

We  have  individuals  in  Kentucky,  kind  reader,  that  even  there  are
considered  wonderful  adepts  in  the  management  of  the  rifle.  To  drive


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.


293


a nail  is  a common  feat,  not  more  thought  oflp  by  the  Kentuckians  than
to  cut  off  a wild  turkey’s  head,  at  a distance  of  a hundred  yards.  Others
will  harTc  off  squirrels  one  after  another,  until  satisfied  with  the  number
procured.  Some,  less  intent  on  destroying  game,  may  be  seen  under
night  snuffing  a candle  at  the  distance  of  fifty  yards,  off-hand,  without
extinguishing  it.  I have  been  told  that  some  have  proved  so  expert  and
cool,  as  to  make  choice  of  the  eye  of  a foe  at  a wonderful  distance,  boasting
beforehand  of  the  sureness  of  their  piece,  which  has  afterwards  been
fully  proved  when  the  enemy’s  head  has  been  examined !

Having  resided  some  years  in  Kentucky,  and  having  more  than  once
been  witness  of  rifle  sport,  I shall  present  you  with  the  results  of  my  ob-
servation, lea\?ing  you  to  judge  how  far  rifle-shooting  is  understood  in
that  State.

Several  individuals  who  conceive  themselves  expert  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  gun,  are  often  seen  to  meet  for  the  purpose  of  displaying
their  skill,  and  betting  a trifling  sum,  put  up  a target,  in  the  centre  of
which  a common-sized  nail  is  hammered  for  about  two-thirds  of  its  length.
The  marksmen  make  choice  of  what  they  consider  a proper  distance,
which  may  be  forty  paces.  Each  man  cleans  the  interior  of  his  tube,
which  is  called  wiping  it,  places  a ball  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  pouring
as  much  powder  from  his  horn  upon  it  as  will  cover  it.  This  quantity  is
supposed  to  be  sufficient  for  any  distance  within  a hundred  yards.  A
shot  which  comes  very  close  to  the  nail  is  considered  as  that  of  an  indif-
ferent marksman;  the  bending  of  the  nail  is,  of  course,  somewhat  better;
but  nothing  less  than  hitting  it  right  on  the  head  is  satisfactory.  Well,
kind  reader,  one  out  of  three  shots  generally  hits  the  nail,  and  should  the
shooters  amount  to  half  a dozen,  two  nails  are  frequently  needed  before
each  can  have  a shot.  Those  who  drive  the  nail  have  a further  trial
amongst  themselves,  and  the  two  best  shots  out  of  these  generally  settle
the  affair,  when  all  the  sportsmen  adjourn  to  some  house,  and  spend  an
hour  or  two  in  friendly  intercourse,  appointing,  before  they  part,  a day  for
another  trial.  This  is  technically  termed  Driving  the  Nail.

BarMng  off  squirrels  is  delightful  sport,  and  in  my  opinion  requires  a
greater  degree  of  accuracy  than  any  other.  I first  witnessed  this  manner
of  procuring  squirrels,  whilst  near  the  town  of  Frankfort.  The  performer
was  the  celebrated  Daniel  Boon.  We  walked  out  together,  and  fol-
lowed the  rocky  margins  of  the  Kentucky  River,  until  we  reached  a piece
of  flat  land  thickly  covered  with  black  walnuts,  oaks  and  hickories.  As


294


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.


the  general  mast  was  a good  one  that  year,  squirrels  were  seen  gambol-
ling on  every  tree  around  us.  My  companion,  a stout,  hale,  and  athletic
man,  dressed  in  a homespun  hunting-shirt,  bare-legged  and  moccasined,
carried  a long  and  heavy  rifle,  which,  as  he  was  loading  it,  he  said  had
proved  efficient  in  all  his  former  undertakings,  and  which  he  hoped
would  not  fail  on  this  occasion,  as  he  felt  proud  to  shew  me  his  skill.
The  gun  was  wiped,  the  powder  measured,  the  ball  patched  with  six-
hundred- thread  linen,  and  the  charge  sent  home  with  a hickory  rod.  We
moved  not  a step  from  the  place,  for  the  squirrels  were  so  numerous  that
it  was  unnecessary  to  go  after  them.  Boon  pointed  to  one  of  these  ani-
mals which  had  observed  us,  and  was  crouched  on  a branch  about  fifty
paces  distant,  and  bade  me  mark  well  the  spot  where  the  ball  should  hit.
He  raised  his  piece  gradually,  until  the  head  (that  being  the  name  given
by  the  Kentuckians  to  the  sight)  of  the  barrel  was  brought  to  a line  with
the  spot  which  he  intended  to  hit.  The  whip-like  report  resounded
through  the  woods  and  along  the  hills,  in  repeated  echoes.  Judge  of  my
surprise,  when  I perceived  that  the  ball  had  hit  the  piece  of  the  bark
immediately  beneath  the  squirrel,  and  shivered  it  into  splinters,  the  con-
cussion produced  by  which  had  killed  the  animal,  and  sent  it  whirling
through  the  air,  as  if  it  had  been  blown  up  by  the  explosion  of  a powder
magazine.  Boon  kept  up  his  firing,  and,  before  many  hours  had  elapsed,
we  had  procured  as  many  squirrels  as  we  wished ; for  you  must  know,
kind  reader,  that  to  load  a rifle  requires  only  a moment,  and  that  if  it
is  wiped  once  after  each  shot,  it  will  do  duty  for  hours.  Since  that  first
interview  with  our  veteran  Boon,  I have  seen  many  other  individuals
perform  the  same  feat.

The  snuffing  of  a candle  with  a ball,  I first  had  an  opportunity  of
seeing  near  the  banks  of  Green  River,  not  far  from  a large  pigeon-roost,
to  which  I had  previously  made  a visit.  I heard  many  reports  of  guns
during  the  early  part  of  a dark  night,  and  knowing  them  to  be  those  of
rifles,  I went  towards  the  spot  to  ascertain  the  cause.  On  reaching  the
place,  I was  welcomed  by  a dozen  of  tall  stout  men,  who  told  me  they
were  exercising,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  them  to  shoot  under  night  at
the  reflected  light  from  the  eyes  of  a deer  or  wolf,  by  torch-light,  of
which  I shall  give  you  an  account  somewhere  else.  A fire  was  blazing
near,  the  smoke  of  which  rose  curling  among  the  thick  foliage  of  the
trees.  At  a distance  which  rendered  it  scarcely  distinguishable,  stood  a
burning  candle,  as  if  intended  for  an  offering  to  the  goddess  of  night,  but


KENTUCKY  SPORTS.


293


which  in  reality  was  only  fifty  yards  from  the  spot  on  which  we  all  stood.
One  man  was  within  a few  yards  of  it,  to  watch  the  effects  of  the  shots,
as  well  as  to  light  the  candle  should  it  chance  to  go  out,  or  to  replace  it
should  the  shot  cut  it  across.  Each  marksman  shot  in  his  turn.  Some
never  hit  either  the  snuff  or  the  candle,  and  were  congratulated  with  a
loud  laugh  ; while  others  actually  snuffed  the  candle  without  putting  it
out,  and  were  recompensed  for  their  dexterity  by  numerous  hurrahs.
One  of  them,  who  was  particularly  expert,  was  very  fortunate,  and  snuf-
fed the  candle  three  times  out  of  seven,  whilst  all  the  other  shots  either
put  out  the  candle,  or  cut  it  immediately  under  the  light.

Of  the  feats  performed  by  the  Kentuckians  with  the  rifle,  I could
say  more  than  might  be  expedient  on  the  present  occasion.  In  every
thinly  peopled  portion  of  the  State,  it  is  rare  to  meet  one  without  a gun
of  that  description,  as  well  as  a tomahawk.  By  way  of  recreation,  they
often  cut  off*  a piece  of  the  bark  of  a tree,  make  a target  of  it,  using  a
little  powder  wetted  with  water  or  saliva,  for  the  bull’s  eye,  and  shoot  in-
to the  mark  all  the  balls  they  have  about  them,  picking  them  out  of  the
wood  again.

After  what  I have  said,  you  may  easily  imagine  with  what  ease  a
Kentuckian  procures  game,  or  dispatches  an  enemy,  more  especially  when
I tell  you  that  every  one  in  the  State  is  accustomed  to  handle  the  rifle
from  the  time  when  he  is  first  able  to  shoulder  it  until  near  the  close  of
his  career.  That  murderous  weapon  is  the  means  of  procuring  them  sub-
sistence din  ing  all  their  wild  and  extensive  rambles,  and  is  the  source  of
their  principal  sports  and  pleasures.


( 29G  )

llED-SHOULDERED  HAWK.

Falco  lineatus,  Gmel.

PLATE  LVI.  Male  and  Female.

Although  we  are  informed  that  a skin  of  this  species  has  long  ago
been  described  in  Europe,  we  are,  in  the  same  breath,  told  that  nothing
is  known  of  the  life  and  habits  of  the  individual  on  the  body  of  which  it
once  shone  in  all  its  native  glossiness.  Nothing,  kind  reader  : — -the  tar-
nished coat  only  has  been  transmitted  abroad  ; and,  like  that  belonging
to  many  equally  interesting  species  of  the  feathered  tribe,  has  been  ex-
posed for  sale  in  distant  markets,  where  the  purchaser  has  felt  as  little
concern  about  the  life  of  the  individual  to  which  it  belonged,  as  purchasers
of  another  kind  usually  feel  about  the  former  owners  of  the  thread-bare
vestments  which  we  see  offered  for  sale  by  the  old-clothes’-men  of  St  Giles’s.
Even  Mr  Alexander  Wilson  himself,  knew  nothing  respecting  the
habits  of  this  species ; and  as  other  authors,  ranking  equally  high  with
that  pleasing  writer,  have  unwittingly  confounded  it  with  another  species,
known  in  the  United  States  by  the  name  of  the  Winter  Hawk^  it  is  with
satisfaction  that  I find  myself  in  some  degree  qualified  to  give  an  account
of  the  differences  of  habit  between  the  two  species.

The  Red-shouldered  Hawk,  or,  as  I would  prefer  calling  it,  the  Red-
hreasted  Hawk,  although  dispersed  over  the  greater  part  of  the  United
States,  is  rarely  observed  in  the  Middle  Districts,  where,  on  the  contrary,
the  Winter  Falcon  usually  makes  its  appearance  from  the  north,  at  the
approach  of  every  autumn,  and  is  of  more  common  occurrence.  Ken-
tucky, Tennessee,  and  other  Western  States,  with  the  most  Southern
Districts  of  our  Union,  are  apparently  best  adapted  for  the  constant  resi-
dence of  the  Red-shouldered  Hawk,  as  in  all  these  latter  districts  it  is  met
with  in  greater  numbers  than  in  any  other.

This  bird  is  one  of  the  most  noisy  of  its  genus,  during  spring  espe-
cially, when  it  would  be  difficult  to  approach  the  skirts  of  woods  bordering
a large  plantation  without  hearing  its  discordant  shrill  notes,  ka-hee,  ka-hee,
as  it  is  seen  sailing  in  rapid  circles  at  a very  great  elevation.  Its  ordi-
nary flight  is  even  and  protracted,  excepting  when  it  is  describing  the


RED-SHOULDERED  HAWK.


297


circles  just  mentioned,  when  it  often  dives  and  gambols.  It  is  a more
general  inhabitant  of  the  woods  than  most  of  our  other  species,  particularly
during  the  summer,  and  in  autumn  and  winter;  now  and  then  only,  in  early
spring,  shewing  itself  in  the  o})en  grounds,  and  about  the  vicinity  of
small  lakes,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  Red-winged  Starlings  and  wound-
ed Ducks.

The  interior  of  woods  seems,  as  I have  said,  the  fittest  haunts  for  the
Red-shouldered  Hawk.  He  sails  through  them  a few  yards  above  the
ground,  and  suddenly  alights  on  the  low  branch  of  a tree,  or  the  top  of  a
dead  stump,  from  which  he  silently  watches,  in  an  erect  posture,  for  the
appearance  of  squirrels,  upon  which  he  pounces  directly  and  kills  them
in  an  instant,  afterwards  devouring  them  on  the  ground.  If  accidentally
discovered,  he  essays  to  remove  the  squirrel,  but  finding  this  difficult,  he
drags  it  partly  through  the  air  and  partly  along  the  ground,  to  some  short
distance,  until  he  conceives  himself  out  of  sight  of  the  intruder,  when  he
again  commences  feeding.  The  eating  of  a whole  squirrel,  which  this
bird  often  devours  at  one  meal,  so  gorges  it,  that  I have  seen  it  in  this
state  almost  unable  to  fly,  and  with  such  an  extraordinary  protuberance
on  its  breast  as  seemed  very  unnatural,  and  very  injurious  to  the  beauty
of  form  which  the  bird  usually  display?  s.  On  all  occasions,  such  as  I have
described,  when  the  bird  is  so  gorged,  it  is  approached  with  the  greatest
ease.  On  the  contrary,  when  it  is  in  want  of  food,  it  requires  the  greatest
caution  to  get  within  shooting  distance  of  it.

At  the  approach  of  spring,  this  species  begins  to  pair,  and  its  flight  is
accompanied  with  many  circlings  and  zigzag  motions,  during  which  it
emits  its  shrill  cries.  The  male  is  particularly  noisy  at  this  time.  He
gives  chase  to  all  other  Hawks,  returns  to  the  branch  on  which  his  mate
has  chanced  to  perch,  and  caresses  her.  This  happens  about  the  begin-
ning of  March.  The  spot  adapted  for  a nest  is  already  fixed  upon,  and
the  fabric  is  half  finished.  The  top  of  a tall  tree  appears  to  be  preferred
by  this  Hawk,  as  I have  found  its  nest  more  commonly  placed  there,  not
far  from  the  edges  of  woods  bordering  plantations.  The  nest  is  seated  in
the  forks  of  a large  branch,  towards  its  extremity,  and  is  as  bulky  as  that
of  the  Common  Crow.  It  is  formed  externally  of  dry  sticks  and  Spanish
moss,  and  is  lined  with  withered  grass  and  fibrous  roots  of  different  sorts,
arranged  in  a circular  manner.  The  female  usually  lays  four  eggs,  some-
times five.  They  are  of  abroad  oval  form,  granulated  all  over,  pale  blue,
faintly  blotched  with  brownish-red  at  the  smaller  end.


298


RED-SHOULDERED  HAWK.


When  one  ascends  to  the  nest,  which,  by  the  way,  is  not  always  an
easy  matter,  as  our  Beech-trees  are  not  only  very  smooth,  but  frequently
without  any  boughs  to  a considerable  distance  from  the  ground,  as  well
as  of  rather  large  size,  the  female  bird,  if  she  happens  to  be  sitting,  flies
off  silently  and  alights  on  a neighbouring  tree,  to  wait  the  result.  But,
should  the  male,  who  supplies  her  with  food,  and  assists  in  incubation,
be  there,  or  make  his  appearance,  he  immediately  sets  up  a hue  and  cry,
and  plunges  towards  the  assailant  with  such  violence  as  to  astonish  him.
When,  on  several  occasions,  I have  had  the  tree  on  which  the  nest  was
placed  cut  down,  I have  observed  the  same  pair,  a few  days  after,  build
another  nest  on  a tree  not  far  distant  from  the  spot  in  which  the  first  one
had  been.

The  mutual  attachment  of  the  male  and  the  female  continues  during
life.  They  usually  hunt  in  pairs  during  the  whole  year ; and  although
they  build  a new  nest  every  spring,  they  are  fond  of  resorting  to  the  same
parts  of  the  woods  for  that  purpose.  I knew  the  pair  represented  in  the
Plate  for  three  years,  and  saw  their  nest  each  spring  placed  within  a few
hundred  yards  of  the  spot  in  which  that  of  the  preceding  year  was.

The  young  remain  in  the  nest  until  fully  fledged,  and  are  fed  by  the
parents  for  several  weeks  after  they  have  taken  to  wing,  but  leave  them
and  begin  to  shift  for  themselves  in  about  a month,  when  they  disperse
and  hunt  separately  until  the  approach  of  the  succeeding  spring,  at  which
time  they  pair.  The  young  birds  acquire  the  rusty  reddish  colour  of  the
feathers  on  the  breast  and  shoulders  before  they  leave  the  nest.  It  deepens
gradually  at  the  approach  of  autumn,  and  by  the  first  spring  they  com-
pletely resemble  the  old  birds.  Only  one  brood  is  raised  each  season.
Scarcely  any  difference  of  size  exists  between  the  sexes,  the  female  being
merely  a little  stouter.

This  Hawk  seldom  attacks  any  kind  of  poultry,  and  yet  frequently
pounces  on  Partridges,  Doves,  or  Wild  Pigeons,  as  well  as  Red- winged
Starlings,  and  now  and  then  very  young  rabbits.  On  one  or  two  occa-
sions, I have  seen  them  make  their  appearance  at  the  report  of  my  gun,
and  try  to  rob  me  of  some  Blue-winged  Teals  shot  in  small  ponds.  I have
never  seen  them  chase  any  other  small  birds  than  those  mentioned,  or
quadrupeds  of  smaller  size  than  the  Cotton  Rat ; nor  am  I aware  of  their
eating  frogs,  which  are  the  common  food  of  the  Winter  Falcon,  an  ac-
count of  which  you  will  find,  kind  reader,  in  another  part  of  this  the  first
volume  of  my  Biography  of  the  Birds  found  in  the  Ihiited  States  of
America.


RED-SHOULDERED  HAWK.


299


Falco  lineatus,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  268. — Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  27.—  IVils.

Amer.  Omith.  vol.  vi.  p.  86.  PI.  53,  fig.  3.  Young  Male.

Falco  hyemalis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  33.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  as  broad  as  deep,  the  sides  convex,  the  dorsal  outline  con-
vex from  the  base ; upper  mandible  cerate,  the  edges  blunt,  slightly  in-
flected, with  an  obtuse  lobe  towards  the  curvature,  the  tip  trigonal,  de-
flected, very  acute  ; lower  mandible  involute  at  the  edges,  a little  trun-
cate at  the  end.  Nostrils  round,  lateral,  with  a soft  papilla  in  the  centre.
Head  rather  large.  Neck  and  body  rather  slender.  Legslongish;  tar-
sus rather  slender,  anteriorly  scutellate  ; toes  scutellate  above,  scaly  on
the  sides,  scabrous  and  tuberculate  beneath  ; middle  and  outer  toe  con-
nected at  the  base  by  a small  membrane  ; claws  roundish,  slender,  cur-
ved, very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated  ; feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow
towards  the  tip,  of  the  back  broad  and  rounded  ; tibial  feathers  elongated
behind.  Wings  long,  third  and  fourth  primaries  longest,  first  short.

Bill  light  blue  at  the  base,  bluish-black  at  the  tip ; cere,  basal  margin
of  the  bill,  edges  of  the  eyelids,  and  the  feet,  bright  yellow.  Iris  hazel.
Claws  black.  Head,  neck,  and  back,  light  yellowish-red,  longitudinally
spotted  with  dark  brown.  Tail  brownish-black,  banded  with  greyish-
white,  the  tip  of  the  latter  colour.  Lesser  wing-coverts  bright  yellowish-
red,  spotted  with  brown ; larger  coverts  and  secondary  quills  dusky,  broad-
ly barred  with  white  ; primary  quills  brownish-black  banded  with  white,
the  greater  part  of  their  inner  webs  being  of  the  latter  colour.  Lower  parts
of  the  neck  and  under  wing-coverts  light  yellowish-red,  the  former  longitu-
dinally lined  with  blackish;  breast  reddish- white,  marked  with  transverse
hastate  yellowish-red  spots  ; abdomen  and  under  tail-coverts  reddish-
white.  Tibial  feathers  yellowish,  transversely  barred  with  dull  orange.

Length  18  inches;  bill  along  the  back  1|,  along  the  gap  from  the
tip  of  under  mandible  ; tarsus

Adult  Female.  Plate  LVI.  Fig.  1.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  in  being  a little  larger,  and  in  hav-
ing the  tints  lighter.


( 300  )


THE  LOGGERHEAD  SHRIKE.

LaNI  us  LUDO  VIC  IAN  US,  L I N N .

PLATE  LVII.  Male  and  Female.

This  species  may  with  great  propriety  be  called  an  inhabitant  of  the
“ Low  Countries,”  as  it  is  seldom  or  never  met  with  even  in  the  vicinity
of  the  mountains  intersecting  the  districts  in  which  it  usually  resides.  It
is  also  confined  to  that  portion  of  our  country  usually  known  under  the
name  of  the  Southern  States,  seldom  reaching  farther  eastward  than
North  Carolina,  or  farther  inland  than  the  State  of  Mississippi,  in  which
latter,  as  well  as  in  Louisiana,  it  appears  only  during  the  winter  months.
Its  residence  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  confined  to  the  Floridas,
Georgia,  and  the  Carolinas.  In  these  States,  it  is  seen  along  the  fences
and  bushes  about  the  rice  plantations,  at  all  seasons,  and  is  of  some  ser-
vice to  the  planter,  as  it  destroys  the  field-mice  in  great  numbers,  as  well
as  many  of  the  larger  kinds  of  grubs  and  insects,  upon  which  it  pounces
in  the  manner  of  a Hawk.

The  Loggerhead  has  no  song,  but  utters  a shrill  clear  creaking  pro-
longed note,  resembling  the  grating  of  a rusty  hinge  slowly  moved  to
and  fro.  This  sound  is  heard  only  during  the  spring  season,  and  whilst
the  female  is  sitting.  About  the  beginning  of  March  these  birds  begin
to  pair.  They  exhibit  at  this  time  few  of  those  marks  of  the  tender
affection  which  birds  usually  shew.  The  male  courts  the  female  without
much  regard,  and  she,  in  return,  appears  to  receive  his  haughty  attentions
with  merely  just  as  much  condescension  as  enables  her  to  become  the
mother  of  a family,  whose  feelings  are  destined  to  be  of  the  same  cold
nature.

The  nest  is  fixed  in  a low  bush,  generally  near  the  centre  of  a dwarf
hawthorn,  and  is  so  little  concealed  as  to  be  easily  discovered.  It  is
coarsely  constructed  of  dry  crooked  twigs,  and  is  lined  with  fibrous  roots
and  slender  grasses.  The  eggs,  which  are  of  a greenish  white,  are  from
three  to  five.  Incubation  is  performed  by  the  male  as  well  as  by  the  fe-
male, but  each  searches  for  its  own  food  during  the  intervals  of  sitting.

The  young  are  at  first  fed  on  crickets,  grasshoppers,  and  other  in-
sects ; but  as  they  become  larger  and  stronger,  they  receive  portions  of


LOGGERHEAD  SHRIKE.


301


mice,  which  form  the  principal  food  of  the  grown  birds  at  all  seasons.
The  Loggerheads  rear  only  one  brood  in  the  season.

Whilst  this  species  is  on  wing,  its  motions  are  very  rapid  and  direct,
its  flight  being  produced  by  quick  flutterings  of  the  wings,  without  any
apparent  undulation.  The  bird  alights  in  a sudden  firm  manner,  like  a
Hawk,  stands  erect,  silent  and  watchful,  until  it  spies  its  prey  on  the
ground,  when  it  suddenly  pounces  upon  it,  striking  it  first  with  its  billy
but  seizing  it  with  its  claws  so  immediately  after,  that  the  most  careful
observation  alone  can  enable  one  to  decide  as  to  the  priority  of  either
action.  I have  never  seen  it  attack  birds,  nor  stick  its  prey  on  thorns  in
the  manner  of  the  Great  American  Shrike.

This  bird  appears  in  Louisiana  only  at  intervals,  and  seldom  remains
more  than  a few  weeks  in  December  or  January.  It  never  comes  near
houses,  although  it  frequents  the  fields  around  them.  It  has  no  note  at
this  period,  and  appears  singly,  alighting  on  the  stacks  and  fences,  where
it  stands  perched  for  a considerable  time,  carefully  looking  around  over
the  ground.  As  soon  as  the  spot  is  thoroughly  examined,  it  flies  off*  to
another,  and  there  renews  its  search.

I have  given  you,  kind  reader,  the  representation  of  a pair  of  these
Shrikes,  contending  for  a mouse.  The  difference  of  plumage  in  the  sexes
is  scarcely  perceptible ; but  I have  thought  it  necessary  to  figure  both,
in  order  to  shew  the  quarrelsome  disposition  of  these  birds  even  when
united  by  the  hymeneal  band.


l^ANius  LUDOViciAXUS,  Limi.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  134 Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of

Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  72.

Loggerhead  Shrike,  Lanius  carolinensis,  Wils*  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  iii.  p.  57.
PI.  22.  fig.  8.

Adult  Male.  Plata  L VII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  moderate  length,  straightish,  robust,  acute,  compressed ; upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  a little  arched,  the  tip  declinate,  the
edges  acute  and  overlapping,  with  a sharp  process  near  the  tip  ; lower
mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  a little  convex,  the  tip  acute  and  ascending.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  half  closed  by  an  arched  membrane.  Head  large.
Neck  and  body  robust.  Feet  of  ordinary  length ; tarsus  scutellate  be-
fore, acute  behind ; toes  free,  the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  arched,
compressed,  acute.


302


LOGGERHEAD  SHRIKE.


Plumage  soft,  blended.  Long  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  bill.
Wings  of  ordinary  length,  curved,  the  second  quill  longest,  the  first  and
fifth  equal.  Tail  long,  graduated,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  greyish-black.  The  general  co-
lour of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  grey,  of  the  under  greyish- white,  the  sides
tinged  with  brown.  Forehead  and  sides  of  the  head  included  in  a broad
black  band.  Wings  and  tail  black.  Base  of  the  primaries,  and  tips  of
the  secondaries  and  six  inner  primaries,  white.  Tail-feathers,  excepting
the  four  middle  ones,  white  towards  the  end,  the  outer  ones  nearly  all  of
that  colour.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  13  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  nearly  1 ; tarsus  1,  middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  LVII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  only  in  being  a little  smaller  and
somewhat  darker  and  duller  in  the  plumage.


The  Green  Briar,  or  Round-leaved  Smilax.

Smilax  rotundifolia,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  779*  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  250. — Dkecia  Hexandria,  Linn.  Asparagi,  Juss.

This  species  of  Smilax,  which  is  common  along  fences,  in  old  fields,
and  by  the  borders  of  woods,  is  characterized  by  its  shrubby  stem,  round
branches,  roundish-ovate,  acuminate,  slightly  cordate,  five  or  seven-nerved
leaves,  and  spherical  berries.  It  flowers  in  May  and  June.  The  berries
are  of  a dark  purple  colour.


The  Field  Mouse.

This  species  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  living  in  the
meadows  and  woods.  It  forms  narrow  subterranean  passages,  to  which
it  resorts  on  the  least  appearance  of  danger,  but  from  which  it  is  easily
driven,  by  thrusting  a twig  into  them.


1


( 303  )


THE  HERMIT  THRUSH.

Turd  us  minor,  Gmel.

PLATE  LVIIL  Male  and  Female.

This,  kind  reader,  is  another  constant  resident  in  the  Southern  States,
more  especially  those  of  Mississippi  and  Louisiana,  where  it  abounds
during  the  winter  months,  and  is  found  in  considerable  numbers  during
spring  and  summer.  In  the  lower  parts  of  Kentucky,  Indiana  and
'I'ennessee,  it  is  also  observed  during  spring  and  summer ; but  it  becomes
scarcer  as  you  advance  towards  the  Middle  Districts,  where  a few  are  oc-
casionally seen  about  the  low  woodlands  of  the  Atlantic  shores.

Except  during  winter,  this  Thrush  prefers  the  darkest,  most  swampy,
and  most  secluded  cane-brakes  along  the  margins  of  the  Mississippi,
where  it  breeds  and  spends  the  summer,  retiring  to  higher  lands  during
the  period  when  the  alluvial  grounds  are  covered  with  the  water  which,
during  freshets,  generally  inundates  these  low  cane-brakes  and  swampy
retreats.

The  flight  of  the  Hermit  Thrush  is  performed  low  over  the  ground,
and  in  a gliding  manner,  as  the  bird  shifts  from  one  place  to  another  at
a short  distance.  In  this  respect,  it  differs  greatly  from  its  relative,  my
great  favourite,  the  Wood  Thrush,  the  flight  of  which  is  more  protract-
ed, and  is  performed  at  a greater  elevation.

The  Hermit  Thrush  has  no  song,  and  only  utters  a soft  plaintive
note,  seldom  heard  at  a greater  distance  than  twenty-five  or  thirty  yards.
It  is  most  frequently  seen  on  the  ground,  where  it  hops  with  the  same
movements  employed  by  the  well-known  little  Red-breast  of  Europe,  in
other  words,  before  it  haps  its  breast  almost  comes  in  contact  with  the
ground,  the  tail  is  a little  raised,  the  wings  droop,  and  after  hopping,  it
runs  a few  steps,  erects  its  head,  and  looks  around.

All  the  nests  of  the  Hermit  Thrush  which  I have  found  were  in  every
instance  placed  lower  on  the  branches  of  trees  than  those  of  the  Wood
Thrush,  seldom  above  seven  or  eight  feet  from  the  ground,  and  some-
times so  low  that  I could  easily  look  into  them.  These  nests  were  fixed
to  a horizontal  bough,  but  were  not  saddled  upon  it  so  deeply  as  those  of
the  Wood  Thrush  are.  They  were  smaller,  and  had  no  mud  or  plaster  of
any  kind,  but  were  extremely  compact,  the  outer  parts  being  formed  of


304


HERMIT  THRUSH.


coarse  dry  weeds,  and  here  and  there  a withered  leaf,  the  interior  composed
of  a long  delicate  kind  of  grass,  which  is  found  growing  along  the  edges  of
cane-brakes.  This  grass  is  arranged  in  a circular  manner,  to  the  whole
extent  of  its  length,  and  gives  the  inner  part  of  the  nest  of  this  bird  a
remarkable  appearance  of  neatness  and  finish.  The  female  lays  from
four  to  six  eggs,  of  a light  blue  colour,  sprinkled  with  dark  dots  towards
the  large  end.  The  first  set  are  laid  early  in  April,  the  second  about
the  middle  of  June;  for,  in  Lower  Louisiana,  this  species  rears  two
broods  in  the  year.  The  female  is  much  attached  to  her  nest,  and  glides
off  silently  from  it  when  closely  approached,  not,  however,  unless  she
thinks  herself  or  her  nest  observed.  The  young  run  after  the  parents,
on  the  ground,  for  several  days  after  they  leave  the  nest.

As  soon  as  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi  become  so  swelled  as  to  over-
flow the  banks,  the  Hermit  Thrush  retires  to  the  nearest  hills,  and  mixes
with  many  other  birds,  amongst  which  the  Wood  Thrush  is  pre-eminent.
The  former  is,  however,  easily  recognised  at  once,  by  its  single  plaintive
note,  heard  from  the  boughs  of  low  trees,  on  the  berries  of  which  it  feeds.
In  fact,  its  food  is  altogether  composed  of  different  fruits  and  berries,
which  are  at  all  seasons  abundant  in  our  woods.

The  branches  so  thickly  covered  with  dull  red  berries,  and  upon
which  two  Hermit  Thrushes  are  seen,  belong  to  a shrub  which  grows  in
the  swampy  recesses  preferred  by  these  birds.  Its  leaves  fall  off  at  an
early  period,  and  are  of  an  ovato-lanceolate  form,  thin  consistence,  and
deep  green  colour,  their  under  surface  light  grey.  The  common  name
of  it  is  Robin  Wood.  It  seldom  grows  taller  than  from  seven  to  eight
feet,  and  all  the  branches,  in  a favourable  season,  are  thickly  covered
with  the  berries,  on  which  many  birds,  besides  the  Turdus  migratorius^
from  which  it  seems  to  have  derived  its  common  name,  are  seen  to  feed.


Turdus  minor,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol  i.  p.  809. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of
the  United  States,  p.  75 — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p 328.

Little  Thrush,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  20.

Hermit  Thrush,  Turdus  solitarius,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  v.  p.  95,  PI.  43.
fig.  2.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  compressed  towards  the  end ;
upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  a little  convex,  the  tip  slightly
declinate,  the  margins  acute,  inflected  towards  the  end,  sliglitly  notched


HERMIT  THRUSH.


305


close  upon  the  tip ; lower  mandible  slightly  convex  in  its  dorsal  line,  the
tip  rather  obtuse.  Head  of  ordinary  size  ; neck  and  body  rather  slender.
Feet  rather  long ; tarsus  longish,  compressed,  slender,  anteriorly  covered
with  a few  elongated,  indistinct  scutella,  posteriorly  edged,  longer  than
the  middle  toe ; toes  scutellate  above,  lateral  ones  almost  equal,  the  outer
connected  as  far  as  the  second  joint.

Plumage  rather  loose.  A few  longish  bristles  at  the  base  of  the  up-
per mandible.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  third  quill  longest,  the
first  very  short.  Tail  rather  short,  even,  of  twelve  broad  feathers,  the
shaft  of  which  projects  a little  beyond  the  extremity  of  the  webs,  as  is  the
case  with  the  outer  primaries.

Bill  dark  brown,  yellowish  towards  the  base  of  the  lower  mandible.
Iris  hazel.  Feet  flesh-colour.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is
light  yellowish-brown,  changing  on  the  rump  and  tail  into  dull  yellowish-
red.  Quills  dusky,  margined  externally  with  yellowish-brown.  Primary
coverts  yellowish-brown,  dusky  at  the  end ; secondary  coverts  tipped
with  yellowish-red.  Under  parts  greyish-white,  the  neck  and  breast
spotted  with  dark  brown.

Length  7 inches,  extent  of  wings  10  J ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  1 ^ .

Adult  Female.  Plate  LVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  only  in  having  the  spots  on  the  breast  somewhat
larger,  and  the  tints  of  the  upper  parts  rather  deeper.


u


( 306  )


THE  CHESTNUT-SIDED  WARBLER.

Sylvia  icterocephala^  Lath.

PLATE  LIX.  Male  and  Female.

In  the  beginning  of  May  1808,  I shot  five  of  these  birds,  on  a very
cold  morning,  near  Potts-grove,  in  the  State  of  Pennsylvania.  There  was
a slight  fall  of  snow  at  the  time,  although  the  Peach  and  Apple  trees  were
already  in  full  bloom.  I have  never  met  with  a single  individual  of  this
species  since.  They  all  had  their  wings  drooping,  as  if  suffering  severely
from  the  sudden  change  of  the  weather,  and  had  betaken  themselves  to  the
lower  rails  of  a fence,  where  they  were  engaged  in  searching  after  insects,
particularly  spiders.  I procured  every  one  of  those  which  I met  with
that  morning,  and  which  were  five  in  number,  two  of  them  males,  and  the
rest  females.

Where  this  species  goes  to  breed  I am  unable  to  say,  for  to  my  in-
quiries on  this  subject  I never  received  any  answers  which  might  have
led  me  to  the  districts  resorted  to  by  it.  I can  only  suppose,  that  if  it
is  at  all  plentiful  in  any  portion  of  the  United  States,  it  must  be  far  to
the  northward,  as  I ransacked  the  borders  of  Lake  Ontario,  and  those  of
Lakes  Erie  and  Michigan,  without  meeting  with  it.  I do  not  know  of
any  naturalist  who  has  been  more  fortunate,  otherwise  I should  here  quote
his  observations.

The  females  had  the  ovaries  furnished  with  numerous  eggs,  about  the
size  of  the  head  of  a common  pin.  The  stomach  of  all  the  birds  which  I
killed  contained  some  grass  seeds  of  the  preceding  year,  and  a few  small
black  spiders ; but  the  birds  appeared  half-starved.  Having  procured
them  near  the  ground,  I have  placed  them  on  a plant  which  grows  about
the  fields,  and  flowers  in  the  beginning  of  May.

Sylvia  icterocephala,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  538. — Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.
of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  00.

Motacilla  icterocephala,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  334.

Quebec  Warbler,  Lath.  Synops.  voL  iv.  p.  484.

Chestnut-sided  Warbler,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  99.  PI.  14.  %.  5.


Adult  Male.  Plate  LIX.  Fig.  1.


CHESTNUT-SIDED  WARBLER.


307


Bill  of  ordinary  lengthy  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  near-
ly as  deep  as  broad  at  the  base,  the  edges  acute,  the  gap-line  slightly  de-
flected at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  by  a mem-
brane. Head  of  ordinary  size.  Neck  short.  Body  slender.  Feet  of  or-
dinary length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  ante-
riorly by  a few  scutella,  acutely  edged  behind  ; toes  scutellate  above,  the
inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size  ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,
arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  short,  slightly  notched.

Bill  light  blue,  blackish  above.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  dusky.  Forehead
white  ; upper  part  of  the  head  bright  yellow.  Loral  space,  and  two  lines
proceeding  from  it,  one  over  and  behind  the  eye,  the  other  downwards,
black.  Back  dusky  green,  spotted  with  black,  as  are  the  lesser  wing-
coverts,  the  larger  broadly  tipped  with  bright  yellow,  excepting  those  of
the  primary  quills,  which  are  dusky.  Primaries  dusky,  edged  externally
with  light  blue,  as  is  the  tail.  Under  parts  white  ; side  of  the  lower  neck
and  body  under  the  wings  deep  chestnut.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  |.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  considerably  smaller,  but  is  coloured  nearly  in  the  same
manner  as  the  male.  The  chestnut  patch  on  the  sides  is  of  less  extent,  and
the  primaries  are  yellow,  instead  of  blue,  on  their  outer  webs.


The  Moth  Mullein.

Verbascum  Blattaria,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  i.  p.  1005.  Piirsh.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  L
p.  142,  Smith.  Engl.  Flor.  vol.  i.  p.  513. — Pentandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  So-
LANEiE,  Juss.

A biennial  plant,  distinguished  from  the  other  species  of  the  same
genus  by  its  amplexicaul  ovato-oblong,  rugose,  serrated,  glabrous  leaves,
and  one-flowered  solitary  pedicels.  The  ordinary  colour  of  the  flowers  is
yellow,  but  the  plant  represented  is  of  a variety  with  larger  whitish  or
pale  rose-coloured  flowers.  It  grows  in  fields  and  by  roads,  and  is  of  com-

u 2


mon  occurrence.


( 3oa  )


THE  CARBONATED  WARBLER.

Sylvia  carbonata,

PLATE  LX.  Male.

I SHOT  the  two  little  birds  here  represented,  near  the  village  of  Hen-
derson, in  the  State  of  Kentucky,  in  May  1811.  They  were  both  busily
engaged  in  searching  for  insects  along  the  branches  and  amongst  the
leaves  of  a Dog-wood  tree.  Their  motions  were  those  common  to  all  the
species  of  the  genus  Sylvia.  On  examination,  they  were  found  to  be  both
males.  I am  of  opinion,  that  they  were  both  young  birds  of  the  prece-
ding year,  and  not  in  fuU  plumage,  as  they  had  no  part  of  their  dress
seemingly  complete,  excepting  the  head.  Not  having  met  with  any  other
individuals  of  the  species,  I am  at  this  moment  unable  to  say  any  thing
more  about  them.  They  were  drawn,  like  all  the  other  birds  which  I
have  represented,  immediately  after  being  killed ; but  the  branch  on
which  you  see  them  was  not  added  until  the  following  summer.

The  common  name  of  this  plant  is  Service  Tree.  It  seldom  attains  a
greater  height  than  thirty  or  forty  feet,  and  is  usually  found  in  hilly
ground  of  secondary  quality.  The  berries  are  agreeable  to  the  taste,  and
are  sought  after  by  many  species  of  birds,  amongst  which  the  Red-headed
Woodpecker  is  very  conspicuous.


Sylvia  carbonata.

Young  Male.  Plate  LX.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,
nearly  as  deep  as  broad  at  the  base,  the  edges  acute,  the  gap  line  slightly
deflected  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  by  a
membrane.  Head  rather  small.  Neck  short.  Body  slender.  Feet  of
ordinary  length,  slender ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  an-
teriorly by  a few  scutella,  acutely-edged  behind ; toes  scutellate  above,
the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size  ; claws  slender,  compressed,
acute,  arched.

Plumage,  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  short,  notched.


CARBONATED  WARBLER.


309


Bill  brownish-black  above,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet
light  flesh-colour.  Upper  part  of  the  head  black.  Fore  part  of  the
back,  lesser  wing-coverts  and  sides  dusky,  spotted  with  black.  Lower
back  dull  yellowish-green,  as  is  the  tail,  of  which  the  outer  web  of  the
outer  feather  is  whitish.  Tips  of  the  second  row  of  coverts  white,  of  the
£rst  row  yellow ; quills  dusky,  their  outer  webs  tinged  with  yellow.  A
Kne  from  the  lore  over  the  eye,  sides  of  the  neck,  and  the  throat,  bright
yellow.  A dusky  Kne  behind  the  eye.  The  rest  of  the  under  parts  dull
yellow,  excepting  the  sides.

Length  4|  inches;  bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  gap  ^ ;
tarsus  f .


The  May-bush  or  Service.

Pyrus  Botryapium,  Willd,  Sp.  PL  vol.  ii*  p.  1013.  Pv/ts\  Flor.  Amer.  voL  i.  p.  339.

ICOSANDRIA  PeNTAGYNIA,  Lmn.  RoSAGEiE,  Juss.

This  species  is  distinguished  by  its  ovate,  acuminate  leaves,  racemose
flowers,  Knear-lanceolate  petals,  pubescent  germens,  and  smooth  calycine
segments.


( 310  )


THE  TRAVELLER  AND  THE  POLE  CAT.

On  a journey  from  Louisville  to  Henderson  in  Kentucky,  performed
during  very  severe  winter  weather,  in  company  with  a foreigner,  the  ini-
tials of  whose  name  are  D.  T.,  my  companion  spying  a beautiM  animal,
marked  with  black  and  pale  yellow,  and  having  a long  and  bushy  tail,
exclaimed,  “ Mr  Audubon,  is  not  that  a beautiful  squirrel  ?”  “ Yes,”  I
answered,  “ and  of  a kind  that  will  suffer  you  to  approach  it,  and  lay
hold  of  it,  if  you  are  well  gloved.”  Mr  D.  T.  dismounting,  took  up  a
dry  stick,  and  advanced  toward  the  pretty  animal,  with  his  large  cloak
floating  in  the  breeze.  I think  I see  him  approach,  and  laying  the  stick
gently  across  the  body  of  the  animal,  try  to  secure  it ; and  I can  yet
laugh  almost  as  heartily  as  I then  did,  when  I plainly  saw  the  discomfi-
ture of  the  traveller.  The  Pole-cat,  (for  a true  Pole-cat  it  was,  the
Mephitis  americana  of  zoologists),  raised  its  fine  bushy  tail,  and  shower-
ed such  a discharge  of  the  fluid  given  him  by  nature  as  a defence,  that
my  friend,  dismayed  and  infuriated,  began  to  belabour  the  poor  animal.
The  swiftness  and  good  management  of  the  Pole-cat,  however,  saved  its
bones,  and  as  it  made  its  retreat  towards  its  hole,  it  kept  up  at  every
step  a continued  ejectment,  which  fully  convinced  the  gentleman  that  the
pursuit  of  such  squirrels  as  these  was  at  the  best  an  unprofitable  employ-
ment.

This  was  not  all,  however.  I could  not  suffer  his  approach,  nor
could  my  horse;  it  was  with  difficulty  he  mounted  his  own;  and  we
were  forced  to  continue  our  journey  far  asunder,  and  he  much  to  leeward.
Nor  did  the  matter  end  here.  We  could  not  proceed  much  farther  that
night ; as,  in  the  first  place,  it  was  nearly  dark  when  we  saw  the  Pole-
cat, and  as,  in  the  second  place,  a heavy  snow-storm  began,  and  almost
impeded  our  progress.  We  were  forced  to  make  for  the  first  cabin  we
saw.  Having  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  rest  for  the  night,  we
dismounted  and  found  ourselves  amongst  a crowd  of  men  and  women
who  had  met  for  the  purpose  of  corn-slmckmg.

To  a European  who  has  not  visited  the  western  parts  of  the  United
States,  an  explanation  of  this  corn-shucking  may  not  be  unacceptable.


THE  TRAVELLER  AND  THE  POLE-CAT,


311


Corn  (or  you  may  prefer  calling  it  maize)  is  gathered  in  the  husk,  that
is,  by  breaking  each  large  ear  from  the  stem.  These  ears  are  first  thrown
into  heaps  in  the  field,  and  afterwards  carried  in  carts  to  the  barn,  or,  as
in  this  instance,  and  in  such  portions  of  Kentucky,  to  a shed  made  of  the
blades  or  long  leaves  that  hang  in  graceful  curves  from  the  stalk,  and
which,  when  plucked  and  dried,  are  used  instead  of  hay  as  food  for  horses
and  cattle.  The  husk  consists  of  several  thick  leaves  rather  longer  than
the  corn-ear  itself,  and  which  secure  it  from  the  weather.  It  is  quite  a
labour  to  detach  these  leaves  from  the  ear,  when  thousands  of  bushels  of
the  corn  are  gathered  and  heaped  together.  For  this  purpose,  however,
and  in  the  western  country  more  especially,  several  neighbouring  families
join  alternately  at  each  other’s  plantations,  and  assist  in  clearing  away  the
husks,  thus  preparing  the  maize  for  the  market  or  for  domestic  use.

The  good  people  whom  we  met  with  at  this  hospitable  house,  were  on
the  point  of  going  to  the  barn  (the  farmer  here  being  in  rather  good  con-
dition) to  work  until  towards  the  middle  of  the  night.  When  we  had
stood  the  few  stares  to  which  strangers  must  accustom  themselves,  no
matter  where,  even  in  a drawing-room,  we  approached  the  fire.  What
a shock  for  the  whole  party  ! The  scent  of  the  Pole-cat,  that  had  been
almost  stifled  on  my  companion’s  vestments  by  the  cold  of  the  evening
air,  now  recovered  its  primitive  strength.  The  cloak  was  put  out  of  the
house,  but  its  owner  could  not  be  well  used  in  the  same  way.  The  com-
pany, however,  took  to  their  heels,  and  there  only  remained  a single
black  servant,  who  waited  on  us  until  supper  was  served.

I felt  vexed  at  myself,  as  I saw  the  good  traveller  displeased.  But
he  had  so  much  good  breeding  as  to  treat  this  important  affair  with  great
forbearance,  and  merely  said  he  was  sorry  for  his  want  of  knowledge  in
zoology.  The  good  gentleman,  however,  was  not  only  deficient  in
zoological  lore,  but,  fresh  as  he  was  from  Europe,  felt  more  than  uneasy
in  this  out-of-the-way-house,  and  would  have  proceeded  towards  my  own
house  that  night,  had  I not  at  length  succeeded  in  persuading  him  that
he  was  in  perfect  security.

We  were  shewn  to  bed.  As  I was  almost  a stranger  to  him,  and  he
to  me,  he  thought  it  a very  awkward  thing  to  be  obliged  to  lie  in  the
same  bed  with  me,  but  afterwards  spoke  of  it  as  a happy  circumstance,
and  requested  that  I should  suffer  him  to  be  placed  next  the  logs,  think-
ing, no  doubt,  that  there  he  should  run  no  risk.


312


THE  TRAVELLER  AND  THE  POLE-CAT.


We  started  by  break  of  day,  taking  with  us  the  frozen  cloak,  and
after  passing  a pleasant  night  in  my  own  house,  we  parted.  Some  years
after,  I met  my  Kentucky  companion  in  a far  distant  land,  when  he
assured  me,  that  whenever  the  sun  shone  on  his  cloak,  or  it  was  brought
near  a fire,  the  scent  of  the  Pole-cat  became  so  perceptible,  that  he  at  last
gave  it  to  a poor  monk  in  Italy.

The  animal  commonly  known  in  America  by  the  name  of  Pole-cat  is
about  a foot  and  a half  in  length,  with  a large  bushy  tail,  nearly  as  long
as  the  body.  The  colour  is  generally  brownish-black,  with  a large  white
patch  on  the  back  of  the  head ; but  there  are  many  varieties  of  colour-
ing, in  some  of  which  the  broad  white  bands  of  the  back  are  very  con-
spicuous. The  Pole-cat  burrows,  or  forms  a subterranean  habitation
among  the  roots  of  trees,  or  in  rocky  places.  It  feeds  on  birds,  young
hares,  rats,  mice,  and  other  animals,  and  commits  great  depredations  on
poultry.  The  most  remarkable  peculiarity  of  this  animal  is  the  power,
alluded  to  above,  of  squirting  for  its  defence  a most  nauseously  scented
fluid  contained  in  a receptacle  situated  under  the  tail,  which  it  can  do  to
the  distance  of  several  yards.  It  does  not,  however,  for  this  purpose,
sprinkle  its  tail  with  the  fluid,  as  some  allege,  unless  when  extremely  ha-
rassed by  its  enemies.  The  Pole-cat  is  frequently  domesticated.  The
removal  of  the  glands  prevents  the  secretion  of  the  nauseous  fluid,  and
when  thus  improved,  the  animal  becomes  a great  favourite,  and  performs
the  offices  of  the  common  cat  with  great  dexterity.


( 313  )


THE  GREAT  HORNED  OWL.

STRIX  riRGINIANA,  GmEL.

PLATE  LXI.  Male  and  Female.

It  is  during  the  placid  serenity  of  a beautiful  summer  night,  when
the  current  of  the  waters  moves  silently  along,  reflecting  from  its  smooth
surface  the  silver  radiance  of  the  moon,  and  when  all  else  of  animated  na-
ture seems  sunk  in  repose,  that  the  Great  Horned  Owl,  one  of  the  Nimrods
of  the  feathered  tribes  of  our  forests,  may  be  seen  sailing  silently  and
yet  rapidly  on,  intent  on  the  destruction  of  the  objects  destined  to  form
his  food.  The  lone  steersman  of  the  descending  boat  observes  the  noc-
turnal hunter,  gliding  on  extended  pinions  across  the  river,  sailing  over
one  hill  and  then  another,  or  suddenly  sweeping  downwards, . and  again
rising  in  the  air  like  a moving  shadow,  now  distinctly  seen,  and  again
mingling  with  the  sombre  shades  of  the  surrounding  woods,  fading  into
obscurity.  The  bark  has  now  floated  to  some  distance,  and  is  opposite
the  newly  cleared  patch  of  ground,  the  result  of  a squatter’s  first  at-
tempt at  cultivation,  in  a place  lately  shaded  by  the  trees  of  the  forest.
The  moon  shines  brightly  on  his  hut,  his  slight  fence,  the  newly  planted
orchard,  and  a tree,  which,  spared  by  the  axe,  serves  as  a roosting-place
for  the  scanty  stock  of  poultry  which  the  new  comer  has  procured  from
some  liberal  neighbour.  Amongst  them  rests  a Turkey-hen,  covering
her  offspring  with  extended  wings.  The  Great  Owl,  with  eyes  keen  as
those  of  any  falcon,  is  now  seen  hovering  above  the  place.  He  has  al-
ready espied  the  quarry,  and  is  sailing  in  wide  circles  meditating  his
plan  of  attack.  The  Turkey-hen,  which  at  another  time  might  be  sound
asleep,  is  now,  however,  so  intent  on  the  care  of  her  young  brood,  that
she  rises  on  her  legs  and  purs  so  loudly,  as  she  opens  her  wings  and
spreads  her  tail,  that  she  rouses  her  neighbours,  the  hens,  together  with
their  protector.  The  cacklings  which  they  at  first  emit  soon  become  a
general  clamour.  The  squatter  hears  the  uproar,  and  is  on  his  feet  in  an  in-
stant, rifle  in  hand  ; the  priming  examined,  he  gently  pushes  open  his  half
closed  door,  and  peeps  out  cautiously,  to  ascertain  the  cause  by  which
his  repose  has  been  disturbed.  He  observes  , the  murderous  Owl  just
alighting  on  the  dead  branch  of  a tall  tree,  when,  raising  his  never-failing


314


GREAT  HORNED  OWL.


rifle,  he  takes  aim,  touches  the  trigger,  and  the  next  instant  sees  the  foe
falling  dead  to  the  ground.  The  bird  is  unworthy  of  his  farther  atten-
tion, and  is  left  a prey  to  some  prowling  oppossum  or  other  carnivorous
quadruped.  Again,  all  around  is  tranquillity.  In  this  manner  falls
many  a Great  Horned  Owl  on  our  frontiers,  where  the  species  abounds.

Differences  of  locality  are  no  security  against  its  depredations,  for  it
occurs  in  the  highest  mountainous  districts,  as  well  as  in  the  low  alluvial
lands  that  border  the  rivers,  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  and  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  sea-shore.  Every  where  it  finds  abundance  of  food.
It  is,  moreover,  an  extremely  hardy  bird,  and  stands  the  severest  winters
of  our  northernmost  latitudes.  It  is  consequently  found  dispersed  over
all  parts  of  the  United  States.

The  flight  of  the  Great  Horned  Owl  is  elevated,  rapid  and  graceful.
It  sails  with  apparent  ease,  and  in  large  circles,  in  the  manner  of  an  eagle,
rises  and  descends  without  the  least  difficulty,  by  merely  inclining  its
wings  or  its  tail,  as  it  passes  through  the  air.  Now  and  then,  it  glides
silently  close  over  the  earth,  with  incomparable  velocity,  and  drops,  as  if
shot  dead,  on  the  prey  beneath.  At  other  times,  it  suddenly  alights  on
the  top  of  a fence-stake  or  a dead  stump,  shakes  its  feathers,  arranges
them,  and  utters  a skriek  so  horrid  that  the  woods  around  echo  to  its  dis-
mal sound.  Now,  it  seems  as  if  you  heard  the  barking  of  a cur-dog ;
again,  the  notes  are  so  rough  and  mingled  together,  that  they  might  be
mistaken  for  the  last  gurglings  of  a murdered  person,  striving  in  vain  to
call  for  assistance ; at  another  time,  when  not  more  than  fifty  yards  dis-
tant, it  utters  its  more  usual  hoo^  hoo,  Jioo-e^  in  so  peculiar  an  under  tone,
that  a person  unacquainted  with  the  notes  of  this  species  might  easily
conceive  them  to  be  produced  by  an  Owl  more  than  a mile  distant.  Du-
ring the  utterance  of  all  these  unmusical  cries,  it  moves  its  body,  and
more  particularly  its  head,  in  various  ways,  putting  them  into  positions,
all  of  which  appear  to  please  it  much,  however  grotesque  they  may  seem
to  the  eye  of  man.  In  the  interval  following  each  cry,  it  snaps  its  bill,
as  if  by  way  of  amusement ; or,  like  the  wdld  boar  sharpening  the  edges
of  his  tusks,  it  perhaps  expects  that  the  action  will  whet  its  mandibles.

The  food  of  the  Great  Horned  Owl  consists  chiefly  of  the  larger  spe-
cies of  gallinaceous  birds,  half-grown  Wild  Turkeys,  Pheasants,  and  do-
mestic poultry  of  all  kinds,  together  with  several  species  of  Ducks.
Hares,  young  Oppossums  and  Squirrels  are  equally  agreeable  to  it,  and


GREAT  HORNED  OWL.


315


whenever  chance  throws  a dead  fish  on  the  shore,  the  Great  Owl  feeds
with  peculiar  avidity  on  it.

It  is  one  of  the  most  common  species  along  the  shores  of  the  Ohio
and  Mississippi,  where  it  is  to  be  met  with  at  all  seasons,  being  fond  of
roosting  amongst  the  thick-growing  young  cotton-wood  trees  and  willows,
that  cover  the  muddy  sand-bars  of  these  noble  streams,  as  well  as  in  the
more  retired  woody  swamps,  where  the  gloomy  cypress  spreads  its  broad
arms,  covered  with  dangling  masses  of  Spanish  beard,  which  give  way
to  the  gentlest  breeze.  In  both  such  situations  I have  frequently  met
with  this  owl : its  body  erect,  its  plumage  closed,  its  tufted  head^feathers
partially  lowered,  and  its  head  half  turned  and  resting  on  one  shoul-
der.

When  the  sun  shines  brightly,  the  bird  is  easily  approached ; but  if
the  weather  be  cloudy,  it  rises  on  its  feet,  at  the  least  noise,  erects  the
tufts  of  its  head,  gives  a knowing  kind  of  nod,  flies  off  in  an  instant,
,and  generally  proceeds  to  such  a distance  that  it  is  difficult  to  find  it
again.  When  disturbed  while  at  roost  on  willows  near  a river,  it  sails
off  low  over  the  stream,  as  if  aware  that  by  so  doing  it  renders  its  pur-
suit more  difficult.  " I once'nearly  lost  my  life  by  going  towards  one  that
I had  shot  on  a willow-bar,  for,  while  running  up  to  the  spot,  I suddenly
found  myself  sunk  in  quicksand  up  to  my  arm-pits,  and  in  this  condi-
tion must  have  remained  to  perish,  had  not  my  boatmen  come  up  and
extricated  me,  by  forming  a bridge  of  their  oars  and  some  driftwood,
during  which -operation  I had  to  remain  perfectly  quiet,  as  any  struggle
would  soon  have  caused  me  to  sink  overhead.

I have  related  this  occurrence  to  you,  kind  reader, — and  it  is  only
one  out  of  many,— -to  shew  you  tliat  every  student  of  nature  must  en-
counter some  difficulties  in  obtaining  the  objects  of  his  research,  although
these  difficulties  are  little  thought  of  when  he  has  succeeded.  So  much
is  this  thd  case  with  me,  that,  could  1 renew -the  leasfe  of  my  life,  I could
not  desire  to  spend  it  in  any  other  pursuit  than  that  which  has  at  last
enabled- me  to  lay  before  you  an  account  of  the  habits  of  our  birds.

"'Early  in  February  the  Great- Horned  Owls  are  seen  to  pair.  The
curioUs  evolutions  of  the  male  in  the  air,'  or  his>  motions  when  he  has
alighted  near  his  beloved,  it  is  impossible  to  describe.  His  bowings,  and
the  'snappings  of  his  bill,  ^are  extremely  ludicrous ; and  no  sooner  is  the
female  assured  that  the  attentions  paid  her  by  the  beau  are  the  result  of  a
sincere  affection,  than  she  joins  in  the  motions  of  her  future  mate.  At  this


316


GREAT  HORNED  OWL.


juncture  both  might  be  said  to  be  dancing  mad^  little  dreaming,  like  most
owls  on  such  occasions,  of  the  possibility  of  their  being  one  day  horn-
mad.

The  nest,  which  is  very  bulky,  is  usually  fixed  on  a large  horizontal

branch,  not  far  from  the  trunk  of  the  tree.  It  is  composed  externally  of

/

crooked  sticks,  and  is  lined  with  coarse  grasses  and  some  feathers.  The
whole  measures  nearly  three  feet  in  diameter.  The  eggs,  which  are  from
three  to  six,  are  almost  globular  in  form,  and  of  a dull  white  colour.
The  male  assists  the  female  in  sitting  on  the  eggs.  Only  one  brood  is
raised  in  the  season.  The  young  remain  in  the  nest  until  fully  fledged,
and  afterwards  follow  the  parents  for  a considerable  time,  uttering  a
mournful  sound,  to  induce  them  to  supply  them  with  food.  They  ac-
quire the  full  plumage  of  the  old  birds  in  the  first  spring,  and  until  then
are  considerably  lighter,  with  more  dull  buff  in  their  tints.  I have  found
nests  belonging  to  this  species  in  large  hollows  of  decayed  trees,  and
twice  in  the  fissures  of  rocks.  In  all  these  cases,  little  preparation  had
been  made  previous  to  the  laying  of  the  eggs,  as  I found  only  a few
grasses  and  feathers  placed  under  them.

The  Great  Horned  Owl  lives  retired,  and  it  is  seldom  that  more  than
one  is  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a farm,  after  the  breeding  season  ;
but  as  almost  every  detached  farm  is  visited  by  one  of  these  dangerous
and  powerful  marauders,  it  may  be  said  to  be  abundant.  The  havock
which  it  commits  is  very  great.  I have  known  a plantation  almost
stripped  of  the  whole  of  the  poultry  raised  upon  it  during  spring,  by  one
of  these  daring  foes  of  the  feathered  race,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing
winter.

This  species  is  very  powerful,  and  equally  spirited.  It  attacks  Wild
Turkeys  when  half-grown,  and  often  masters  them.’  Mallards,  Guinea^
fowls,  and  common  barn  fowls,  prove  an  easy  prey,  and  on  seizing
them  it  carries  them  oflp  in  its  talons  from  the  farm-yards  to  the  interior
of  the  woods.  When  wounded,  it  exhibits  a revengeful  tenacity  of  spirit,
scarcely  surpassed  by  any  of  the  noblest  of  the  Eagle  tribe,  disdaining  to
scramble  away  like  the  Barred  Owl,  but  facing  its  enemy  with  undaunted
courage,  protruding  its  powerful  talons,  and  snapping  its  bill,  as  long  as
he  continues  in  its  presence.  On  these  occasions,  its  large  goggle  eyes
are  seen  to  open  and  close  in  quick  succession,  and  the  feathers  of  its
body,  being  raised,  swell  out  its  apparent  bulk  to  nearly  double  the  na-
tural size.


GREAT  HORNED  OWL.


317


You  have  before  you,  kind  reader,  a male  and  a female  of  this
species,  which  I hope  will  give  you  a more  perfect  idea  of  the  size  and
form  of  the  Great  Horned  Owl  than  any  description  could  do.


Strix  viRGiNiANA,  GmcL  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  2&'l.—^Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  52. —
Ch.  Bmaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  37.

Virginian  Eared  Owl,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  119.

Great  Horned  Owl,  Strix  virginiana,  Wilson,  Americ.  Ornith.  voL  vi.  p.  52.
PI.  50.  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  compressed,  curved,  acute,  with  a cere  at  the  base ; upper
mandible  with  its  dorsal  outline  curved  from  the  base,  the  edges  acute,
the  point  trigonal,  very  acute,  deflected ; lower  mandible  with  the  edges
acute  and  inflected,  obtuse  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  oval,  in  the  fore  part  of
the  cere.  Head  disproportionately  large,  as  are  the  eyes  and  external
ears.  Body  short.  Legs  of  ordinary  length  ; tarsus  and  toes  feathered ;
toes  papillar  and  tuberculate  beneath  ; claws  curved,  rounded,  long,  ex-
tremely sharp.

Plumage  very  soft  and  downy,  somewhat  distinct  above,  tufty  and
loose  beneath.  Long  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  bill,  stretching
forwards.  Eyes  surrounded  by  circles  of  compact  feathers ; auricular
coverts  forming  a ruff.  Two  erectile  tufts  of  feathers  on  the  head,  one
on  each  side.  Wings  ample,  the  fourth  quill  longest,  the  first  short.
Tail  of  ordinary  length,  rounded,  of  twelve  broad  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  yellow.  Claws  black.  Upper  part  of  the  head  brownish-
black,  mottled  with  light  brown,  the  tufts  or  horns  of  the  same  colour,
margined  with  brown.  Face  brownish-red,  with  a circle  of  blackish-
brown.  The  upper  parts  are  undulatingly  banded  and  minutely  mottled
with  brownish-black  and  brownish-red,  the  ground  colour  on  the  lower
part  of  the  back  tinged  with  grey.  Wings  and  tail  light  brownish-
yellow,  barred  and  mottled  with  blackish-brown  and  light  brownish-red.
Chin  white,  upper  part  of  the  throat  light  reddish,  spotted  with  black,
a band  of  white  across  the  middle  of  the  fore  neck  ; lower  fore  neck  and
breast  light  yellowish-red,  barred  with  deep  brown,  as  are  the  under  parts
generally,  some  of  the  feathers  being  nearly  white,  but  barred ; several
longitudinal  brownish-black  patches  on  the  lower  fore  neck  ; tarsal
feathers  light  yellowish-red,  obscurely  barred.


318


GREAT  HORNED  OWL.


Length  23  inches  ; extent  of  wings  56  ; bill  along  the  ridge  2 ; tufts
on  the  head  3.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LX VI.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  considerably  larger  than  the  male,  and  is  duller  and
lighter  in  colouring,  although  the  distribution  of  the  tints  is  similar.  The
white  of  the  chin  is  less  pure,  and  the  broad  band  of  the  same  colour  on
the  fore  neck  is  wanting.


( 319  )


THE  PASSENGER  PIGEON.

COLUMDA  MIGRATORIA,  LiNN.

PLATE  LXII.  Male  and  Female.

The  Passenger  Pigeon,  or,  as  it  is  usually  named  in  America,  the
Wild  Pigeon,  moves  with  extreme  rapidity,  propelling  itself  by  quickly
repeated  flaps  of  the  wings,  which  it  brings  more  or  less  near  to  the  body,
according  to  the  degree  of  velocity  which  is  required.  Like  the  Domestic
Pigeon,  it  often  flies,  during  the  love  season,  in  a circling  manner,  sup-
porting itself  with  both  wings  angularly  elevated,  in  which  position  it
keeps  them  until  it  is  about  to  alight.  Now  and  then,  during  these  cir-
cular flights,  the  tips  of  the  primary  quills  of  each  wing  are  made  to  strike
against  each  other,  producing  a smart  rap,  which  may  be  heard  at  a dis-
tance of  thirty  or  forty  yards.  Before  alighting,  the  Wild  Pigeon,  like
the  Carolina  Parrot  and  a few  other  species  of  birds,  breaks  the  force  of
its  flight  by  repeated  flappings,  as  if  apprehensive  of  receiving  injury
from  coming  too  suddenly  into  contact  with  the  branch  or  the  spot  of
ground  on  which  it  intends  to' settle.  • -

I have  commenced  my  description  of  this  species  with  the  above  ac-
count of  its  flight,  because  the  most  important  facts  connected  with  its>
habits  relate  to  its  migrations.  These  are  entirely  owing  to  the  necessity
of  procuring  food,  and  are  not  performed  with  the  view  of  escaping  the
severity  of  a northern  latitude,  or  of  seeking  a southern  one  for  the  pur-
pose of  breeding.  They  consequently  do  not  take  place  at  any  fixed
period  or  season  of  the  year.  Indeed,  it  sometimes  happens  that  a con-
tinuance of  a sufficient  supply  of  food  in  one  district  will  keep  these  birds
absent  from  another  for  years.  I know,  at  least,  to  a certainty,  that  in
Kentucky  they  remained  for  several  years  constantly,  and  were  nowhere
else  to  be  found.  They  all  suddenly  disappeared  one  season  when  the
mast  was  exhausted,  and  did  not  return  for  a long  period.  Similar  facts
have  been  observed  in  other  States.

Their  great  power  of  flight  enables  them  to  survey  and  pass  over  an
astonishing  extent  of  country  in  a tery  short  time.  - This  is  proved  by
facts  well  known  in  America.  Thus,  Pigeons  have  been  killed  in  the
neighbourhood  of  New  York,  with  their  crops  full  of  rice,  which  they


320


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


must  have  collected  in  the  fields  of  Georgia  and  Carolina,  these  districts^
being  the  nearest  in  which  they  could  possibly  have  procured  a supply  of
that  kind  of  food.  As  their  power  of  digestion  is  so  great  that  they  will
decompose  food  entirely  in  twelve  hours,  they  must  in  this  case  have
travelled  between  three  hundred  and  four  hundred  miles  in  six  hours,,
which  shews  their  speed  to  be  at  an  average  about  one  mile  in  a minute.
A velocity  such  as  this  would  enable  one  of  these  birds,  were  it  so  in-
clined, to  visit  the  European  continent  in  less  than  three  days.

This  great  power  of  flight  is  seconded  by  as  great  a power  of  vision,
which  enables  them,  as  they  travel  at  that  swift  rate,  to  inspect  the  country
below,  discover  their  food  with  facility,  and  thus  attain  the  object  for
which  their  journey  has  been  undertaken.  This  I have  also  proved  to
be  the  case,  by  having  observed  them,  when  passing  over  a sterile  part
of  the  country,  or  one  scantily  furnished  with  food  suited  to  them,  keep
high  in  the  air,  flying  with  an  extended  front,  so  as  to  enable  them  to
survey  hundreds  of  acres  at  once.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  land  is
richly  covered  with  food,  or  the  trees  abundantly  hung  with  mast,  they
fly  low,  in  order  to  discover  the  part  most  plentifully  supplied.

Their  body  is  of  an  elongated  oval  form,  steered  by  a long  well-
plumed  tail,  and  propelled  by  well-set  wings,  the  muscles  of  which  are
very  large  and  powerful  for  the  size  of  the  bird.  When  an  individual  is
seen  gliding  through  the  woods  and  close  to  the  observer,  it  passes  like  a
thought,  and  on  trying  to  see  it  again,  the  eye  searches  in  vain ; the  bird
is  gone.

The  multitudes  of  Wild  Pigeons  in  our  woods  are  astonishing.  In-
deed, after  having  viewed  them  so  often,  and  under  so  many  circum-
stances, I even  now  feel  inclined  to  pause,  and  assure  myself  that  what
I am  going  to  relate  is  fact.  Yet  I have  seen  it  all,  and  that  too  in  the
company  of  persons  who,  like  myself,  were  struck  with  amazement.

In  the  autumn  of  1813,  I left  my  house  at  Henderson,  on  the  banks

of  the  Ohio,  on  my  way  to  Louisville.  In  passing  over  the  Barrens  a

few  miles  beyond  Hardensburgh,  I observed  the  pigeons  flying  from

north-east  to  south-west,  in  greater  numbers  than  I thought  I had  ever

seen  them  before,  and  feeling  an  inclination  to  count  the  flocks  that  might

pass  within  the  reach  of  my  eye  in  one  hour,  I dismounted,  seated  myself

on  an  eminence,  and  began  to  mark  with  my  pencil,  making  a dot  for

every  flock  that  passed.  In  a short  time  finding  the  task  which  I had

undertaken  impracticable,  as  the  birds  poured  in  in  countless  multitudes,

2


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


321


I rose,  and  counting  the  dots  then  put  down,  found  that  163  had  been
made  in  twenty-one  minutes.  I travelled  on,  and  still  met  more  the  far-
ther I proceeded.  The  air  was  literally  filled  with  Pigeons ; the  light  of
noon-day  was  obscured  as  by  an  eclipse ; the  dung  fell  in  spots,  not  un-
like melting  flakes  of  snpw;  and  the  continued  buzz  of  wings  had  a ten-
dency to  lull  my  senses  to  repose.

Whilst  waiting  for  dinner  at  You  lie’s  inn,  at  the  confluence  of  Salt-
River  with  the  Ohio,  I saw,  at  my  leisure,  immense  legions  still  going
by,  with  a front  reaching  far  beyond  the  Ohio  on  the  west,  and  the
beech- wood  forests  directly  on  the  east  of  me.  Not  a single  bird
alighted ; for  not  a nut  or  acorn  was  that  year  to  be  seen  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. They  consequently  flew  so  high,  that  different  trials  to  reach
them  with  a capital  rifle  proved  ineffectual  ; nor  did  the  reports  disturb
them  in  the  least.  I cannot  describe  to  you  the  extreme  beauty  of  their
aerial  evolutions,  when  a Hawk  chanced  to  press  upon  the  rear  of
a flock.  At  once,  like  a torrent,  and  with  a noise  like  thunder,  they
rushed  into  a compact  mass,  pressing  upon  each  other  towards  the  centre.
In  these  almost  solid  masses,  they  darted  forward  in  undulating  and
angular  lines,  descended' and  swept  close  over  the  earth  with  inconceivable
velocity,  mounted  perpendicularly  so  as  to  resemble  a vast  column,  and,
when  high,  were  seen  wheeling  and  twisting  within  their  continued  lines,
which  then  resembled  the  coils  of  a gigantic  serpent.

Before  sunset  I reached  Louisville,  distant  from  Hardensburgh  fifty-
five  miles.  The  Pigeons  were  still  passing  in  undiminished  numbers,
and  continued  to  do  so  for  three  days  in  succession.  The  people  were
all  in  arms.  The  banks  of  the  Ohio  were  crowded  with  men  and  boys,
incessantly  shooting  at  the  pilgrims,  which  there  flew  lower  as  they  passed
the  river.  Multitudes  were  thus  destroyed.  For  a week  or  more,  the
population  fed  on  no  other  flesh  than  that  of  Pigeons,  and  talked  of  no-
thing but  Pigeons.  The  atmosphere,  during  this  time,  was  strongly  im-
pregnated with  the  peculiar  odour  which  emanates  from  the  species.

It  is  extremely  interesting  to  see  flock  after  flock  performing  exactly
the  same  evolutions  which  had  been  traced  as  it  were  in  the  air  by  a pre-
ceding flock.  Thus,  should  a Hawk  have  charged  on  a group  at  a cer-
tain spot,  the  angles,  curves,  and  undulations  that  have  been  described  by
the  birds,  in  their  efforts  to  escape  from  the  dreaded  talons  of  the  plun-
derer, are  undeviatingly  followed  by  the  next  group  that  comes  up.
Sliould  the  bystander  happen  to  witness  one  of  these  affrays,  and,  struck


X


323


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


with  the  rapidity  and  elegance  of  the  motions  exhibited,  feel  desirous  of
seeing  them  repeated,  his  wishes  will  be  gratified  if  he  only  remain  in
the  place  until  the  next  group  comes  up.

It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  out  of  place  to  attempt  an  estimate  of  the
number  of  Pigeons  contained  in  one  of  those  mighty  flocks,  and  of  the
quantity  of  food  daily  consumed  by  its  members.  The  inquiry  will  tend
to  shew  the'astonishing  bounty  of  the  great  Author  of  Nature  in  providing
for  the  wants  of  his  creatures.  Let  us  take  a column  of  one  mile  in
breadth,  which  is  far  below  the  average  size,  and  suppose  it  passing  over
us  without  interruption  for  three  hours,  at  the  rate  mentioned  above  of  '
one  mile  in  the  minute.  This  will  give  us  a parallelogram  of  180  miles
by  1,  covering  180  square  miles.  Allowing  two  pigeons  to  the  square
yard,  we  have  One  billion,  one  hundred  and  fifteen  millions,  one  hundred
and  thirty-six  thousand  pigeons  in  one  flock.  As  every  pigeon  daily
consumes  fully  half  a pint  of  food,  the  quantity  necessary  for  supplying
this  vast  multitude  must  be  eight  millions  seven  hundred  and  twelve
thousand  bushels  per  day.

As  soon  as  the  Pigeons  discover  a sufficiency  of  food  to  entice  them
to  alight,  they  fly  round  in  circles,  reviewing  the  country  below.  During
their  evolutions,  on  such  occasions,  the  dense  mass  which  they  form  ex-
hibits a beautiful  appearance,  as  it  changes  its  direction,  now  displaying  a
glistening  sheet  of  azure,  when  the  backs  of  the  birds  come  simultane-
ously into  view,  and  anon,  suddenly  presenting  a mass  of  rich  deep  pur-
ple. They  then  pass  lower,  over  the  woods,  and  for  a moment  are  lost
among  the  foliage,  but  again  emerge,  and  are  seen  gliding  aloft.  They
now  alight,  but  the  next  moment,  as  if  suddenly  alarmed,  they  take
to  wing,  producing  by  the  flappings  of  their  wings  a noise  like  the  ^
roar  of  distant  thunder,  and  sweep  through  the  forests  to  see  if  danger
is  near.  Hunger,  however,  soon  brings  them  to  the  ground.  When
alighted,  they  are  seen  industriously  throwing  up  the  withered  leaves  in
quest  of  the  fallen  mast.  The  rear  ranks  are  continually  rising,  passing
over  the  main-body,  and  alighting  in  front,  in  such  rapid  succession,  that
the  whole  flock  seems  still  on  wing.  The  quantity  of  ground  thus
swept  is  astonishing,  and  so  completely  has  it  been  cleared,  that  the
gleaner  who  might  follow  in  their  rear  would  find  his  labour  completely
lost.  Whilst  feeding,  their  avidity  is  at  times  so  great  that  in  attempt-
ing to  swallow  a large  acorn  or  nut,  they  are  seen  gasping  for  a long
while,  as  if  in  the  agonies  of  suffocation.


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


323


Gn  such  occasions,  when  the  woods  are  filled  with  these  Pigeons,  they
are  killed  in  immense  numbers,  although  no  apparent  diminution  ensues.
About  the  middle  of  the  day,  after  their  repast  is  finished,  they  settle  on
the  trees,  to  enjoy  rest,  and  digest  their  food.  On  the  ground  they
walk  with  ease,  as  well  as  on  the  branches,  frequently  jerking  their  beau-
tiful tail,  and  moving  the  neck  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  most  grace-
ful manner.  As  the  sun  begins  to  sink  beneath  the  horizon,  they  depart
en  masse  for  the  roosting-place,  which  not  unfrequently  is  hundreds- of
miles  distant,  as  has  been  ascertained  by  persons  who  have  kept  an  ac-
count of  their  arrivals  and  departures.

Let  us  now,  kind  reader,  inspect  their  place  of  nightly  rendezvous.
One  of  these  curious  roosting-places,  on  the  banks  of  the  Green  River  in
Kentucky,  I repeatedly  visited.  It  was,  as  is  always  the  case,  in  a por-
tion of  the  forest  where  the  trees  were  of  great  magnitude,  and  where
there  was  little  underwood.  I rode  through  it  upwards  of  forty  miles,
and,  crossing  it  in  different  parts,  found  its  average  breadth  to  be  rather
more  than  three  miles.  My  first  view  of  it  was  about  a fortnight  subse-
quent to  the  period  when  they  had  made  choice  of  it,  and  I arrived  there
nearly  two  hours  before  sunset.  Few  Pigeons  were  then  to  be  seen,  but
a great  number  of  persons,  with  horses  and  waggons,  guns  and  ammuni-
tion, had  already  established  encampments  on  the  borders.  Two  farmers
from  the  vicinity  of  Russelsville,  distant  more  than  a hundred  miles,  had
driven  upwards  of  three  hundred  hogs  to  be  fattened  on  the  pigeons
which  were  to  be  slaughtered.  Here  and  there,  the  people  employed  in
plucking  and  salting  what  had  already  been  procured,  were  seen  sit-
ting in  the  midst  of  large  piles  of  these  birds.  The  dung  lay  several
inches  deep,  covering  the  whole  extent  of  the  roosting-place,  like
a bed  of  snow.  Many  trees  two  feet  in  diameter,  I observed,  were
broken  off  at  no  great  distance  from  the  ground ; and  the  branches  of
many  of  the  largest  and  tallest  had  given  way,  as  if  the  forest  had  been
swept  by  a tornado.  Every  thing  proved  to  me  that  the  number  of  birds
resorting  to  this  part  of  the  forest  must  be  immense  beyond  conception.
As  the  period  of  their  arrival  approached,  their  foes  anxiously  prepared
to  receive  them.  Some  were  furnished  with  iron-pots  containing  sulphur,
others  with  torches  of  pine-knots,  many  with  poles,  and  the  rest  with
guns.  The  sun  was  lost  to  our  view,  yet  not  a Pigeon  had  arrived.
Every  thing  was  ready,  and  all  eyes  were  gazing  on  the  clear  sky,  which
appeared  in  glimpses  amidst  the  tall  trees.  Suddenly  there  burst  forth

X 2


324


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


a general  cry  of  “ Here  they  come  !”  The  noise  which  they  made,
though  yet  distant,  reminded  me  of  a hard  gale  at  sea,  passing  through
the  rigging  of  a close-reefed  vessel.  As  the  birds  arrived  and  passed
over  me,  I felt  a current  of  air  that  surprised  me.  Thousands  were  soon
knocked  down  by  the  pole-men.  The  birds  continued  to  pour  in.  The
fires  were  lighted,  and  a magnificent,  as  well  as  wonderful  and  almost
terrifying,  sight  presented  itself.  The  Pigeons,  arriving  by  thousands,
alighted  everywhere,  one  above  another,  until  solid  masses  as  large  as
hogsheads  were  formed  on  the  branches  all  round.  Here  and  there  the
perches  gave  way  under  the  weight  with  a crash,  and,  falling  to  the  ground,
destroyed  hundreds  of  the  birds  beneath,  forcing  down  the  dense  groups
with  which  every  stick  was  loaded.  It  was  a scene  of  uproar  and  con-
fusion. I found  it  quite  useless  to  speak,  or  even  to  shout  to  those  per-
sons who  were  nearest  to  me.  Even  the  reports  of  the  guns  w^ere  seldom
heard,  and  I was  made  aware  of  the  firing  only  by  seeing  the  shooters
reloading.

No  one  dared  venture  within  the  line  of  devastation.  The  hogs  had
been  penned  up  in  due  time,  the  picking  up  of  the  dead  and  wounded
being  left  for  the  next  morning‘’s  employment.  The  Pigeons  were  con-
stantly coming,  and  it  was  past  midnight  before  I perceived  a decrease
in  the  number  of  those  that  arrived.  The  uproar  continued  the  whole
night ; and  as  I was  anxious  to  know  to  what  distance  the  sound  reach-
ed, I sent  off  a man,  accustomed  to  perambulate  the  forest,  who,  return-
ing two  hours  afterwards,  informed  me  he  had  heard  it  distinctly  when
three  miles  distant  from  the  spot.  Towards  the  approach  of  day,  the
noise  in  some  measure  subsided,  long  before  objects  were  distinguishable,
the  Pigeons  began  to  move  off  in  a direction  quite  different  from  that  in
which  they  had  arrived  the  evening  before,  and  at  sunrise  all  that  were
able  to  fly  had  disappeared.  The  bowlings  of  the  wolves  now  reached
our  ears,  and  the  foxes,  lynxes,  cougars,  bears,  raccoons,  oppossums  and
pole-cats  were  seen  sneaking  off,  whilst  eagles  and  hawks  of  different
species,  accompanied  by  a crowd  of  vultures,  came  to  supplant  them,
and  enjoy  their  share  of  the  spoil.

It  was  then  that  the  authors  of  all  this  devastation  began  their  entry
amongst  the  dead,  the  dying,  and  the  mangled.  The  pigeons  were
picked  up  and  piled  in  heaps,  until  each  had  as  many  as  he  could  possi-
bly dispose  of,  when  the  hogs  were  let  loose  to  feed  on  the  remainder.

Persons  unacquainted  with  these  birds  might  naturally  conclude  that


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


325


such  dreadful  havock  would  soon  put  an  end  to  the  species.  But  I have
satisfied  myself,  by  long  observation,  that  nothing  but  the  gradual  dimi-
nution of  our  forests  can  accomplish  their  decrease,  as  they  not  unfre-
quently  quadruple  their  numbers  yearly,  and  always  at  least  double  it.
In  1805  I saw  schooners  loaded  in  bulk  with  Pigeons  caught  up  the
Hudson  River,  coming  in  to  the  wharf  at  New  York,  when  the  birds  sold
for  a cent  a piece.  I knew  a man  in  Pennsylvania,  who  caught  and
killed  upwards  of  500  dozens  in  a clap-net  in  one  day,  sweeping  some-
times twenty  dozens  or  more  at  a single  haul.  In  the  month  of  March
1830,  they  were  so  abundant  in  the  markets  of  New  York,  that  piles  of
them  met  the  eye  in  every  direction.  I have  seen  the  Negroes  at  the
United  States’  Salines  or  Saltworks  of  Shawanee  Town,  wearied  with
killing  Pigeons,  as  they  alighted  to  drink  the  water  issuing  from  the
leading  pipes,  for  weeks  at  a time ; and  yet  in  1826,  in  Louisiana,  I saw
congregated  flocks  of  these  birds  as  numerous  as  ever  I had  seen  them
before,  during  a residence  of  nearly  thirty  years  in  the  United  States.

The  breeding  of  the  Wild  Pigeons,  and  the  places  chosen  for  that
purpose,  are  points  of  great  interest.  The  time  is  not  much  influenced
by  season,  and  the  place  selected  is  where  food  is  most  plentiful  and  most
attainable,  and  always  at  a convenient  distance  from  water.  Forest-trees
of  great  height  are  those  in  which  the  Pigeons  form  their  nests.  Thither
the  countless  myriads  resort,  and  prepare  to  fulfil  one  of  the  great  laws
of  nature.  At  this  period  the  note  of  the  Pigeon  is  a soft  coo-coo-coo-coo,
much  shorter  than  that  of  the  domestic  species.  The  common  notes  re-
semble the  monosyllables  kee-lcee-'kee-'kee,  the  first  being  the  loudest,  the
others  gradually  diminishing  in  power.  The  male  assumes  a pompous
demeanour,  and  follows  the  female  whether  on  the  ground  or  on  the
branches,  with  spread  tail  and  drooping  wings,  which  it  rubs  against  the
part  over  which  it  is  moving.  The  body  is  elevated,  the  throat  swells,
the  eyes  sparkle.  He  continues  his  notes,  and  now  and  then  rises  on
the  wing,  and  flies  a few  yards  to  approach  the  fugitive  and  timorous  fe-
male. Like  the  domestic  Pigeon  and  other  species,  they  caress  each
other  by  billing,  in  which  action,  the  bill  of  the  one  is  introduced  trans-
versely into  that  of  the  other,  and  both  parties  alternately  disgorge  the
contents  of  their  crop  by  repeated  efibrts.  These  preliminary  affairs  are
soon  settled,  and  the  Pigeons  commence  their  nests  in  general  peace  and
harmony.  They  are  composed  of  a few  dry  twigs,  crossing  each  other,
and  are  supported  by  forks  of  the  branches.  On  the  same  tree  from  fifty


326


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


to  a hundred  nests  may  frequently  be  seen  : — I might  say  a much  greater
number,  were  I not  anxious,  kind  reader,  that  however  wonderful  my  ac-
count of  the  Wild  Pigeon  is,  you  may  not  feel  disposed  to  refer  it  to  the
marvellous.  The  eggs  are  two  in  number,  of  a broadly  elliptical  form,
and  pure  white.  During  incubation,  the  male  supplies  the  female  with
food.  Indeed,  the  tenderness  and  affection  displayed  by  these  birds  to-
wards their  mates,  are  in  the  highest  degree  striking.  It  is  a remarkable
fact,  that  each  brood  generally  consists  of  a male  and  a female.

Here  again,  the  tyrant  of  the  creation,  man,  interferes,  disturbing  the
harmony  of  this  peaceful  scene.  As  the  young  birds  grow  up,  their  ene-
mies, armed  with  axes,  reach  the  spot,  to  seize  and  destroy  all  they  can.
The  trees  are  felled,  and  made  to  fall  in  such  a way  that  the  cutting  of
one  causes  the  overthrow  of  another,  or  shakes  the  neighbouring  trees  so
much,  that  the  young  Pigeons,  or  squabs,  as  they  are  named,  are  violent-
ly hurried  to  the  ground.  In  this  manner  also,  immense  quantities  are
destroyed.

The  young  are  fed  by  the  parents  in  the  manner  described  above ;
in  other  words,  the  old  bird  introduces  its  bill  into  the  mouth  of  the
young  one  in  a transverse  manner,  or  with  the  back  of  each  mandible
opposite  the  separations  of  the  mandibles  of  the  young  bird,  and  dis^
gorges  the  contents  of  its  crop.  As  soon  as  the  young  birds  are  able  to
shift  for  themselves,  they  leave  their  parents,  and  continue  separate  un-
til they  attain  maturity.  By  the  end  of  six  months  they  are  capable  of
reproducing  their  species.

The  flesh  of  the  Wild  Pigeon  is  of  a dark  colour,  but  affords  tolera-
ble eating.  That  of  young  birds  from  the  nest  is  much  esteemed.  The
skin  is  covered  with  small  white  filmy  scales.  The  feathers  fall  off  at  the
least  touch,  as  has  been  remarked  to  be  the  case  in  the  Carolina  Turtle.
I have  only  to  add,  that  this  species,  like  others  of  the  same  genus,  im-
merses its  head  up  to  the  eyes  while  drinking.

In  March  1830,  I bought  about  350  of  these  birds  in  the  market  of
New  York,  at  four  cents  a piece.  Most  of  these  I carried  alive  to  Eng-
land, and  distributed  amongst  several  noblemen,  presenting  some  at  the
same  time  to  the  Zoological  Society.


PASSENGER  PIGEON.


327


CoLUMBA  MIGB.ATOHIA,  Linn.  Sjst.  Nat,  voL  i.  p.  285. — Lath,  Jnd.  Ornith.  voL  ii.
p.  612.— C4.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  ,p.  120.

Passenger  Pigeon,  Columba  migbatoria.  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  66l~m.~WUs,
Amer.  Omith.  vol.  v.  p.  102.  PL  44.  fig.  1.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  straight,  of  ordinary  length,  rather  slender,  broader  than  deep  at
the  base,  with  a tumid  fleshy  covering  above,  compressed  towards  the
end,  rather  obtuse ; upper  mandible  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip  ; edges
inflected.  Head  small,  neck  slender,  body  rather  full.  Legs  short  and
strong ; tarsus  rather  rounded,  anteriorly  scutellate  ; toes  slightly  webbed
at  the  base ; claws  short,  depressed,  obtuse.

Plumage  blended  on  the  neck  and  under  parts,  compact  on  the  back.
Wings  long,  the  second  quill  longest.  Tail  graduated,  of  twelve  taper-
ing feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  bright  red.  Feet  carmine  purple,  claws  blackish.
Head  above  and  on  the  sides  light  blue.  Throat,  fore-neck,  breast,  and
sides,  light  brownish-red,  the  rest  of  the  under  parts  white.  I.ower  part
of  the  neck  behind,  and  along  the  sides,  changing  to  gold,  emerald  green,
and  rich  crimson.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  greyish-blue,
some  of  the  wing-coverts  marked  with  a black  spot.  Quills  and  larger
wing-coverts  blackish,  the  primary  quills  bluish  on  the  outer  web,  the
larger  coverts  whitish  at  the  tip.  The  two  middle  feathers  of  the  tail
black,  the  rest  pale  blue  at  the  base,  becoming  white  towards  the  end.

Length  16  j inches,  extent  of  wings  25  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  1^,  middle  toe  *

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXII.  Fig.  2.

The  colours  of  the  female  are  much  duller  than  those  of  the  male,
although  their  distribution  is  the  same.  The  breast  is  light  greyish-
brown,  the  upper  parts-  pale  reddish-brown,  tinged  with  blue.  The
changeable  spot  on  the  neck  is  of  less  extent,  and  the  eye  of  a somewhat
duller  red,  as  are  the  feet.

Length  15  inches,  extent  of  wings  23 ; bill  along  the  ridge  f,  along
the  gap  f


( 328  )


THE  WHITE-EYED  FLY-CATCHER,  OR  VIREO.

ViREO  NOVEBORJCENSIS,  Ch.  Bonap.

PLATE  LXIIL  Male.

This  interesting  little  bird  enters  the  State  of  Louisiana  often  as  early
as  the  1st  of  March.  Indeed,  some  individuals  may  now  and  then  be  seen
a week  or  ten  days  sooner,  provided  the  weather  be  mild.  It  throws  itself
into  the  thickest  part  of  the  briars,  sumachs,  and  small  evergreen  bushes,
which  form  detached  groves  in  abandoned  fields,  where  its  presence  is  at
once  known  by  the  smartness  of  its  song.  This  song  is  composed  of  many
different  notes,  emitted  with  great  spirit,  and  a certain  degree  of  pompo-
sity, which  makes  it  differ  materially  from  that  of  all  other  Fly-catchers.
It  is  frequently  repeated  during  the  day.

These  birds  become  at  once  so  abundant,  that  it  would  be  more  diffi-
cult not  to  meet  one,  than  to  observe  a dozen  or  more,  during  a morning
walk.  Their  motions  are  as  animated  as  their  music.  They  pass  from
twig  to  twig,  upwards  or  downwards,  examining  every  opening  bud  and
leaf,  and  securing  an  insect  or  a larva  at  every  leap.  Their  flight  is  short,
light,  and  easy.  Their  migrations  are  performed  during  the  day,  and  by
passing  from  one  low  bush  to  another,  for  these  birds  seldom  ascend  to
the  tops  of  even  moderately  tall  trees.  Like  all  our  other  visitors,  they
move  eastward  as  the  season  opens,  and  do  not  reach  the  Middle  States
before  the  end  of  April,  or  the  beginning  of  May.  Notwithstanding  this
apparently  slow  progress,  they  reach  and  disperse  over  a vast  expanse  of
country.  I have  met  with  some  in  every  part  of  the  United  States  which
I have  visited.

Many  remain  in  Louisiana,  where  they  rear  two  broods,  perhaps  some-
times three,  in  a season.  Of  this,  however,  I am  not  quite  certain.  I
never  saw  them  alight  on  the  ground,  unless  for  the  purpose  of  drinking,
or  of  procuring  fibrous  roots  for  their  nests.  They  are  fond  of  sipping
the  dew  drops  that  hang  at  the  extremities  of  leaves.  • Their  sorties  after
insects  seldom  extend  beyond  the  bushes.

About  the  first  of  April,  the  White-eyed  Fly-catcher  forms  a nest  of
dry  slender  twigs,  broken  pieces  of  grasses,  and  portions  of  old  hornets’


.WHITE-EYED  FLY-CATCHER.


329


nests,  which  have  so  great  a resemblance  to  paper,  that  the  nest  appears
as  if  studded  with  bits  of  that  substance.  It  is  lined  with  fine  fibrous
roots,  and  the  dried  filaments  of  the  Spanish  moss.  The  nest  is  of  the
form  of  an  inverted  cone,  and  is  fastened  to  two  or  three  twigs  of  a Green
Briar,  a species  of  Smilax  abundant  in  the  old  fields  and  along  the  fences.
The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six,  of  a pure  white,  with  a few  dark  spots  near
the  larger  end.  In  those  districts  where  the  Cow-bird  is  found,  it  fre-
quently drops  one  of  its  eggs  among  them.  I have  seen  the  first  brood
from  the  nest  about  the  middle  of  May.  Unless  when  disturbed  while
upon  its  nest,  this  bird  is  extremely  sociable,  and  may  be  approached
within  a few  feet ; but  when  startled  from  the  nest,  it  displays  the
anxiety  common  to  almost  all  birds  on  such  occasions.  The  difference  of
colour  in  the  sexes  is  scarcely  perceptible.

The  figure  of  a male  has  been  given  on  a branch  of  the  tree  called  in
Louisiana  the  Pride  of  China^  an  ornamental  plant,  with  fragrant  flowers.
The  wood  is  extremely  valuable  on  account  of  its  great  durability,  and  is
employed  for  making  posts  and  rails  for  the  fences.  Being  capable  of
receiving  a beautiful  polish,  it  is  also  frequently  made  into  various  articles
of  furniture.  For  these  reasons,  the  planters  have. found  it  expedient  to
adopt  measures  for  increasing  the  propagation  of  this  tree.  It  bears  a
pulpy  fruit  inclosing  a hard  seed,  which  is  swallowed  by  different  birds
during  the  winter  months.  It  has  been  thought  deleterious,  but  without
reason.  A decoction  of  the  root  is  used  by  the  planters  as  an  effectual
vermifuge.

ViREO  NOVEBORACENsis,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  70.

Muscicapa  NOVEBORACENSIS,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  947 Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.

voL  ii.  p.  489.

Hanging  Fly-catcher,  Lath.  Synops.  Suppl.  p.  174.

White-eyed  Fly-catcher,  Muscicapa  cantatrix,  IFi/s.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.
p.  266.  PI.  18.  Fig.  6.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXIII.

Bill  shortish,  nearly  straight,  rather  strong,  conico-acuminate,  com-
pressed towards  the  end  ; upper  mandible  slightly  notched,  and  a little
deflected  at  the  tip ; lower  mandible  ascending  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  basal,
rounded.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size ; body  rather  slender.  Feet


330


WHITE-EYED  FLY-CATCHER.


of  ordinary  length,  slender  ; tarsus  anteriorly  scutellate  ; lateral  toes
nearly  equal.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  tufty.  Wings  shortish,  the  third  quill
longest.  Tail  even,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Upper  mandible  blackish  blue,  lower  light  blue.  Iris  white.  Feet
greyish-blue.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  olive,  the
head  greener.  Sides  of  the  head,  including  a line  above  the  eye,  and  the
loral  space,  bright  yellow.  Quills,  large  coverts,  and  tail,  wood-brown,
the  quills  edged  externally  with  greenish-yellow,  the  larger  coverts  tipped
with  white,  forming  two  bands.  Sides  of  the  neck  tinged  with  bluish-
grey  ; the  under  parts  greyish- white,  excepting  the  sides,  which  are  yellow.

Length  5 inches,  extent  of  wings  7 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap

The  female  scarcely  differs  from  the  male  in  external  appearance.


The  Pride  of  China,  or  Bead-tree.

Melia  Azedarach,  Lmn.  Sp.  Plant,  p.  550. — Decandrta  Monogynia,  Llnup
Melia:,  Juss.

Distinguished  by  its  bipinnate  shining  leaves,  with  ferruginous  dots
beneath.  In  the  south  of  Europe,  the  nuts  are  bored  and  strung  by  the
Roman  Catholics.


( 331  )


THE  SWAMP  SPARROW.

Fringilla  palustbis,  Wils.

PLATE  LXIV.  Male.

The  shores  and  such  flat  sand-bars  as  are  overgrown  with  grasses  and
rank  weeds,  along  the  Mississippi,  from  its  mouth  to  a great  height,  as
well  as  the  swamps  that  occur  in  the  woods,  within  a short  distance  from
the  margins  of  that  river,  are  the  resorts  of  the  Swamp  Sparrow,  during
autumn  and  winter.  Although  these  birds  do  not  congregate  in  flocks,
their  numbers  are  immense.  They  form  the  principal  food  of  the  many
Sparrow  Hawks,  Pigeon  Hawks,  and  Hen-harriers,  which  follow  them  as
well  as  several  other  species,  on  their  return  from  the  Middle  Districts,
where  they  go  towards  spring,  for  the  purpose  of  breeding.  In  those
districts  they  continue  to  prefer  low  swampy  places,  damp  meadows,  and
the  margins  of  creeks  and  rivers.

It  is  a timid  species,  destitute  of  song,  and  merely  uttering  a single
cheepy  which  is  now  and  then  heard  during  the  day,  but  more  frequently
towards  evening.  They  skulk  along  the  weeds  with  activity,  and  feed
principally  upon  the  seeds  of  grasses,  with  a few  insects,  sometimes  wa-
ding in  shallow  water.  When  wounded  and  forced  to  fall  in  the  stream,
they  swim  off  to  the  nearest  tuft  of  grass  and  hide  in  it.  Their  flight  is
short,  low,  and  assisted  by  strong  jerking  motions  of  the  body  and  tail,
accompanied  by  a rustling  of  the  wings.  They  alight  by  dropping  sud-
denly amongst  the  weeds,  seldom  making  towards  a high  tree.  They  are
rarely  if  ever  met  with  in  dry  woodlands.

Their  nest  is  placed  on  the  ground,  at  the  foot  of  a large  bunch  of
tall  grass.  It  is  composed  of  dry  weeds  and  finer  fibres  of  the  same,  and
is  sometimes  partially  covered  over.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a dull
white,  speckled  with  reddish.  They  raise  two,  sometimes  three,  broods  in
a season.

I found  these  birds  abundantly  dispersed  in  the  swamps  of  Cayaga
Lakes,  and  those  bordering  the  Illinois  river,  during  summer,  and  far  up
the  Arkansas  River  in  the  winter  months.  Their  flesh  is  sedgy,  which
perhaps  forms  no  objection  to  some  people  against  its  use.  They  be-
come fat  and  tender,  when  the  weeds  have  produced  an  abundance  of
seeds.  Their  note  differs  from  that  of  all  other  species  of  Sparrow,  being
harsher  in  its  tone.  The  young  follow  the  parents  on  the  ground,  skulk-
ing among  the  grass  for  nearly  a week  b^efore  they  are  able  to  fly.


332


SWAMP  SPARROW.


The  plant  on  which  you  see  this  bird  is  called  the  May-apple.  It  shoots
from  the  ground  in  great  numbers,  and  grows  very  close.  The  flowers
appear  at  an  early  season,  and  are  succeeded  by  a pulpy  yellowish  fruit,
about  the  size  of  a pullet’s  egg,  and  which,  when  ripe,  is  pleasant  to  the
taste,  being  a little  acid  and  very  cooling.


Fringilla  palustris,  Ch.  BmapartCy  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  110.

Swamp  Sparrow,  Fringilla  palustris,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  iii.  p.  49,  PI.  xxii.
fig.  1.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXIV.

Bill  short,  conical,  acute,  straight ; upper  mandible  nearly  straight  in
its  dorsal  line,  as  is  the  lower ; gap-line  a little  declinate  at  the  base-
Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  partly  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Feet  of  mo-
derate length  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe  ; toes  free,  the  lateral
ones  nearly  equal ; claws  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  rather  compact  above,  soft  and  blended  beneath.  Wings
short,  rounded,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest.  Tail  longish,  slightly
notched,  the  feathers  broad  and  rather  acute.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  paler  and  tinged  with  blue  beneath.  Iris  ha-
zel. Feet  yellowish-brown.  Upper  part  of  the  head  reddish-brown,
streaked  with  black.  Loral  space,  and  a broad  streak  over  the  eye,  yel-
lowish-grey ; a dark  line  behind  the  eye,  and  another  from  the  commis-
sure of  the  mandibles.  Upper  parts  generally  yellowish-brown,  spotted
with  brownish-black.  Primary  quill-coverts  dusky,  as  are  the  inner  webs
of  the  secondary  coverts  and  quills,  their  outer  webs  being  brownish-red
Tail-feathers  dusky,  their  outer  webs  brownish-red.  Sides  of  the  neck
and  the  breast  light  grey,  the  rest  of  the  under  parts  greyish- white.

Length  5|  inches,  extent  of  wings  7^  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  back  f ; tarsus


The  May-apple.

Podophyllum  peltatum,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  1141.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer
vol.  ii.  p.  366 — Polyandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Ranunculacea;,  Juss.

Root  of  many  large  tubers.  Stalks  several,  each  divided  at  the  top,
and  bearing  two  peltate  leaves,  composed  of  five  or  seven  lobes,  with  a
flower  in  the  fork.  Petals  nine,  white.  Fruit  when  ripe  of  the  size  of  a
plum,  yellow.


( 333  )


THE  RATHBONE  WARBLER.

Sylvia  Ratiibonia.

PliATE  LXV.  Male  akd  Female.

Kind  reader,  you  are  now  presented  with  a new  and  beautiful  little
species  of.  Warbler,  which  I have  honoured  with  the  name  of  a family
that  must  ever  be  dear  to  me.  W ere  I at  liberty  here  to  express  the
gratitude  which  swells  my  heart,  when  the  remembrance  of  all  the  un-
merited kindness  and  unlooked-for  friendship  which  I have  received  from
the  Rathbones  of  Liverpool  comes  to  my  mind,  I might  produce  a
volume  of  thanks.  But  I must  content  myself  with  informing  you,  that
the  small  tribute  of  gratitude  which  alone  it  is  in  my  power  to  pay,  I
now  joyfully  accord,  by  naming  after  them  one  of  those  birds,  to  the
study  of  which  all  my  efforts  have  been  directed.  I trust  that  future
naturalists,  regardful  of  the  feelings  which  have  guided  me  in  naming
this  species,  will  continue  to  it  the  name  of  the  Raihhone  Warhler.

I met  with  the  species  now  under  consideration  only  once,  when  I
procured  both  the  male  and  the  female  represented  in  the  plate.  They
were  actively  engaged  in  searching  for  food  amongst  the  blossoms  and
leaves  of  the  Bignonia  on  which  I have  placed-  them.  All  my  endea-
vours to  discover  their  nest,  or  to  procure  other  individuals,  having
proved  abortive,  I am  unable  to  say  any  thing  of  their  habits  and  his-
tory ; but  should  I be  more  fortunate  at  some  future  period,  I shall  not
fail  to  record  the  result  of  my  observations  respecting  this  delicate  little
Warbler.

The  Bignonia  on  which  they  are  represented,  grows  abundantly  in
the  low  alluvial  grounds  of  the  States  of  Mississippi  and  Louisiana,
sparingly  in  Tennessee,  and  about  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio.  It  twines
round  the  trunks  of  various  trees,  and  produces  beautiful  flowers,  in
which  Humming  Birds  are  frequently  seen  to  search  for  the  minute  in-
sects which  form  their  food.  They  are  destitute  of  smell,  but  are  seen
both  during  spring  and  autumn.


1


334


RATHBONE  WARBLER.


Sylvia  Rathbonia.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXV.  Fig,  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  as
deep  as  broad  at  the  base,  with  sharp  edges.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  half
concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large,  neck  short,  body  ovate.
Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  anteriorly
with  a few  long  scutella,  acute  behind,  a little  longer  than  the  middle
toe;  toes  free,  scutellate  above;  claws  arched,  slender,  * compressed,
acute.

Plumage  blended,  soft,  and  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  rather  short,  nearly  even,  of  twelve  obtuse
feathers.

Bill  yellowish-brown  above,  yellow  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  flesh-
colour.  The  general  colour  is  bright  yellow,  the  upper  parts  olivaceous.
Quills  and  tail  wood-brown,  the  former  yellow  on  the  outer  web,  the  lat-
ter margined  externally  with  the  same  colour.

Length  4 J inches ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  gap  ; tarsus

middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXV.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  almost  precisely  the  same  in  external  appearance.


The  Ramping  Trumpet-flower.

Bignonia  capbeolata,  Wind.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iii.  p.  297.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  419.— Didynamia  Angiospermia,  Linn.  Bignonia;,  Juss.

This  species  i«  distinguished  by  its  conjugate  cirrhous  leaves,  with
oblongo-lanceolate  leaflets,  which  are  somewhat  cordate  at  the  base,  the
lower  leaves  single.  The  flowers  are  carmine.


( 335  )


DEER  HUNTING.

The  different  modes  of  destroying  Deer  are  probably  too  well  un-
derstood and  too  successfully  practised  in  the  United  States ; for,  not-
withstanding the  almost  incredible  abundance  of  these  beautiful  animals
in  our  forests  and  prairies,  such  havock  is  carried  on  amongst  them,  that,
in  a few  centuries,  they  will  probably  be  as  scarce  in  America,  as  the
Great  Bustard  now  is  in  Britain.

We  have  three  modes  of  hunting  Deer,  each  varying  in  some  slight
degree,  in  the  different  States  and  Districts.  The  first  is  termed  Still
Hunting,  and  is  by  far  the  most  destructive.  The  second  is  called  Fire-
light Hunting,  and  is  next  in  its  exterminating  effects.  The  third,
which  may  be  looked  upon  as  a mere  amusement,  is  named  Driving,
Although  many  deer  are  destroyed  by  this  latter  method,  it  is  not  by
any  means  so  pernicious  as  the  others.  These  methods  I shall  describe
separately.

Still  Hunting  is  followed  as  a kind  of  trade  by  most  of  our  frontier
men.  To  be  practised  with  success,  it  requires  great  activity,  an  expert
management  of  the  rifle,  and  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  forest,  toge-
ther with  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  habits  of  the  Deer,  not  only
at  different  seasons  of  the  year,  but  also  at  every  hour  of  the  day,  as  the
hunter  must  be  aware  of  the  situations  which  the  game  prefers,  and  in
which  it  is  most  likely  to  be  found,  at  any  particular  time.  I might
here  present  you  with  a full  account  of  the  habits  of  our  Deer,  were  it
not  my  intention  to  lay  before  you,  at  some  future  period,  in  the  form  of
a distinct  work,  the  observations  which  I have  made  on  the  various
Quadrupeds  of  our  extensive  territories.

Illustrations  of  any  kind  require  to  be  presented  in  the  best  possible
light.  We  shall  therefore  suppose  that  we  are  now  about  to  follow  the
true  hunter,  as  the  Still  Hunter  is  also  called,  through  the  interior  of  the
tangled  woods,  across  morasses,  ravines,  and  such  places,  where  the  game
may  prove  more  or  less  plentiful,  even  should  none  be  found  there  in  the
first  instance.  We  shall  allow  our  hunter  all  the  agihty,  patience,  and
care,  which  his  occupation  requires,  and  will  march  in  his  rear,  as  if  we
were  spies,  watching  all  his  motions.

His  dress,  you  observe,  consists  of  a leather  hunting-shirt,  and  a


336


DEER  HUNTING.


pair  of  trowsers  of  the  same  material.  His  feet  are  well  moccassined ; he
wears  a belt  round  his  waist ; his  heavy  rifle  is  resting  on  his  brawny
shoulder ; on  one  side  hangs  his  ball-pouch,  surmounted  by  the  horn  of
an  ancient  Buffalo,  once  the  terror  of  the  herd,  but  now  containing  a
pound  of  the  best  gunpowder ; his  butcher  knife  is  scabbarded  in  the
same  strap ; and  behind  is  a tomahawk,  the  handle  of  which  has  been
thrust  through  his  girdle.  He  walks  with  so  rapid  a step,  that  pro-
bably few  men,  besides  ourselves,  that  is,  myself  and  my  kind  reader,
could  follow  him,  unless  for  a short  distance,  in  their  anxiety  to  witness
his  ruthless  deeds.  He  stops,  looks  at  the  flint  of  his  gun,  its  priming,
and  the  leather  cover  of  the  lock,  then  glances  his  eye  towards  the  sky,
to  judge  of  the  course  most  likely  to  lead  him  to  the  game.

The  heavens  are  clear,  the  red  glare  of  the  morning  sun  gleams
through  the  lower  branches  of  the  lofty  trees,  the  dew  hangs  in  pearly
drops  at  the  top  of  every  leaf.  Already  has  the  emerald  hue  of  the  fo-
liage been  converted  into  the  more  glowing  tints  of  our  autumnal  months.
A slight  frost  appears  on  the  fence-rails  of  his  little  corn-field.  As  he
proceeds,  he  looks  to  the  dead  foliage  under  his  feet,  in  search  of  the
well  known  traces  of  a buck’s  hoof.  Now  he  bends  toward  the  ground,
on  which  something  has  attracted  his  attention.  See  ! he  alters  his  course,
increases  his  speed,  and  will  soon  reach  the  opposite  hill.  Now,  he  moves
with  caution,  stops  at  almost  every  tree,  and  peeps  forward,  as  if  already
within  shooting  distance  of  the  game.  He  advances  again,  but  how  very
slowly  ! He  has  reached  the  declivity,  upon  which  the  sun  shines  in  all
its  growing  splendour; — but  mark  him ! he  takes  the  gun  from  his  shoulder,
has  already  thrown  aside  the  leathern  cover  of  the  lock,  and  is  wiping
the  edge  of  his  flint  with  his  tongue.  Now  he  stands  like  a monumental
figure,  perhaps  measuring  the  distance  that  lies  between  him  and  the
game,  which  he  has  in  view.  His  rifle  is  slowly  raised,  the  report  follows,
and  he  runs.  Let  us  run  also.  Shall  I speak  to  him,  and  ask  him  the
result  of  this  first  essay  ? Assuredly,  reader,  for  I know  him  well.

‘‘  Pray,  friend,  what  have  you  killed for  to  say,  what  have  you
shot  at  ?”  might  imply  the  possibility  of  his  having  missed,  and  so  might
hurt  his  feelings  ? “ Nothing  but  a Buck.”  And  where  is  it  “ Oh,
it  has  taken  a jump  or  so,  but  I settled  it,  and  will  soon  be  with  it.  My
ball  struck,  and  must  have  gone  through  his  heart.”  We  arrive  at  the
spot,  where  the  animal  had  laid  itself  down  among  the  grass  in  a thicket
of  grape-vines,  sumachs,  and  spruce-bushes,  where  it  intended  to  repose


DEER  HUNTING.


337


during  the  middle  of  the  day.  The  place  is  covered  with  blood,  the
hoofs  of  the  deer  have  left  deep  prints  in  the  ground,  as  it  bounced  in
the  agonies  produced  by  its  wound  ; but  the  blood  that  has  gushed  from
its  side  discloses  the  course  which  it  has  taken.  We  soon  reach  the  spot.
There  lies  the  buck,  its  tongue  out,  its  eye  dim,  its  breath  exhausted  ;
it  is  dead.  The  hunter  draws  his  knife,  cuts  the  buck’s  throat  almost
asunder,  and  prepares  to  skin  it.  For  this  purpose  he  hangs  it  upon  the
branch  of  a tree.  When  the  skin  is  removed,  he  cuts  off  the  hams,
and  abandoning  the  rest  of  the  carcass  to  the  wolves  and  vultures,  re-
loads his  gun,  flings  the  venison,  enclosed  by  the  skin,  upon  his  back,
secures  it  with  a strap,  and  walks  off*  in  search  of  more  game,  well
knowing  that,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  another  at  least  is  to  be
found.

Had  the  weather  been  warmer,  the  hunter  would  have  sought  for  the
buck  along  the  shadowy  side  of  the  hills.  Had  it  been  the  spring  sear-
son,  he  would  have  led  us  through  some  thick  cane-brake,  to  the  margin
of  some  remote  lake,  where  you  would  have  seen  the  deer,  immersed  to
his  head  in  the  water,  to  save  his  body  from  the  tormenting  attacks  of
moschettoes.  Had  winter  overspread  the  earth  with  a covering  of  snow,
he  would  have  searched  the  low  damp  woods,  where  the  mosses  and
lichens,  on  which  at  that  period  the  deer  feeds,  abound,  the  trees  being
generally  crusted  with  them  for  several  feet  from  the  ground.  At  one
time,  he  might  have  marked  the  places  where  the  deer  clears  the  velvet
from  his  horns  by  rubbing  them  against  the  low  stems  of  bushes,  and
where  he  frequently  scrapes  the  earth  with  his  fore-hoofs ; at  another,  he
would  have  betaken  himself  to  places  where  persimons  and  crab-apples
abound,  as  beneath  these  trees  the  deer  frequently  stops  to  munch  their
fruits.  During  early  spring,  our  hunter  would  imitate  the  bleating  of
the  doe,  and  thus  frequently  obtain  both  her  and  the  fawn ; or,  like  some
tribes  of  Indians,  he  would  prepare  a deer’s  head,  placed  on  a stick,  and
creeping  with  it  amongst  the  tall  grass  of  the  prairies,  would  decoy  the
deer  within  reach  of  his  rifle.  But  kind  reader,  you  have  seen  enough
of  the  still  hunter.  Let  it  suffice  for  me  to  add,  that  by  the  mode  pursued
by  him,  thousands  of  deer  are  annually  killed,  many  individuals  shooting
these  animals  merely  for  the  skin,  not  caring  for  even  the  most  valuable
portions  of  the  flesh,  unless  hunger,  or  a near  market,  induce  them  to
carry  off*  the  hams.

The  mode  of  destroying  deer  by  Jir e-light^  or,  as  it  is  named  in  some

Y


338


DEER  HUNTING.


parts  of  the  country,  forest-light^  never  fails  to  produce  a very  singular
feeling  in  him  who  witnesses  it  for  the  first  time.  There  is  something  in
it  which  at  times  appears  awfully  grand.  At  other  times,  a certain  de-
gree of  fear  creeps  over  the  mind,  and  even  affects  the  physical  powers,  of
him  who  follows  the  hunter  through  the  thick  undergrowth  of  our  woods,
having  to  leap  his  horse  over  hundreds  of  huge  fallen  trunks,  at  one  time
impeded  by  a straggling  grape-vine  crossing  his  path,  at  another  squeezed
between  two  stubborn  saplings,  whilst  their  twigs  come  smack  in  his
face,  as  his  companion  has  forced  his  way  through  them.  Again,  he
every  now  and  then  runs  the  risk  of  breaking  his  neck,  by  being  sudden-
ly pitched  headlong  on  the  ground,  as  his  horse  sinks  into  a hole  covered
over  with  moss.  But  I must  proceed  in  a more  regular  manner,  and
leave  you,  kind  reader,  to  judge  whether  such  a mode  of  hunting  would
suit  your  taste  or  not.

The  hunter  has  returned  to  his  camp  or  his  house,  has  rested  and
eaten  of  his  game.  He  waits  impatiently  for  the  return  of  night.  He
has  procured  a quantity  of  pine-knots  filled  with  resinous  matter,  and  has
an  old  frying-pan,  that,  for  aught  I know  to  the  contrary,  may  have  been
used  by  his  great  grandmother,  in  which  the  pine-knots  are  to  be  placed
when  lighted.  The  horses  stand  saddled  at  the  door.  The  hunter  comes
forth,  his  rifle  slung  on  his  shoulder,  and  springs  upon  one  of  them,
while  his  son,  or  a servant,  mounts  the  other,  with  the  frying-pan  and
the  pine-knots.  Thus  accoutred,  they  proceed  towards  the  interior  of
the  forest.  When  they  have  arrived  at  the  spot  where  the  hunt  is  to
begin,  they  strike  fire  with  a flint  and  steel,  and  kindle  the  resinous
wood.  The  person  who  carries  the  fire  moves  in  the  direction  judged  to
be  the  best.  The  blaze  illuminates  the  near  objects,  but  the  distant
parts  seem  involved  in  deepest  obscurity.  The  hunter  who  bears  the  gun
keeps  immediately  in  front,  and  after  a while  discovers  before  him  two
feeble  lights,  which  are  produced  by  the  reflection  of  the  pine-fire  from
the  eyes  of  an  animal  of  the  deer  or  wolf  kind.  The  animal  stands
quite  still.  To  one  unacquainted  with  this  strange  mode  of  hunting,  the
glare  from  its  eyes  might  bring  to  his  imagination  some  lost  hobgoblin
that  had  strayed  from  its  usual  haunts.  The  hunter,  however,  nowise
intimidated,  approaches  the  object,  sometimes  so  near  as  to  discern  its
form,  when  raising  the  rifle  to  his  shoulder,  he  fires  and  kills  it  on  the
spot.  He  then  dismounts,  secures  the  skin  and  such  portions  of  the  flesh
as  he  may  want,  in  the  manner  already  described,  and  continues  his


DEER  HUNTING.


339


search  through  the  greater  part  of  the  night,  sometimes  until  the  dawn
of  day,  shooting  from  five  to  ten  deer,  should  these  animals  be  plenti-
ful. This  kind  of  hunting  proves  fatal,  not  to  the  deer  alone,  but  also
sometimes  to  wolves,  and  now  and  then  to  a horse  or  a cow,  which  may
have  straggled  far  into  the  woods.

Now,  kind  reader,  prepare  to  mount  a generous,  full  blood  Virginian
Hunter.  See  that  your  gun  is  in  complete  order,  for,  hark  to  the  sound  of
the  bugle  and  horn,  and  the  mingled  clamour  of  a pack  of  harriers  ! Your
friends  are  waiting  you,  under  the  shade  of  the  wood,  and  we  must  toge-
ther go  driving  the  light-footed  deer.  The  distance  over  which  one  has
to  travel  is  seldom  felt,  when  pleasure  is  anticipated  as  the  result : so,
galloping  we  go  pell-mell  through  the  woods,  to  some  well  known  place,
where  many  a fine  buck  has  drooped  its  antlers  under  the  ball  of  the
hunter’s  rifle.  The  servants,  who  are  called  the  drivers^  have  already
begun  their  search.  Their  voices  are  heard  exciting  the  hounds,  and  un-
less we  put  spurs  to  our  steeds,  we  may  be  too  late  at  our  stand,  and
thus  lose  the  first  opportunity  of  shooting  the  fleeting  game,  as  it  passes
by.  Hark  again  ! The  dogs  are  in  chase,  the  horn  sounds  louder  and
more  clearly.  Hurry,  hurry  on,  or  we  shall  be  sadly  behind  !

Here  we  are  at  last  ! Dismount,  fasten  your  horse  to  this  tree,
place  yourself  by  the  side  of  that  large  yellow  poplar,  and  mind  you  do
not  shoot  me  ! The  deer  is  fast  approaching ; I will  to  my  own  stand,
and  he  who  shoots  him  dead  wins  the  prize.

The  deer  is  heard  coming.  It  has  inadvertently  cracked  a dead
stick  with  its  hoof,  and  the  dogs  are  now  so  near  it  that  it  will  pass  in  a
moment.  There  it  comes  ! How  beautifully  it  bounds  over  the  ground  !
What  a splendid  head  of  horns  ! How  easy  its  attitudes,  depending,  as,
it  seems  to  do,  on  its  own  swiftness  for  safety  ! All  is  in  vain,  however  :
a gun  is  fired,  the  animal  plunges  and  doubles  with  incomparable  speed.
There  he  goes ! He  pa'sses  another  stand,  from  which  a second  shot,
better  directed  than  the  first,  brings  him  to  the  ground.  The  dogs,  the
servants,  the  sportsmen  are  now  rushing  forward  to  the  spot.  The  hunter
who  has  shot  it  is  congratulated  on  his  skill  or  good  luck,  and  the  chase
begins  again  in  some  other  part  of  the  woods,

A few  lines  of  explanation  may  be  required  to  convey  a clear  idea  of
this  mode  of  hunting.  Deer  are  fond  of  following  and  retracing  the
paths  which  they  have  formerly  pursued,  and  continue  to  do  so  even  af-
ter they  have  been  shot  at  more  than  once.  These  tracks  are  discovered

y 2


DEER  HUNTING.


MO

by  persons  on  horseback  in  the  woods,  or  a deer  is  observed  crossing  a
road,  a field,  or  a small  stream.  When  this  has  been  noticed  twice,  the
deer  may  be  shot  from  the  places  called  stands  by  the  sportsman,  who  is
stationed  there,  and  waits  for  it,  a line  of  stands  being  generally  formed  so
as  to  cross  the  path  which  the  game  will  follow.  The  person  who  ascer-
tains the  usual  pass  of  the  game,  or  discovers  the  parts  where  the  animal
feeds  or  lies  down  during  the  day,  gives  intimation  to  his  friends,  who  then
prepare  for  the  chase.  The  servants  start  the  deer  with  the  hounds,  and
by  good  management,  generally  succeed  in  making  it  run  the  course  that
will  soonest  bring  it  to  its  death.  But,  should  the  deer  be  cautious,  and
take  another  course,  the  hunters,  mounted  on  swift  horses,  gallop  through
the  woods  to  intercept  it,  guided  by  the  sound  of  the  horns  and  the  cry
of  the  dogs,  and  frequently  succeed  in  shooting  it.  This  sport  is  ex-
tremely agreeable,  and  proves  successful  on  almost  every  occasion.

Hoping  that  this  account  will  be  sufficient  to  induce  you,  kind  reader,
to  go  driving  in  our  Western  and  Southern  Woods,  I now  conclude  my
chapter  on  Deer  Hunting  by  informing  you,  that  the  species  referred  to
above  is  the  Virginian  Deer,  Cervus  virginianus ; and  that,  until  I be
able  to  present  you  with  a full  account  of  its  habits  and  history,  you  may
consult  for  information  respecting  it  the  excellent  Fauna  Americana  of
my  esteemed  friend  Dr  Harlan  of  Philadelphia.


< 341  >


THE  IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER,

Picus  PRINCIPALIS^  Linn.

PLATE  LXVI.  Male  and  Female.

I HAVE  always  imagined,  that  in  the  plumage  of  the  beautiful  Ivory-
billed Woodpecker,  there  is  something  very  closely  allied  to  the  style  of
colouring  of  the  great  Vandyee.  The  broad  extent  of  its  dark  glossy  body
and  tail,  the  large  and  well-defined  white  markings  of  its  wings,  neck,  and
bill,  relieved  by  the  rich  carmine  of  the  pendent  «rest  of  the  male,  and
the  brilliant  yellow  of  its  eye,  have  never  failed  to  remind  me  of  some  of
the  boldest  and  noblest  productions  of  that  inimitable  artist’s  pencil.  So
strongly  indeed  have  these  thoughts  become  ingrafted  in  my  mind,  as  I
gradually  obtained  a more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Ivory-billed
Woodpecker,  that  whenever  I have  observed  one  of  these  birds  flying
from  one  tree  to  another,  I have  mentally  exclaimed,  There  goes  a
Vandyke  !”  This  notion  may  seem  strange,  perhaps  ludicrous,  to  you,
good  reader,  but  I relate  it  as  a fact,  and  whether  or  not  it  may  be  found
in  accordance  with  your  own  ideas,  after  you  have  inspected  the  plate  in
which  is  represented  this  great  chieftain  of  the  Woodpecker  tribe,  is  per-
haps of  little  consequence.

The  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker  confines  its  rambles  to  a comparatively
very  small  portion  of  the  United  States,  it  never  having  been  observed  in
the  Middle  States  within  the  memory  of  any  person  now  living  there.  In
fact,  in  no  portion  of  these  districts  does  the  nature  of  the  woods  appear
suitable  to  its  remarkable  habits.

Descending  the  Ohio,  we  meet  with  this  splendid  bird  for  the  first
time  near  the  confluence  of  that  beautiful  river  and  the  Mississippi ; after
which,  following  the  windings  of  the  latter,  either  downwards  toward  the
sea,  or  upwards  in  the  direction  of  the  Missouri,  we  frequently  observe  it.
On  the  Atlantic  coast.  North  Carolina  may  be  taken  as  the  limit  of  its
distribution,  although  now  and  then  an  individual  of  the  species  may  be
accidentally  seen  in  Maryland.  To  the  westward  of  the  Mississippi,  it  is
found  in  all  the  dense  forests  bordering  the  streams  which  empty  their
waters  into  that  majestic  river,  from  the  very  declivities  of  the  Rocky
Mountains.  The  lower  parts  of  the  Carolinas,  Georgia,  Allabama,  Loui-


342


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


siana,  and  Mississippi,  are,  however,  the  most  favourite  resorts  of  this
bird,  and  in  those  States  it  constantly  resides,  breeds,  and  passes  a life  of
peaceful  enjoyment,  finding  a profusion  of  food  in  all  the  deep,  dark,  and
gloomy  swamps  dispersed  throughout  them.

I wish,  kind  reader,  it  were  in  my  power  to  present  to  your  mind’s
eye  the  favourite  resort  of  the  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker.  Would  that  I
could  describe  the  extent  of  those  deep  morasses,  overshadowed  by  millions
of  gigantic  dark  cypresses,  spreading  their  sturdy  moss-covered  branches,
as  if  to  admonish  intruding  man  to  pause  and  reflect  on  the  many  diffi-
culties which  he  must  encounter,  should  he  persist  in  venturing  farther
into  their  almost  inaccessible  recesses,  extending  for  miles  before  him,
where  he  should  be  interrupted  by  huge  projecting  branches,  here  and
there  the  massy  trunk  of  a fallen  and  decaying  tree,  and  thousands  of
creeping  and  twining  plants  of  numberless  species  ! Would  that  I could
represent  to  you  the  dangerous  nature  of  the  ground,  its  oozing,  spongy,
and  miry  disposition,  although  covered  with  a beautiful  but  treacherous
carpeting,  composed  of  the  richest  mosses,  flags,  and  water-lilies,  no  soon-
er receiving  the  pressure  of  the  foot  than  it  yields  and  endangers  the  very
life  of  the  adventurer,  whilst  here  and  there,  as  he  approaches  an  open-
ing, that  proves  merely  a lake  of  black  muddy  water,  his  ear  is  assailed
by  the  dismal  croaking  of  innumerable  frogs,  the  hissing  of  serpents,  or
the  bellowing  of  alligators ! W ould  that  I could  give  you  an  idea  of  the
sultry  pestiferous  atmosphere  that  nearly  suffocates  the  intruder  during
the  meridian  heat  of  our  dogdays,  in  those  gloomy  and  horrible  swamps  !
But  the  attempt  to  picture  these  scenes  would  be  vain.  Nothing  short  of
ocular  demonstration  can  impress  any  adequate  idea  of  them.

How  often,  kind  reader,  have  I thought  of  the  difference  of  the  tasks
imposed  on  different  minds,  when,  travelling  in  countries  far  distant  from
those  where  birds  of  this  species  and  others  as  difficult  to  be  procured  are
now  and  then  offered  for  sale  in  the  form  of  dried  skins,  I have  heard  the
amateur  or  closet-naturalist  express  his  astonishment  that  half-a-crown
was  asked  by  the  person  who  had  perhaps  followed  the  bird  when  alive
over  miles  of  such  swamps,  and  after  procuring  it,  had  prepared  its  skin
in  the  best  manner,  and  carried  it  to  a market  thousands  of  miles  distant
from  the  spot  where  he  had  obtained  it.  I must  say,  that  it  has  at  least
grieved  me  as  much  as  when  I have  heard  some  idle  fop  complain  of  the
poverty  of  the  Gallery  of  the  Louvre,  where  he  had  paid  nothing,  or  when
I have  listened  to  the  same  infatuated  idler  lamenting  the  loss  of  his  shil-


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


343


ling,  as  he  sauntered  through  the  Exhibition  Rooms  of  the  Royal  Aca^
demy  of  London,  or  any  equally  valuable  repository  of  art.  But,  let  us
return  to  the  biography  of  the  famed  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  graceful  in  the  extreme,  although  seldom  pro-
longed to  more  than  a few  hundred  yards  at  a time,  unless  when  it  has  to
cross  a large  river,  which  it  does  in  deep  undulations,  opening  its  wings  at
first  to  their  full  extent,  and  nearly  closing  them  to  renew  the  propelling
impulse.  The  transit  from  one  tree  to  another,  even  should  the  distance
be  as  much  as  a hundred  yards,  is  performed  by  a single  sweep,  and  the
bird  appears  as  if  merely  swinging  itself  from  the  top  of  the  one  tree  to
that  of  the  other,  forming  an  elegantly  curved  line.  At  this  moment  all
the  beauty  of  the  plumage  is  exhibited,  and  strikes  the  beholder  with
pleasure.  It  never  utters  any  sound  whilst  on  wing,  unless  during  the
love  season ; but  at  all  other  times,  no  sooner  has  this  bird  alighted  than
its  remarkable  voice  is  heard,  at  almost  every  leap  which  it  makes,  whilst
ascending  against  the  upper  parts  of  the  trunk  of  a tree,  or  its  highest
branches.  Its  notes  are  clear,  loud,  and  yet  rather  plaintive.  They  are
heard  at  a considerable  distance,  perhaps  half  a mile,  and  resemble  the
false  high  note  of  a clarionet  They  are  usually  repeated  three  times  in
succession,  and  may  be  represented  by  the  monosyllable  'pmt^  pait,  paiU
These  are  heard  so  frequently  as  to  induce  me  to  say  that  the  bird  spends
few  minutes  of  the  day  without  uttering  them,  and  this  circumstance  leads
to  its  destruction,  which  is  aimed  at,  not  because  (as  is  supposed  by  some)
this  species  is  a destroyer  of  trees,  but  more  because  it  is  a beautiful  bird,
and  its  rich  scalp  attached  to  the  upper  mandible  forms  an  ornament  for
the  war-dress  of  most  of  our  Indians,  or  for  the  shot-pouch  of  our  squat-
ters and  hunters,  by  all  of  whom  the  bird  is  shot  merely  for  that  purpose.

Travellers  of  all  nations  are  also  fond  of  possessing  the  upper  part  of
the  head  and  the  bill  of  the  male,  and  I have  frequently  remarked,  that
on  a steam-boat’s  reaching  what  we  call  a xt)ooding-place^  the  strangers  were
very  apt  to  pay  a quarter  of  a dollar  for  two  or  three  heads  of  this
Woodpecker.  I have  seen  entire  belts  of  Indian  chiefs  closely  ornament-
ed with  the  tufts  and  bills  of  this  species,  and  have  observed  that  a great
value  is  frequently  put  upon  them.

The  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker  nestles  earlier  in  spring  than  any  other
species  of  its  tribe.  I have  observed  it  boring  a hole  for  that  purpose  in
the  beginning  of  March.  The  hole  is,  I believe,  always  made  in  the
trunk  of  a live  tree,  generally  an  ash  or  a hagberry,  and  is  at  a great


344


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


height.  The  birds  pay  great  regard  to  the  particular  situation  of  the
tree,  and  the  inclination  of  its  trunk ; first,  because  they  prefer  retire-
ment, and  again,  because  they  are  anxious  to  secure  the  aperture  against
the  access  of  water  during  beating  rains.  To  prevent  such  a calamity,
the  hole  is  generally  dug  immediately  under  the  junction  of  a large  branch
with  the  trunk.  It  is  first  bored  horizontally  for  a few  inches,  then  di-
rectly downwards,  and  not  in  a spiral  manner,  as  some  people  have  ima-
gined. According  to  circumstances,  this  cavity  is  more  or  less  deep,  be-
ing sometimes  not  more  than  ten  inches,  whilst  at  other  times  it  reaches
nearly  three  feet  downwards  into  the  core  of  the  tree.  I have  been  led
to  think  that  these  differences  result  from  the  more  or  less  immediate  ne-
cessity under  which  the  female  may  be  of  depositing  her  eggs,  and  again
have  thought  that  the  older  the  Woodpecker  is,  the  deeper  does  it  make
its  hole.  The  average  diameter  of  the  different  nests  which  I have  exa-
mined was  about  seven  inches  within,  although  the  entrance,  which  is
perfectly  round,  is  only  just  large  enough  to  admit  the  bird.

Both  birds  work  most  assiduously  at  this  excavation,  one  waiting  out-
side to  encourage  the  other,  whilst  it  is  engaged  in  digging,  and  when
the  latter  is  fatigued,  taking  its  place.  I have  approached  trees  whilst
these  W oodpeckers  were  thus  busily  employed  in  forming  their  nest,  and
by  resting  my  head  against  the  bark,  could  easily  distinguish  every  blow
given  by  the  bird,  I observed  that  in  two  instances,  when  the  Wood-
peckers saw  me  thus  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  in  which  they  were  digging
their  nest,  they  abandoned  it  for  ever.  For  the  first  brood  there  are  ge-
nerally six  eggs  They  are  deposited  on  a few  chips  at  the  bottom  of
the  hole,  and  are  of  a pure  white  colour.  The  young  are  seen  creeping
out  of  the  hole  about  a fortnight  before  they  venture  to  fly  to  any  other
tree.  The  second  brood  makes  its  appearance  about  the  15th  of  August.

In  Kentucky  and  Indiana,  the  Ivory-bills  seldom  raise  more  than  one
brood  in  the  season.  The  young  are  at  first  of  the  colour  of  the  female,
only  that  they  want  the  crest,  which,  however,  grows  rapidly,  and  to-
wards autumn,  particularly  in  birds  of  the  first  breed,  is  nearly  equal  to
that  of  the  mother.  The  males  have  then  a slight  line  - of  red  on  the
head,  and  do  not  attain  their  richness  of  plumage  until  spring,  or  their
full  size  until  the  second  year.  Indeed,  even  then,  a difference  is  easily
observed  between  them  and  individuals  which  arc  much  older.

The  food  of  this  species  consists  principally  of  beetles,  larvae,  and
large  grubs.  No  sooner,  however,  are  the  grapes  of  our  forests  ripe  than


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


‘345


they  are  eaten  by  the  Ivory-billed  Woodpecker  with  great  avidity.  1
have  seen  this  bird  hang  by  its  claws  to  the  vines,  in  the  position  so  of-
ten assumed  by  a Titmouse,  and,  reaching  downwards,  help  itself  to  a
bunch  of  grapes  with  much  apparent  pleasure.  Persimons  are  also
sought  for  by  them,  . 9s  soon  as  the  fruit  becomes  quite  mellow,  as  are
hagberries.  '

The  Ivory-bill  is  never  seen  attacking  the  corn,  or  the  fruit  of  the
orchards,  although  it  is  sometimes  observed  working  upon  and  chipping
off  the  bark  from  the  belted  trees  of  the  newly-cleared  plantations.  It  sel-
dom comes  near  the  ground,  but  prefers  at  all  times  the  tops  of  the  tall-
est trees.  Should  it,  however,  discover  the  half-standing  broken  shaft  of
a large  dead  and  rotten  tree,  it  attacks  it  in  such  a manner  as  nearly  to
demolish  it  in  the  course  of  a few  days.  I have  seen  the  remains  of  some
of  these  ancient  monarchs  of  our  forests  so  excavated,  and  that  so  singu-
larly, that  the  tottering  fragments  of  the  trunk  appeared  to  be  merely
supported  by  the  great  pile  of  chips  by  which  its  base  was  surrounded.
The  strength  of  this  Woodpecker  is  such,  that  I have  seen  it  detach
pieces  of  bark  seven  or  eight  inches  in  length  at  a single  blow  of  its  pow-
erful bill,  and  by  beginning  at  the  top  branch  of  a dead  tree,  tear  off  the
bark,  to  an  extent  of  twenty  or  thirty  feet,  in  the  course  of  a few  hours,
leaping  downwards  with  its  body  in  an  upward  position,  tossing  its  head
to  the  right  and  left,  or  leaning  it  against  the  bark  to  ascertain  the  pre-
cise spot  where  the  grubs  were  concealed,  and  immediately  after  renew-
ing its  blows  with  fresh  vigour,  all  the  while  sounding  its  loud  notes,  as
if  highly  delighted.  >

This  species  generally  moves  in  pairs,  after  the  young  have  left  their
parents.  The  female  is  always  the  most  clamorous  and  the  least  shy.
Their  mutual  attachment  is,  I believe,  continued  through  life.  Except-
ing when  digging  a hole  for  the  reception  of  their  eggs,  these  birds  sel-
dom, if  ever,  attack  living  trees,  for  any  other  purpose  than'  that  of  pro-
curing food,  in  doing  which  they  destroy  the  insects  that  would  otherl
wise  prove  injurious  to  the  trees.

I have  frequently  observed  the  male  and  female  retire  to  rest  for  the
night,  into  the  same  hole  in  which  they  had  long  before  reared  their
young.  This  generally  happens  a short  time  after  sunset.

When  wounded  and  brought  to  the  ground,  the  Ivory-bill  immediately
makes  for  the  nearest  tree,  and  ascends  it  with  great  rapidity  and  perse-


346


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


verance,  until  it  reaches  the  top  branches,  when  it  squats  and  hides,
generally  with  great  effect.  Whilst  ascending,  it  moves  spirally  round
the  tree,  utters  its  loud  pait^  pait^  pait^  at  almost  every  hop,  but  becomes
silent  the  moment  it  reaches  a place  where  it  conceives  itself  secure.
They  sometimes  cling  to  the  bark  with  their  claws  so  firmly,  as  to  re-
main cramped  to  the  spot  for  several  hours  after  death.  When  taken  by
the  hand,  which  is  rather  a hazardous  undertaking,  they  strike  with
great  violence,  and  inflict  very  severe  wounds  with  their  bill  as  well  as
claws,  which  are  extremely  sharp  and  strong.  On  such  occasions,  this
bird  utters  a mournful  and  very  piteovis  cry.

Picus  PRINCIPALIS,  Linn,  Sjst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  Yl^.—Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  225.

— Ch.  Bonaparte^  Sjnops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  44.

White-billed  Woodpecker,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  553.

Ivory-billed  Woodpecker,  Picus  principalis,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.

PI.  29,  Fig.  i.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  long,  straight,  strong,  polyhedral,  tapering,  compressed  and
truncated  at  the  tip ; mandibles  nearly  equal,  both  nearly  straight  in
their  dorsal  outline.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  partly  covered  by  recumbent
bristly  feathers.  Head  large.  Neck  long  and  slender.  Body  robust.
Feet  rather  short,  robust ; tarsus  strong,  scutellate  before,  scaly  on  the
sides ; two  toes  before  and  two  behind,  the  inner  hind  toe  shortest ;
claws  strong,  arched,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  glossy.  Feathers  of  the  head  elongated  and  erec-
tile. Wings  large,  the  third  and  fourth  quills  longest.  Tail  long,  gra-
duated, of  twelve  tapering  stiff  feathers  worn  to  a point  by  being  rubbed
against  the  bark  of  trees.

Bill  of  an  ivory-white,  whence  the  common  name  of  the  bird.  Iris
bright  yellow.  Feet  greyish  blue.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage
is  black,  with  violet  reflections,  more  glossy  above.  The  feathers  of  the
middle  and  hind  part  of  the  head  are  of  a vivid  deep  carmine.  A broad
band  of  white  runs  down  the  neck  and  back,  on  either  side,  commencing
narrow  under  the  ear,  and  terminating  with  the  scapulars.  The  five
outer  primaries  black,  the  rest  white  towards  the  end,  the  secondaries
wholly  white,  so  that  when  the  wings  are  closed,  the  posterior  part  of


IVORY-BILLED  WOODPECKER.


347


the  back  seems  white,  although  it  is  in  reality  black.  Lateral  tail-fea-
thers with  a spot  of  white  near  the  tip  of  each  web.

I.ength  21  inches,  extent  of  Avings  30  ; bill  along  the  back  2^,  along
the  gap  3 ; tarsus  2.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXVI.  Fig.  2,  3.

The  female  resembles  the  male  in  colouring,  but  wants  the  vivid
patch  on  the  crest,  which  is  wholly  black.


( 348  )


THE  RED-WINGED  STARLING,  OR  MARSH
BLACKBIRD.

Icterus  phcenjceus,  Daud.

PLATE  LXVII.  Male  in  different  states,  Female  and  Young.

I F the  name  of  Starling  has  been  given  to  this  well-known  species,
with  the  view  of  assimilating  it  to  the  European  bird  of  that  name,  it  can
only  have  been  on  account  of  the  numbers  of  individuals  that  associate
together,  for  in  every  other  respect  it  is  as  distinct  from  the  true  Starlings
as  a Common  Crow.'  But  without  speaking  particularly  of  generic  or
specific  affinities — a task  which  I reserve  for  another  occasion — I shall
here  content  myself  with  giving  you,  kind  reader,  an  account  of  the
habits  of  this  bird.

The  Marsh  Blackbird  is  so  well  known  as  being  a bird  of  the  most
nefarious  propensities,  that  in  the  United  States  one  can  hardly  mention  its
name,  without  hearing  such  an  account  of  its  pilferings  as  might  induce  the
young  student  of  nature  to  conceive  that  it  had  been  created  for  the  pur-
pose of  annoying  the  farmer.  That  it  destroys  an  astonishing  quantity
of  corn,  rice,  and  other  kinds  of  grain,  cannot  be  denied ; but  that  before
it  commences  its  ravages,  it  has  proved  highly  serviceable  to  the  crops,  is
equally  certain.

As  soon  as  spring  makes  its  appearance,  almost  all  the  Redwings
leave  the  Southern  States,  in  small  detached  and  straggling  flocks,  the
males  leading  the  way  in  full  song,  as  if  to  invite  the  females  to  follow.
Prodigious  numbers  make  their  appearance  in  the  Eastern  Districts,  as
winter  recedes,  and  are  often  seen  while  piles  of  drifted  snow  still  remain
along  the  roads,  under  shelter  of  the  fences.  They  frequently  alight  on
trees  of  moderate  size,  spread  their  tail,  swell  out  their  plumage,  and  utter
their  clear  and  not  unmusical  notes,  particularly  in  the  early  morning,
before  their  departure  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  places  in  which
they  have  roosted ; for  their  migrations,  you  must  know,  are  performed
entirely  during  the  day.

Their  food  at  this  season  is  almost  exclusively  composed  of  grubs,
worms,  caterpillars,  and  different  sorts  of  coleopterous  insects,  which  they


MARSH  BLACKBIRD.


349^


procure  by  searching  with  great  industry,  in  the  meadowsj  the  orchards,
or  the  newly  ploughed  fields,  walking  with  a graceful  step,  but  much
quicker  than  either  of  their  relatives,  the  Purple  Grakle  or  the  Boat-tail
of  the  Southern  States.  The  millions  of  insects  which  the  Red-wings
destroy  at  this  early  season,  are,  in  my  opinion,  a full  equivalent  for  the
corn  which  they  eat  at  another  period ; and  for  this  reason,  the  farmers
do  not  molest  them  in  spring,  when  they  resort  to  the  fields  in  immense
numbers.  They  then  follow  the  ploughman,  in  company  with  the  Crow
Blackbird,  and  as  if  aware  of  the  benefit  which  they  are  conferring,  do
not  seem  to  regard  him  with  apprehension.

The  females  being  all  arrived,  the  pairing  season  at  once  commences.
Several  males  are  seen  flying  in  pursuit  of  one,  until,  becoming  fatigued,
she  alights,  receives  the  addresses  of  her  suitors,  and  soon  makes  a choice
that  establishes  her  the  consort  of  one  of  them.  The  happy  couple”
immediately  retire  from  the  view  of  the  crowds  around  them,  and  seek
along  the  margins  of  some  sequestered  pond  or  damp  meadow,  for  a
place  in  which  to  form  their  nest.  An  Alder  bush  or  a thick  tuft  of
rank  weeds  answer  equally  well,  and  in  such  places  a quantity  of  coarse
dried  weeds  is  deposited  by  them,  to  form  the  exterior  of  the  fabric  which
is  to  receive  the  eggs.  The  nest  is  lined  with  fine  grasses,  and,  in  some
instances,  with  horse-hair.  The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six  in  number,  of
a regular  oval  form,  light  blue,  sparsely  spotted  with  dusky.

Now  is  the  time,  good-natured  reader,  to  see  and  admire  the  courage
and  fidelity  of  the  male,  whilst  assiduously  watching  over  his  beloved
mate.  He  dives  headlong  towards  every  intruder  that  approaches  his
nest,  vociferating  his  fears  and  maledictions  with  great  vehemence,  pass-
ing at  times  within  a few  yards  of  the  person  who  has  disturbed  his  peace,
or  alighting  on  a twig  close  to  his  nest,  and  uttering  a plaintive  note,
which  might  well  prevent  any  other  than  a mischievous  person  from  in-
terfering with  the  hopes  and  happiness  of  the  mated  Redwings.

The  eggs  are  hatched,  and  the  first  brood  has  taken  flight.  The
young  soon  after  associate  with  thousands  of  other  striplings,  and  shift
for  themselves,  whilst  the  parent  birds  raise  a second  family.  The  first
brood  comes  abroad  about  the  beginning  of  June,  the  second  in  the  be-
ginning of  August.  At  this  latter  period,  the  corn  in  the  Middle  Dis-
tricts has  already  acquired  considerable  consistence,  and  the  congregated
Redwings  fall  upon  the  fields  in  such  astonishing  numbers  as  to  seem
capable  of  completely  veiling  them  under  the  shade  of  their  wings.  The


350


MARSH  BLACKBIRD.


husbandman,  anxious  to  preserve  as  much  of  his  corn  as  he  can,  for  his
own  use  or  for  market,  pursues  every  possible  method  of  annoyance  or
destruction.  But  his  ingenuity  is  almost  exerted  in  vain.  The  Red-
wings heed  not  his  efforts  further  than  to  remove,  after  each  report  of  his
gun,  from  one  portion  of  the  field  to  another.  All  the  scarecrows  that
he  may  choose  to  place  about  his  grounds  are  merely  regarded  by  the
birds  as  so  many  observatories,  on  which  they  occasionally  alight.

The  corn  becoming  too  hard  for  their  bills,  they  now  leave  the  fields,
and  resort  to  the  meadows  and  the  margins  of  streams  thickly  overgrown
with  the  Wild  Oat  and  other  grasses,  upon  the  seeds  of  which  they  feed
with  great  avidity  during  the  autumnal  and  winter  months.  They  then
associate  partially  with  the  Reed  Birds,  Grakles,  and  Cow-pen  Buntings,
and  are  seen  to  move  from  the  Eastern  to  the  Southern  Districts,  in  such
immense  and  thick  flocks  as  almost  to  cloud  the  air.

The  havock  made  amongst  them  is  scarcely  credible.  I have  heard
that  upwards  of  fifty  have  been  killed  at  a shot,  and  am  the  more  inclined
to  believe  such  accounts  that  I have  myself  shot  hundreds  in  the  course
of  an  afternoon,  killing  from  ten  to  fifteen  at  every  discharge.  Whilst
travelling  in  different  parts  of  the  Southern  States,  during  the  latter  part
of  autumn,  I have  often  seen  the  fences,  trees  and  fields  so  strewed  with
these  birds,  as  to  make  me  believe  their  number  fully  equal  to  that  of  the
falling  leaves  of  the  trees  in  the  places  traversed  by  me.

Towards  evening  they  alight  in  the  marshes  by  millions,  in  compact
bodies,  settle  on  the  reeds  and  rushes  close  above  the  water,  and  remain
during  the  night,  unless  disturbed  by  the  gunners.  When  this  happens,
they  rise  all  of  a sudden,  and  perform  various  evolutions  in  the  air,  now
gliding  low  over  the  rushes,  and  again  wheeling  high  above  them,  pre-
serving silence  for  a while,  but  finally  diving  suddenly  to  the  spot  for-
merly chosen,  and  commencing  a general  chuckling  noise,  after  which
they  remain  quiet  during  the  rest  of  the  night.

Different  species  of  Hawks  derive  their  principal  sustenance  from
them  at  this  season*  The  Pigeon  Hawk  is  an  adept  in  picking  the  fattest
from  their  crowded  flocks ; and  while  they  are  in  the  Southern  States,
where  millions  of  them  spend  the  winter,  the  Hen-harriers  are  seen  con-
tinually hovering  over  them,  and  picking  up  the  stragglers.

The  Marsh  Blackbird  is  easily  kept  in  confinement,  and  sings  there
with  as  much  vigour  as  when  at  full  liberty.  It  is  kept  in  good  order
with  rice,  wheat,  or  any  other  small  grain.  Attempts  have  been  made


MARSH  BLACKBIRD.


351


to  induce  these  birds  to  breed  in  confinement,  but  in  as  far  as  I have
been  able  to  ascertain,  have  failed.  As  an  article  of  food,  they  are  little
better  than  the  Starling  of  Europe,  or  the  Crow  Blackbird  of  the  United
States,  although  many  are  eaten  and  thought  good  by  the  country  people,
who  make  pot-pies  of  them.

I have  represented  a male  and  a female  in  the  adult  statey  a male  in
the  first  spring,  and  a young  bird,  and  have  placed  them  on  the  branch
of  a Water  Maple,  these  birds  being  fond  of  alighting  on  trees  of  that
kind,  in  early  spring,  to  pick  up  the  insects  that  frequent  the  blossoms.
This  tree  is  found  dispersed  throughout  the  United  States,  and  grows,  as
its  name  indicates,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  water;  Its  wood  is  soft,
and  is  hardly  used  for  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  being  converted
into  common  domestic  utensils.


Icterus  phceniceus,  Ch.  Bonapartej  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  62.

Oriolus  ph(ENiceus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  voL  i.  p.  161. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  178.

Red-winged  Starling,  Sturnus  pr^edatorius,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  30.

PI.  30.  Male  and  Female.

Red-wunged  Oriole,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  428.

Male  in  complete  plumage.  Plate  LXVII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  conical,  rather  slender,  longish,  compressed,  nearly  straight,  very
acute,  with  inflected  acute  margins ; upper  mandible  obtuse  above,  en-
croaching „ on  the  forehead,  lower  broadly  obtuse  beneath;  gapJine  de-
flected at  the  base.  Nostrils  oval,  basal.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary
size.  Body  full.  Feet  of  ordinary  length  ; tarsus  a little  longer  than
the  middle  toe ; inner  toe  little  shorter  than  the  outer;  claws  arched,
acute,  compressed,  that  of  the  hind  toe  twice  the  size  of  the  rest

Plumage  soft,  blended,  glossy.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  second
and  third  quills  longest.  Tail  rather  long,  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded
feathers.

Bill  and  feet  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  The  general  colour  of  the
plumage  is  glossy  black ; the  lesser  wing-coverts  scarlet,  their  lower  row
bright  yellow.

Length  9 inches,  extent  of  wings  14  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  1.


Male,  the  first  spring.  Plate  LXVII.  Fig.


352


MARSH  BLACKBIRD.


Bill,  eyes  and  feet,  as  in  the  adult  male.  The  general  colour  of  the
upper  parts  is  dark-brown,  the  feathers  edged  with  lighter.  The  shoulder
is  scarlet,  but  of  a lighter  tint ; the  second  row  of  wing-coverts  broadly
margined  with  bro wnish- white ; the  larger  coverts  and  quills  margined
with  reddish-white.  Quills  and  tail  brownish-black.  The  under  parts
are  dark  greyish-brown,  spotted  with  black.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXVII.  Fig.  3.

The  adult  female  resembles  the  male  of  the  first  spring  in  colouring.
The  bill  is  lighter ; there  is  a broad  streak  of  pale  brown  from  the  bill
over  each  eye  ; the  wing-coverts  are  less  broadly  margined,  and  the  lesser
wing-coverts  are  merely  tinged  with  red.  The  size  is  greatly  inferior  to
that  of  the  adult  male,  the  length  being  only  7g  inches.

Young  Bird.  Plate  LXVII.  Fig.  4.

The  young  is  similar  to  the  female,  lighter  on  the  cheeks  and  throat,
and  having  merely  a slight  tinge  of  red  on  the  lesser  wing-coverts.


The  Red  Maple  or  Swamp  Maple.

Acer  rubrum,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol,  iv.  p.  984*.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  266.

Mich.  Abr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  210,  PI.  14- Octandria  Mono-

GYNiA,  Linn.  Acerina:,  Juss.

This  species  having  been  represented  in  Plate  LXVII  in  seed,  has
already  been  described  at  p.  287.


2


( 353  )


THE  REPUBLICAN  OR  CLIFF  SWALLOW.

Hirundo  fulvj,  Vieill.

PLATE  LXVIII.  Male,  Female,  and  Nests.

In  the  spring  of  1815,  I for  the  first  time  saw  a few  individuals  of  this
species  at  Henderson,  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  a hundred  and  twenty
miles  below  the  Falls  of  that  river.  It  was  an  excessively  cold  morning,
and  nearly  all  were  killed  by  the  severity  of  the  weather.  I drew  up  a
description  at  the  time,  naming  the  species  Hirundo  repuhlicana^  the
Republican  Swallow,  in  allusion  to  the  mode  in  which  the  individuals  be-
longing to  it  associate,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  their  nests  and  rearing
their  young.  Unfortunately,  through  the  carelessness  of  my  assistant,
the  specimens  were  lost,  and  I despaired  for  years  of  meeting  with
others.

In  the  year  1819,  my  hopes  were  revived  by  Mr  Robert  Best,
curator  of  the  Western  Cincinnati  Museum,  who  informed  me  that  a
strange  species  of  bird  had  made  its  appearance  in  the  neighbourhood,
building  nests  in  clusters,  affixed  to  the  walls.  In  consequence  of  this
information,  I immediately  crossed  the  Ohio  to  New  Port,  in  Kentucky,
where  he  had  seen  many  nests  the  preceding  season  ; and  no  sooner  were
we  landed  than  the  chirruping  of  my  long-lost  little  strangers  saluted  my
ear.  Numbers  of  them  were  busily  engaged  in  repairing  the  damage
done  to  their  nests  by  the  storms  of  the  preceding  winter.

Major  Oldham  of  the  United  States’  Army,  then  commandant  of  the
garrison,  politely  offered  us  the  means  of  examining  the  settlement  of
these  birds,  attached  to  the  walls  of  the  building  under  his  charge.  He
informed  us,  that,  in  1815,  he  first  saw  a few  of  them  working  against  the
wall  of  the  house,  immediately  under  the  eaves  and  cornice ; that  their
work  was  carried  on  rapidly  and  peaceably,  and  that  as  soon  as  the
young  were  able  to  travel,  they  all  departed.  Since  that  period,  they
had  returned  every  spring,  and  then  amounted  to  several  hundreds.
They  usually  appeared  about  the  lOth  of  April,  and  immediately  began
their  work,  which  was  at  that  moment,  it  being  then  the  20th  of  that
month,  going  on  in  a regular  manner,  against  the  walls  of  the  arsenal.
They  had  about  fifty  nests  quite  finished^  and  others  in  progress.


z


354


REPUBLICAN  OR  CLIFF  SWALLOW.


About  day-break  they  flew  down  to  the  shore  of  the  river,  one  hun-
dred yards  distant,  for  the  muddy  sand  of  which  the  nests  were  con-
structed, and  worked  with  great  assiduity  until  near  the  middle  of  the
day,  as  if  aware  that  the  heat  of  the  sun  was  necessary  to  dry  and  har-
den their  moist  tenements.  They  then  ceased  from  labour  for  a few
hours,  amused  themselves  by  performing  aerial  evolutions,  courted  and
caressed  their  mates  with  much  affection,  and  snapped  at  flies  and  other
insects  on  the  wing.  They  often  examined  their  nests  to  see  if  they  were
sufficiently  dry,  and  as  soon  as  these  appeared  to  have  acquired  the  re-
quisite firmness,  they  renewed  their  labours.  Until  the  females  began  to
sit,  they  all  roosted  in  the  hollow  limbs  of  the  Sycamores  [Platanus  occi-
dentalis)  growing  on  the  banks  of  the  Licking  River,  but  when  incuba-
tion commenced,  the  males  alone  resorted  to  the  trees.  A second  party
arrived,  and  were  so  hard  pressed  for  time,  that  they  betook  themselves
to  the  holes  in  the  wall,  where  bricks  had  been  left  out  for  the  scaffold-
ing. These  they  fitted  with  projecting  necks,  similar  to  those  of  the
complete  nests  of  the  others.  Their  eggs  were  deposited  on  a few  bits  of
straw,  and  great  caution  was  necessary  in  attempting  to  procure  them,  as
the  slightest  touch  crumbled  their  frail  tenement  into  dust.  By  means  of
a table  spoon,  I was  enabled  to  procure  many  of  them.  Each  nest  con-
tained four  eggs,  which  were  white,  with  dusky  spots.  Only  one  brood
' is  raised  in  a season.  The  energy  with  which  they  defended  their  nests
was  truly  astonishing.  Although  I had  taken  the  precaution  to  visit
them  at  sun-set,  when  I supposed  they  would  all  have  been  on  the  Syca-
mores, yet  a single  female  happened  to  be  sitting,  and  gave  the  alarm,
which  immediately  called  out  the  whole  tribe.  They  snapped  at  my  hat,
body  and  legs,  passed  between  me  and  the  nests,  within  an  inch  of  my
face,  twittering  their  rage  and  sorrow.  They  continued  their  attacks  as
I descended,  and  accompanied  me  for  some  distance.  Their  note  may  be
perfectly  imitated  by  rubbing  a cork  damped  with  spirit  against  the  neck
of  a bottle.

A third  party  arrived  a few  days  after,  and  immediately  commenced
building.  In  one  week  they  had  completed  their  operations,  and  at  the
end  of  that  time  thirty  nests  hung  clustered  like  so  many  gourds,  each
having  a neck  two  inches  long.  On  the  27th  July,  the  young  \^ere  able
to  follow  their  parents.  They  all  exhibited  the  white  frontlet,  and  were
scarcely  distinguishable  in  any  part  of  their  plumage  from  the  old  birds.
On  they  1st  of  August,  they  all  assembled  near  their  nests,  mounted


REPUBLICAN  OR  CLIFF  SWALLOW.


355


about  three  hundred  feet  in  the  air,  and  at  ten  in  the  morning  took  their
departure,  flying  in  a loose  body,  in  a direction  due  north.  They  re-
turned the  same  evening  about  dusk,  and  continued  these  excursions,  no
doubt  to  exercise  their  powers,  until  the  third,  when,  uttering  a farewell
cry,  they  shaped  the  same  course  at  the  same  hour,  and  finally  disap-
peared. Shortly  after  their  departure,  I was  informed  that  several  hun-
dreds of  their  nests  were  attached  to  the  Court-House  at  the  mouth  of
the  Kentucky  River.  They  had  commenced  building  them  in  1815.  A
person  likewise  informed  me,  that,  along  the  cliff’s  of  the  Kentucky,  he
had  seen  many  bunches,  as  he  termed  them,  of  these  nests  attached  to  the
naked  shelving  rocks  overhanging  that  river.

Being  extremely  desirous  of  settling  the  long-agitated  question  re-
specting the  migration  or  supposed  torpidity  of  Swallows,  I embraced
every  opportunity  of  examining  their  habits,  carefully  noted  their  arrival
and  disappearance,  and  recorded  every  fact  connected  with  their  history.
After  some  years  of  constant  observation  and  reflection,  I remarked  that
among  all  the  species  of  migratory  birds,  those  that  remove  farthest  from
us,  depart  sooner  than  those  which  retire  only  to  the  confines  of  the
United  States  ; and,  by  a parity  of  reasoning,  those  that  remain  later  re-
turn earlier  in  the  spring.  These  remarks  were  confirmed,  as  I advanced
towards  the  south-west  on  the  approach  of  winter,  for  I there  found  num-
bers of  Warblers,  Thrushes,  &c.  in  full  feather  and  song.  It  was  also
remarked  that  the  Hirundo  viridis  of  Wilson  (called  by  the  French  of
Lower  Louisiana,  Le  Petit  Martinet  d ventre  hlanc ) remained  about  the
City  of  New  Orleans  later  than  any  other  Swallow.  As  immense  num-
bers of  them  were  seen  during  the  month  of  November,  I kept  a diary  of
the  temperature  from  the  third  of  that  month,  until  the  arrival  of  Hirundo
purpurea.  The  following  notes  are  taken  from  my  journal,  and  as  I had
excellent  opportunities,  during  a residence  of  many  years  in  that  country,  of
visiting  the  lakes  to  which  these  Swallows  were  said  to  resort,  during  the
transient  frosts,  I present  them  with  confidence.

November  11. — Weather  very  sharp,  with  a heavy  white  frost.
Swallows  in  abundance  during  the  whole  day.  On  inquiring  of  the  in-
habitants if  this  was  a usual  occurrence,  I was  answered  in  the  affirma-
tive by  all  the  French  and  Spaniards.  From  this  date  to  the  22d,  the
thermometer  averaged  65°,  the  weather  generally  a drizzly  fog.  Swallows
playing  over  the  city  in  thousands.

z 2


356


BEPUBLICAN  OR  CLIFF  SWALLOW.


November  25. — Thermometer  this  morning  at  30°.  Ice  in  New
Orleans  a quarter  of  an  inch  thick  The  Swallows  resorted  to  the  lee  of
the  Cypress  Swamp  in  the  rear  of  the  city.  Thousands  were  flying  in
different  flocks.  Fourteen  were  killed  at  a single  shot,  all  in  perfect
plumage,  and  very  fat.  The  markets  were  abundantly  supplied  with
these  tender,  juicy,  and  delicious  birds.  Saw  Swallows  every  day,  but
remarked  them  more  plentiful  the  stronger  the  breeze  blew  from  the  sea.

December  20. — The  weather  continues  much  the  same.  Eoggy
and  drizzly  mist.  Thermometer  averaging  63°.

January  14. — Thermometer  42°.  Weather  continues  the  same.  My
little  favourites  constantly  in  view.

January  28. — Thermometer  at  40®.  Having  seen  the  Hirundo  viri-
dis  continually,  and  the  H.  purjiurea  or  Purple  Martin  beginning  to
appear,  I discontinued  my  observations.

During  the  whole  winter  many  of  them  retired  to  the  holes  about  the
houses,  but  the  greater  number  resorted  to  the  lakes,  and  spent  the  night
among  the  branches  of  Myrica  cerifera^  the  drier,  as  it  is  termed  by
the  French  settlers.

About  sunset  they  began  to  flock  together,  calling  to  each  other  for
that  purpose,  and  in  a short  time  presented  the  appearance  of  clouds
moving  towards  the  lakes,  or  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  as  the  wea-
ther and  wind  suited.  Their  aerial  evolutions  before  they  alight,  are
truly  beautiful.  They  appear  at  first  as  if  reconnoitring  the  place,
when,  suddenly  throwing  themselves  into  a vortex  of  apparent  confusion,
they  descend  spirally  with  astonishing  quickness,  and  very  much  resemble
a tromhe  or  water-spout.  When  within  a few  feet  of  the  driers,  they
disperse  in  all  directions,  and  settle  in  a few  moments.  Their  twittering,
and  the  motions  of  their  wings,  are,  however,  heard  during  the  whole
night.  As  soon  as  the  day  begins  to  dawn,  they  rise,  flying  low  over  the
lakes,  almost  touching  the  water  for  some  time,  and  then  rising,  gra-
dually move  off*  in  search  of  food,  separating  in  different  directions.
The  hunters  who  resort  to  these  places  destroy  great  numbers  of  them,
by  knocking  them  down  with  light  paddles,  used  in  propelling  their
canoes.


REPUBLICAN  OR  CLIFF  SWALLOW.


357


Hirundo  fulva,  Vieill.  Ois.  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  i.  p.  62.  PI.  32. — Ch,  Bonaparte
Sjnops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  64.

Fulvous  or  Cliff.Swallow,  Hirundo  fulva,  Ch,  Bonaparte^  Amer-  Ornith,
vol.  i.  p.  63.  PI.  7*  .fig*  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  feeble,  much  depressed  and  very  broad  at  the  base,  com-
pressed towards  the  tip ; upper  mandible  nearly  straight ; gap  as  wide
as  the  head,  and  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,
roundish.  Head  of  ordinary  size.  Neck  short.  Body  rather'  slender.
Feet  very  short  and  feeble ; tarsus  and  toes  scutellate  anteriorly,  lateral
toes  nearly  equal,  the  outer  united  to  the  second  joint ; claws  short,  weak,
arched,  rather  obtuse.

Plumage  silky,  shining,  and  blended  ; wings  very  long  and  slender,
the  first  quill  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  the  same  length  as  the
wings,  even,  of  twelve  straight,  narrowish,  rather  abrupt  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  dusky.  Upper  part  of  the  head,  the
back,  and  the  lesser  wing-coverts  black,  with  violet  reflections.  A line
of  black  across  the  anterior  part  of  the  forehead,  extending  over  the  eyes.
Forehead  marked  with  a semilunar  band  of  white,  slightly  tinged  with
red.  Chin,  throat,  and  sides  of  the  head  deep  brownish-red,  the  band  of
each  side  narrowing  and  meeting  the  other  at  the  back  of  the  neck.
Posterior  part  of  the  back  and  upper  tail-coverts  light  yellowish-red.
Breast  pale  reddish,  the  rest  of  the  under  parts  greyish-white,  tinged
with  red.  Wings  and  tail  brownish-black.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  12 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  middle  toe  a little  more  than  J.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  in  external  appearance  differs  in  no  respect . from  the
male.


( 358  )


THE  BAY-BREA.STED  WARBLER.

Sylvia  castanea^  Wils.

PLATE  LXIX.  Male  and  Female.

This  species  does  not  breed  in  the  United  States,  or  if  it  does,  must
spend  the  summer  in  some  of  the  most  remote  north-western  districts,  so
that  I have  not  been  able  to  discover  its  principal  abode.  It  merely
passes  through  the  better  known  portions  of  the  Union,  where  it  remains
for  a very  short  time.  There  is  something  so  very  uncommon  in  its  ap-
pearance in  different  States,  that  I cannot  refrain  from  briefly  mentioning
it.  It  is  sometimes  found  in  Pennsylvania,  or  the  State  of  New  York,  as
well  as  in  New  Jersey,  as  early  as  the  beginning  of  April,  but  is  only
seen  there  for  a few  days.  I have  shot  some  individuals  at  such  times,
when  I observed  them  employed  in  searching  for  insects  and  larvae  along
the  fences  bordering  our  fields.  At  other  times  I have  shot  them  late
in  June,  in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  when  the  cotton-plant  was  covered
with  blossoms,  amongst  which  they  were  busily  searching  for  food.  The
Bay-breasted  Warbler,  however,  has  so  far  eluded  my  inquiries,  that  I
am  unable  to  give  any  further  account  of  its  habits.

Sylvia  castanea,  C/s.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  80.

Bay -BREASTED  Warbler,  Sylvia  castanea,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  97«
PI.  14,  fig.  4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  as
deep  as  broad  at  the  base,  with  sharp  edges.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,  half
concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  of  ordinary  size,  neck  short,  body
ovate.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender ; tarsus  compressed,  covered  an-
teriorly with  a few  long  scutella,  acute  behind,  a little  longer  than  the
middle  toe  ; toes  free,  scutellate  above ; claws  arched,  slender,  compres-
sed, acute.

Plumage  loose,  tufty.  Wings  rather  long,  the  second  quill  longest.
Tail  of  ordinary  length,  slightly  emarginate,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.


BAY-BREASTED  WARBLER.


359


Bill  blackish  above,  greyish-blue  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  greyish-
blue,  upper  part  of  the  head,  the  fore-neck,  anterior  part  of  the  breast,
and  the  sides,  bright  chestnut.  Forehead  and  cheeks,  including  a small
space  over  the  eye,  deep  black,  behind  which  is  a transverse  broad  band
of  yellowish-white  on  the  sides  of  the  neck.  Back  and  lesser  wing-
coverts  yellowish-grey,  spotted  with  blackish-brown.  Larger  coverts,
quills  and  tail,  blackish-brown,  edged  with  light  bluish- grey.  Middle
of  the  breast,  abdomen,  and  under  tail- coverts,  white,  tinged  with  reddish.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  11  ; bill  along  the  ridge  nearly
along  the  gap  > tarsus  f , middle  toe  j.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  somewhat  less.  The  colours  are  similar  to  those  of  the
male,  and  have  the  same  distribution,  but  are  much  fainter,  especially
the  chestnut  of  the  head  and  under  parts,  which  are  converted  into  light
brownish-red.


The  Highland  Cotton-plant.

GossiriuM  HERBACEU5I,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  ii.  p.  462. — Monadelphia  Polyan-
DRiA,  Linn.  Malvacea:,  Juss.


This  species,  commonly  known  in  America,  where  it  is  cultivated,
under  the  name  of  Highland  Cotton^  is  distinguished  by  its  five-lobed
leaves  and  herbaceous  stem.


( 360  )


HENSLOW  S BUNTING.

Emberiza  Henslowii.

PLATE  LXX.

I OBTAINED  the  bird  represented  in  this  plate  opposite  Cincinnati,  in
the  State  of  Kentucky,  in  the  year  1820,  whilst  in  the  company  of  Mr
Robert  Best,  then  Curator  of  the  Western  Museum.  It  was  on  the
ground,  amongst  tall  grass,  and  exhibited  the  usual  habits  of  its  tribe.
Perceiving  it  to  be  different  from  any  which  I had  seen,  I immediately
shot  it,  and  the  same  day  made  an  accurate  drawing  of  it.

In  naming  it  after  the  Rev.  Professor  Henslow  of  Cambridge,  a
gentleman  so  well  known  to  the  scientific  world,  and  who  has  permitted
me  so  to  designate  it,  my  object  has  been  to  manifest  my  gratitude  for  the
many  kind  attentions  which  he  has  shewn  towards  me.  Its  history  and
habits  are  unknown.  In  appearance  it  differs  so  little  from  the  Buntings,
that,  for  the  present,  I shall  refer  it  to  that  genus.


Emberiza  Henslowii.

Plate  LXX.

Bill  short,  robust,  conical,  acute;  upper  mandible  straight  in  the
dorsal  outline,  angular,  and  encroaching  a little  on  the  forehead,  broader
than  the  lower,  acute  and  inflected  on  the  edges ; lower  mandible  also  in-
flected at  the  edges ; the  gap-line  deflected  at  the  base.  Head  rather
large,  neck  short,  body  full.  Feet  of  ordinary  length  ; tarsus  scutellate
before,  acute  behind ; toes  free,  scutellate  above  ; claws  slightly  arched,
compressed,  acute,  that  of  the  hind  toe  elongated.

Plumage  compact,  slightly  glossed.  Wings  short,  curved,  the  third
and  fourth  quills  longest,  the  secondaries  nearly  as  long  as  the  primaries,
when  the  wing  is  closed.  Tail  short,  graduated  and  deeply  notched,  of
twelve  rather  narrow  very  acute  feathers.

Bill  flesh-colour,  darker  above.  Iris  dark-brown.  Feet  flesh-colour.
The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  pale  brown,  the  central  part  of
the  feathers  brownish-black,  the  margins  of  those  of  the  back  bright  red.
Secondary  coverts  yellowish-red  on  the  outer  webs.  Quills  dark  brown.


HENSLOW’S  BUNTING.


361


externally  margined  with  light  yellowish-brown.  Tail-feathers  dusky,
margined  externally  with  yellowish-brown.  The  under  parts  pale  yel-
lowish-grey, the  breast,  sides,  and  throat,  spotted  with  brownish-black.

Length  5 inches,  bill  along  the  ridge  |,  along  the  gap  nearly  J ;
tarsus  I,  middle  toe  f , hind  toe  the  same.


The  Indian  Pink-root  or  Worm-grass.

Spigelia  marilandica,  Pursh^  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  139.  Fig.  1.  of  the  Plate

Pentandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Apocinea:,  Juss.

Stem  tetragonal,  all  the  leaves  opposite,  ovate,  acuminate.  Flowers
rich  carmine,  in  a terminal  spike.  This  plant  is  perennial,  flowers  in  the
summer  months,  and  grows  in  rich  soil  by  the  margins  of  woods,  in  the
Middle  States.  The  roots  are  used  as  a vermifuge.


Phlox  aristata,  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i p.  130.  Fig.  2.  of  the  Plate.— Pentan-
dria Monogynia,  Linn.  Polemonia,  Juss.

This  species  is  characterized  by  its  erect,  feeble  stem,  its  linear-lan-
ceolate leaves,  lax  fastigiate  panicle,  twin  pedicels,  oboval  segments  of  the
corolla,  pubescent  curved  tube,  and  long  subulate  calycine  teeth.  The
corolla  is  rose-coloured,  but  varies  in  tint,  being  sometimes  nearly  white,
and  sometimes  deep  red.  It  is  perennial,  flowers  in  the  summer  months,
and  occurs  in  the  Middle  and  Atlantic  States.


( 362  )


NIAGARA.

After  wandering  on  some  of  our  great  lakes  for  many  months,  I
bent  my  course  towards  the  celebrated  Falls  of  Niagara,  being  desirous
of  taking  a sketch  of  them.  This  was  not  my  first  visit  to  them,  and  I
hoped  it  should  not  be  the  last.

Artists  (I  know  not  if  I can  be  called  one)  too  often  imagine  that
what  they  produce  must  be  excellent,  and  with  that  foolish  idea  go  on
spoiling  much  paper  and  canvas,  when  their  time  might  have  been  better
employed  in  a different  manner.  But  digressions  aside, — I directed  my
steps  towards  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  with  the  view  of  representing  them
on  paper,  for  the  amusement  of  my  family.

Returning  as  I then  was  from  a tedious  journey,  and  possessing  little
more  than  some  drawings  of  rare  birds  and  plants,  I reached  the  tavern
at  Niagara  Falls  in  such  plight,  as  might  have  deterred  many  an  indivi-
dual from  obtruding  himself  upon  a circle  of  well-clad  and  perhaps  well-
bred  society.  Months  had  passed  since  the  last  of  my  linen  had  been
taken  from  my  body,  and  used  to  clean  that  useful  companion,  my  gun.
I was  in  fact  covered  just  like  one  of  the  poorer  class  of  Indians,  and
was  rendered  even  more  disagreeable  to  the  eye  of  civilized  man,  by  not
having,  like  them,  plucked  my  beard,  or  trimmed  my  hair  in  any  way.
Had  Hogarth  been  living,  and  there  when  I arrived,  he  could  not  have
found  a fitter  subject  for  a Robinson  Crusoe.  My  beard  covered  my
neck  in  front,  my  hair  fell  much  lower  at  my  back,  the  leather  dress
which  I wore  had  for  months  stood  in  need  of  repair,  a large  knife  hung
at  my  side,  a rusty  tin-box  containing  my  drawings  and  colours,  and,
wrapped  up  in  a worn-out  blanket  that  had  served  me  for  a bed,  was
buckled  to  my  shoulders.  To  every  one  I must  have  seemed  immersed
in  the  depths  of  poverty,  perhaps  of  despair.  Nevertheless,  as  I cared
little  about  my  appearance  during  those  happy  rambles,  I pushed  into
the  sitting-room,  unstrapped  my  little  burden,  and  asked  how  soon  break-
fast would  be  ready.

In  America,  no  person  is  ever  refused  entrance  to  the  inns,  at  least
far  from  cities.  We  know  too  well  how  many  poor  creatures  are  forced
to  m.ake  their  way  from  other  countries  in  search  of  employment  or  to
seek  uncultivated  land,  and  we  are  ever  ready  to  let  them  have  vhat
they  may  call  for.  No  one  knew  who  I was,  and  the  landlord  looking  at


NIAGARA.


363


me  with  an  eye  of  close  scrutiny,  answered  that  breakfast  would  be  on
the  table  as  soon  as  the  company  should  come  down  from  their  rooms.
I approached  this  important  personage,  told  him  of  my  avocations,  and
convinced  him  that  he  might  feel  safe  as  to  remuneration.  From  this
moment,  I was,  with  him  at  least,  on  equal  footing  with  every  other  per-
son in  his  house.  He  talked  a good  deal  of  the  many  artists  who  had
visited  the  Falls  that  season,  from  different  parts,  and  offered  to  assist  me,
by  giving  such  accommodations  as  I might  require  to  finish  the  draw-
ings I had  in  contemplation.  He  left  me,  and  as  I looked  about  the
room,  I saw  several  views  of  the  Falls,  by  which  I was  so  disgusted,  that
I suddenly  came  to  my  better  senses.  “ What thought  I,  “ have  I
come  here  to  mimic  nature  in  her  grandest  enterprise,  and  add  my  cari-
cature of  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world  to  those  which  I here  see  ? No.
—I  give  up  the  vain  attempt.  I shall  look  on  these  mighty  cataracts
and  imprint  them,  where  alone  they  can  be  represented, — on  my  mind  !”
Had  I taken  a view,  I might  as  well  have  given  you  what  might  be
termed  a regular  account  of  the  form,  the  height,  the  tremendous  roar  of
these  Falls ; might  have  spoken  of  people  perilling  their  lives  by  going
between  the  rock  and  the  sheet  of  water,  calculated  the  density  of  the  at-
mosphere in  that  strange  position,  related  wondrous  tales  of  Indians  and
their  canoes  having  been  precipitated  the  whole  depth  ; — ^might  have  told
of  the  narrow,  rapid,  and  rockbound  river  that  leads  the  waters  of  the
Erie  into  those  of  Ontario,  remarking  en  passant  the  Devil's  Hole  and
sundry  other  places  or  objects  ; — but  supposing  you  had  been  there,  my
description  would  prove  useless,  and  quite  as  puny  as  my  intended  view
would  have  been  for  my  family ; and  should  you  not  have  seen  them,'
and  are  fond  of  contemplating  the  more  magnificent  of  the  Creator’s
works,  go  to  Niagara,  reader,  for  all  the  pictures  you  may  see,  all  the  de-
scriptions you  may  read,  of  these  mighty  Falls,  can  only  produce  in  your
mind  the  faint  glimmer  of  a glow-worm  compared  with  the  overpowering
glory  of  the  meridian  sun.

I breakfasted  amid  a crowd  of  strangers,  who  gazed  and  laughed  at
me,  paid  my  bill,  rambled  about  and  admired  the  Falls  for  a while,  saw
several  young  gentlemen  sketching  on  cards  the  mighty  mass  of  foaming
waters,  and  walked  to  Buffalo,  where  I purchased  new  apparel  and  shear-
ed my  beard.  I then  enjoyed  civilized  life  as  much  as,  a month  before,  I
had  enjoyed  the  wildest  solitudes  and  the  darkest  recesses  of  mountain
and  forest.


( 364  )


THE  WINTER  HAWK.

Falco  hyemalis,  Gmel.

PLATE  LXXI.

Every  species  of  bird  is  possessed  of  a certain,  not  always  definable,
cast  of  countenance,  peculiar  to  itself.  Although  it  undergoes  changes
necessary  for  marking  the  passions  of  the  individual,  its  joy,  its  anger,
its  terror  or  despondency,  still  it  remains  the  same  specie  look.  Hawks
are  perhaps  more  characteristically  marked  in  this  manner  than  birds  of
any  other  genus,  being  by  nature  intended  for  deeds  of  daring  enterprise,
and  requiring  a greater  perfection  of  sight  to  enable  them  to  distinguish
their  prey  at  great  distances.  To  most  persons  the  family-look  of  parti-
cular species  does  not  appear  so  striking  as  to  the  student  of  Nature,  who
examines  her  productions  in  the  haunts  which  she  has  allotted  to  them.
He  perceives  at  a glance  the  differences  of  species,  and  when  he  has  once
bent  his  attention  to  an  object,  can  distinguish  it  at  distances  which  to
the  ordinary  observer  present  merely  a moving  object,  whether  beast  or
bird.  When  years  of  constant  observation  have  elapsed,  it  becomes  a
pleasure  to  him  to  establish  the  differences  that  he  has  found  to  exist
among  the  various  species  of  a tribe,  and  to  display  to  others  whose  op-
portunities have  been  more  limited  the  fruits  of  his  research.

I hope,  kind  reader,  you  will  not  lay  presumption  to  my  charge,  when
I tell  you  that  I think  myself  somewhat  qualified  to  decide  in  a matter
of  this  kind,  or  say  that  I go  too  far,  when  I assert  that  the  Hawk  which
sails  before  me,  at  a distance  so  great  that  a careless  observer  might  be
apt  to  fancy  it  something  else,  I can  distinguish  and  name  with  as  much
ease  as  I should  recognise  an  old  friend  by  his  walk  or  his  tournure.
Independently  of  the  cast  of  countenance  so  conspicuously  distinctive  of
different  species  of  birds,  there  are  characters  of  separation  in  their  pecu-
liar notes  or  cries ; and  if  you  add  to  these  the  distinctions  that  exist  in
their  habits,  it  will  be  easy  for  you,  when  you  have  looked  at  the  Plate
of  the  Winter  Falcon  and  that  of  the  Red-shouldered  Hawk^  and-  have
been  told  that  their  notes  and  manners  differ  greatly,  to  perceive  that
these  birds,  although  confounded  by  some,  are  truly  distinct.

The  Winter  Hawk  is  not  a constant  resident  in  the  United  States,


WINTER  HAWK.


365


but  merely  visits  them,  making  its  first  appearance  there  at  the  approacn
of  winter.  It  extends  over  the  whole  Union,  from  the  eastern  to  the
southernmost  parts,  but  gives  a decided  preference  to  the  Middle  Districts,
where  the  greater  number  spend  the  winter.  They  come  from  the  north-
ern portions  of  the  continent,  where  they  breed,  and  from  whence  they
seem  to  be  forced  by  the  severity  of  the  weather,  to  seek  subsistence  for
a time  in  milder  climates.  They  return  at  the  approach  of  spring,  and
none,  in  as  fat  as  I have  been  able  to  discover,  remain  to  breed  in  the
United  States.

The  flight  of  the  Winter  Hawk  is  smooth  and  light,  although  greatly
protracted,  when  necessity  requires  it  to  be  so.  It  sails  at  times  at  a con-
siderable elevation,  and,  notwithstanding  the  comparative  shortness  of  its
wings,  performs  this  kind  of  motion  with  grace,  and  in  circles  of  more
than  moderate  diameter.  It  is  a remarkably  silent  bird,  often  spending
the  greater  part  of  a day  without  uttering  its  notes  moreThan  once  or
twice,  which  it  does  just  before  it  alights  to  watch  with  great  patience  and
perseverance  for  the  appearance  of  its  prey.  Its  haunts  are  the  extensive
meadows  and  marshes  which  occur  along  our  rivers.  There  it  pounces
with  a rapid  motion  on  the  frogs,  which  it  either  devours  on  the  spot,  or
carries  to  the  perch,  or  the  top  of  the  hay-stack,  on  which  it  previously
stood.  If  it  seizes  a small  frog,  it  swallows  it  whole  and  at  once  ; but  if
a large  one,  it  first  tears  it  to  pieces.  The  appetite  of  the  Winter  Hawk
may  be  said  to  be  ravenous.  It  seldom  gives  up  eating,  when  food  is
plentiful,  until  it  has  gorged  itself  so  as  to  seem  on  the  point  of  being
suffocated.  At  such  times,  it  flies  heavily,  but  removes  farther  at  once
from  a person  who  pursues  it,  than  when  its  stomach  is  empty,  as  if  at  one
effort  to  ensure  its  safety,  and  afterwards  enjoy  the  digestion  of  its  food
in  quiet.

When  frogs  are  scarce  during  frosty  weather,  the  Winter  Hawk  pur-
sues the  meadow  mouse,  but  only  in  such  cases,  frogs  being  the  favourite
food  of  this  species.  I have  seen  it  when  disappointed  in  seizing  a large
bull-frog,  which  had  saved  itself  by  leaping  into  the  water,  stand  on  the
spot  previously  occupied  by  the  reptile,  and  wait  until  it  reappeared  and
approached  the  shore,  when  the  Hawk  would  strike  at  it  with  his  talons,
although  seldom  successfully,  as  the  frog  would  sink  backward,  and  thus
escape.

Mr  Alexander  Wilson  has  given  a figure  so  unlike  any  bird  of  this
species,  for  one  of  the  Winter  Falcons,  that  although  he  has  at  the  same


366


WINTER  HAWK.


time  briefly  described  the  habits  of  the  latter  with  accuracy,  I cannot
think  that  the  bird  figured  by  him  was  of  that  species.  My  excellent
friend  Charles  Lucian  Bonaparte,  has  probably  been  led  by  Mr  Wil-
son’s error  to  consider  the  Winter  Hawk  and  the  Red-shouldered  Hawk
as  identical.  I have  killed  many  individuals  of  both  species,  and  know-
ing as  I do  that  the  Red-shouldered  Hawk  is  a constant  resident  in  the
Southern  States,  where  I have  often  destroyed  its  nest  and  young,  and
where  very  few  Winter  Hawks  are  ever  seen,  even  during  winter,  I can-
not hesitate  a moment  to  pronounce  them  different  and  distinct  species.

The  Winter  Hawk  generally  rests  at  night  on  the  ground,  amongst
the  tall  sedges  of  the  marshes.  From  such  places  I have  on  several  occa-
sions started  it,  whilst  in  search  of  Ducks,  and  have  shot  it  as  it  flew  low
over  the  ground,  attempting  to  escape  unobserved.  I have  never  seen
this  Hawk  in  pursuit  of  any  other  birds  than  those  of  its  own  species,
each  individual  chasing  the  others  from  the  district  which  it  has  selected
for  itself.

The  cry  of  the  Winter  Hawk  is  clear  and  prolonged,  and  resembles
the  syllables  kay-o.  After  uttering  these  notes,  it  generally  alights.
Towards  spring  they  associate  in  small  parties  of  four  or  five,  to  perform
their  migrations.  In  this  respect  the  species  resembles  most  of  the  Marsh
Hawks  or  Hen-harriers.

Falco  h ye  malts,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  274 — Lath.  Ind.  Omith.  vol.  i.  p.  34. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  33.

Winter  Falcon,  Falco  hyemalis,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  73.  PI.  35.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXI.

Bill  short,  as  broad  as  deep  at  the  base,  the  sides  convex,  the  dorsal
outline  convex  from  the  base  ; upper  mandible  cerate,  the  edges  blunt,
slightly  inflected,  with  an  obtuse  lobe  towards  the  curvature,  the  tip  tri-
gonal, deflected,  very  acute;  lower  mandible  involute  at  the  edges,  a
little  truncate  at  the  end.  Nostrils  round,  lateral,  with  a soft  papilla  in
the  centre.  Head  rather  large,  neck  and  body  rather  slender.  Tarsus
rather  slender,  anteriorly  scutellate ; toes  scutellate  above,  scaly  on  the
sides,  scabrous  and  tuberculate  beneath  ; middle  and  outer  toe  connected  at
the  base  by  a small  membrane;  claws  roundish,  curved,  slender,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated;  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow
towards  the  tips,  of  the  back  broad  and  rounded  ; tibial  feathers  elongat-


WINTER  HAWK.


367


ed  behind.  Wings  long,  third  and  fourth  primaries  longest,  the  first
short.

Bill  light  blue,  darker  at  the  tip  ; cere,  basal  margin  of  the  bill,
edges  of  the  eyelids,  and  the  feet,  yellow,  tinged  with  green.  Iris  yellow.
Claws  black.  Head,  neck  and  back,  pale  brownish-red,  longitudinally
spotted  with  dark-brown,  the  sides  and  fore-part  of  the  head  greyish-
white.  Upper  tail-coverts  bluish-grey  at  the  margins.  Tail  dull  brown,
banded  with  brownish- white,  and  tipped  with  white.  Lesser  wing-coverts
brownish-red,  spotted  with  dark  brown ; larger  coverts  and  secondary
quills  umber,  banded  with  brownish- white ; primary  quills  light  yellowish-
red  at  the  base,  dull  brown  towards  the  end,  barred  with  dark  brown.
Lower  part  of  the  neck,  the  sides  and  under  wing-coverts,  light  brownish-
red,  the  former  longitudinally  lined  with  brown.  Breast  greyish- white,
sparsely  marked  with  guttiform  spots,  abdomen  white.  Tibial  feathers
yellowish-white,  marked  with  small  roundish  spots.

Length  22  inches  ; bill  along  the  back  1 J ; tarsus  S.

Compared  with  the  adult  male  of  the  Red-shouldered  Hawk,  the
present  bird  is  much  larger,  and  differs  greatly  in  colouring ; but  the
differences  will  be  best  understood  by  referring  to  the  figures.


The  Bull-frog,  Rana  taurina,  Cuv.

The  body  olive-green,  clouded  with  black  ; a yellow  line  along  the
back.  Length  ten  or  twelve  inches.  This  Frog  is  found  in  all  parts
of  the  United  States,  but  is  more  abundant  in  the  Southern  Dis-
tricts. Its  voice  is  louder  than  that  of  any  other  species,  and  may  be
distinctly  heard  at  the  distance  of  forty  or  fifty  yards.  It  is  particularly
fond  of  such  small  pure  streams  of  water  as  are  thickly  shaded  by  over-
hanging bushes.  It  sits  for  hours  during  the  middle  of  the  day,  basking
in  the  sun,  near  the  margin  of  the  water,  to  which  it  betakes  itself  by  a
great  leap  at  the  least  appearance  of  danger,  divirg  at  once  to  the  bottom,
or  swimming  to  the  opposite  side.  In  the  Southern  States,  it  is  heard  at
all  seasons,  but  principally  during  the  spring  and  summer  months.  Its
flesh  is  tender,  white,  and  affords  excellent  eating.  The  hind  legs,  how-
ever, are  the  only  parts  used  as  food.  They  make  excellent  bait  for  the
larger  cat-fish.  Some  bull-frogs  weigh  as  much  as  half  a pound.  I have
generally  used  the  gun  for  procuring  them,  shooting  with  very  small  shot.


( 368  )


THE  SWALLOW-TAILED  HAWK.

Falco  furcatus,  Linn.

PLATE  LXXII.  Male.

The  flight  of  elegant  species  of  Hawk  is  singularly  beautiful
and  protracted.  It  moves  through  the  air  with  such  ease  and  grace,  that
it  is  impossible  for  any  individual,  who  takes  the  least  pleasure  in  observ-
ing the  manners  of  birds,  not  to  be  delighted  by  the  sight  of  it  whilst  on
wing.  Gliding  along  in  easy  flappings,  it  rises  in  wide  circles  to  an  im-
mense height,  inclining  in  various  ways  its  deeply  forked  tail,  to  assist  the
direction  of  its  course,  dives  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and,  sudden-
ly checking  itself,  reascends,  soars  away,  and  is  soon  out  of  sight.  At
other  times  a flock  of  these  birds,  amounting  to  fifteen  or  twenty  indivi-
duals, is  seen  hovering  around  the  trees.  They  dive  in  rapid  succession
amongst  the  branches,  glancing  along  the  trunks,  and  seizing  in  their
course  the  insects  and  small  lizards  of  which  they  are  in  quest.  Their
motions  are  astonishingly  rapid,  and  the  deep  curves  which  they  describe,
their  sudden  doublings  and  crossings,  and  the  extreme  ease  with  which
they  seem  to  cleave  the  air,  excite  the  admiration  of  him  who  views  them
while  thus  employed  in  searching  for  food.

A solitary  individual  of  this  species  has  once  or  twice  been  seen  in
Pennsylvania.  Farther  to  the  eastward,  the  Swallow-tailed  Hawk  has
never,  I believe,  been  observed.  Travelling  southward,  along  the  At-
lantic coast,  we  find  it  in  Virginia,  although  in  very  small  numbers.  Be-
yond that  State  it  becomes  more  abundant.  Near  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio,
a pair  had  a nest  and  reared  four  young  ones,  in  1820.  In  the  lower
parts  of  Kentucky  it  begins  to  become  numerous ; but  in  the  States  far-
ther to  the  south,  and  particularly  in  parts  near  the  sea,  it  is  abundant.
In  the  large  prairies  of  the  Attacapas  and  Oppellousas,  it  is  extremely
common.

In  the  States  of  Louisiana  and  Mississippi,  where  these  birds  are  abun-
dant, they  arrive  in  large  companies,  in  the  beginning  of  April,  and  are
heard  uttering  a sharp  plaintive  note.  At  this  period  I generally  re-
marked that  they  came  from  the  westward,  and  have  counted  upwards
of  a hundred  in  the  space  of  an  hour,  passing  over  me  in  a direct  easter-


SWALLOW-TAILED  HAWK.


369


ly  course.  At  that  season,  and  in  the  beginning  of  September,  when
they  all  retire  from  the  United  States,  they  are  easily  approached  when
they  have  alighted,  being  then  apparently  fatigued,  and  busily  engaged
in  preparing  themselves  for  continuing  their  journey,  by  dressing  and
oiling  their  feathers.  At  all  other  times,  however,  it  is  extremely  diffi-
cult to  get  near  them,  as  they  are  generally  on  wing  through  the  day,
and  at  night  rest  on  the  highest  pines  and  cypresses,  bordering  the  river-
bluffs,  the  lakes  or  the  swamps  of  that  district  of  country.

They  always  feed  on  the  wing.  In  calm  and  warm  weather,  they
soar  to  an  immense  height,  pursuing  the  large  insects  called  Musqmto
Haxvhs,  and  performing  the  most  singular  evolutions  that  can  be  con-
ceived, using  their  tail  with  an  elegance  of  motion  peculiar  to  themselves.
Their  principal  food,  however,  is  large  grasshoppers,  grass-caterpillars,
small  snakes,  lizards,  and  frogs.  They  sweep  close  over  the  fields,  some-
times seeming  to  alight  for  a moment  to  secure  a snake,  and  holding  it
fast  by  the  neck,  carry  it  off,  and  devour  it  in  the  air.  When  searching
for  grasshoppers  and  caterpillars,  it  is  not  difficult  to  approach  them  un-
der cover  of  a fence  or  tree.  When  one  is  th^  killed  and  falls  to  the
ground,  the  whole  flock  comes  over  the  dead  bird,  as  if  intent  upon  carry-
ing it  off.  An  excellent  opportunity  is  thus  afforded  of  shooting  as  many
as  may  be  wanted,  and  I have  killed  several  of  these  Hawks  in  this  man-
ner, firing  as  fast  as  I could  load  my  gun.  "

The  Forked-tailed  Hawks  are  also  very  fond  of  frequenting  the  creeks,
which,  in  that  country,  are  much  encumbered  with  drifted  logs  and  ac-
cumulations of  sand,  in  order  to  pick  up  some  of  the  numerous  water-
snakes  which  lie  basking  in  the  sun.  At  other  times,  they  dash  along
the  trunks  of  trees,  and  snap  off  the  pupae  of  the  locust,  or  that  insect  it-
self. Although  when  on  wing  they  ‘move  with  a grace  and  ease  which
it  is  impossible  to  describe,  yet  on  the  ground  they  are  scarcely  able  to
walk.

I kept  for  several  days  one  which  had  been  slightly  wounded  in  the
wing.  It  refused  to  eat,  kept  the  feathers  of  the  head  and  rump  con-
stantly erect,  and  vomited  several  times  part  of  the  contents  of  its  sto-
mach. - It  never  threw  itself  on  its  back,  nor  attempted  to  strike  with  its
talons,  unless  when  taken  up  by  the  tip  of  the  wing.  It  died  from  inani-
tion, as  it  constantly  refused  the  food  placed  before  it  in  profusion,  and
instantly  vomited  what  had  been  thrust  down  its  throat.

The  Swallow-tailed  Hawk  pairs  immediately  after  its  arrival  in  the


A a


SWALLOW-TAILED  HAWK.


;I70

Southern  States,  and  as  its  coiirtsliips  take  place  on  the  wing,  its  mo-
tions are  then  more  beautiful  than  ever.  The  nest  is  usually  placed  on
the  top  branches  of  the  tallest  oak  or  pine  tree,  situated  on  the  mar-
gin of  a stream  or  pond.  It  resembles  that  of  the  Common  Crow  ex-
ternally, being  formed  of  dry  sticks,  intermixed  with  Spanish  moss,  and
is  lined  with  coarse  grasses  and  a few  feathers.  The  eggs  are  from  four
to  six,  of  a greenish- white  colour,  with  a few  irregular  blotches  of  dark
brown  at  the  larger  end.  The  male  and  the  female  sit  alternately,  the
one  feeding  the  other.  The  young  are  at  first  covered  with  buff-colour-
ed down.  Their  next  covering  exhibits  the  pure  white  and  black  of  the
old  birds,  but  without  any  of  the  glossy  purplish  tints  of  the  latter.  The
tail,  which  at  first  is  but  slightly  forked,  becomes  more  so  in  a few  weeks,
and  at  the  approach  of  autumn  exhibits  little  difference  from  that  of
the  adult  birds.  The  plumage  is  completed  the  first  spring.  Only  one
brood  is  raised  in  the*  season.  The  species  leaves  the  United  States  in
the  beginning  of  September,  moving  off  in  flocks,  which  are  formed  im-
mediately after  the  breeding-season  is  over.

Hardly  any  difference  as  to  external  appearance  exists  between  the
sexes.  They  never  attack  birds  or  quadrupeds  of  any  species,  with  the
view  of  preying  upon  tliem.  I never  saw  one  alight  on  the  ground.
They  secure  their  prey  as  they  pass  closely  over  it,  and  in  so  doing  some-
tunes  seem  to  alight,  particularly  when  securing  a snake.  The  common
name  of  the  Snake  represented  in  the  plate  is  the  Garter  Snake.


Falco  furcatus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  129. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  22.

— Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  31.

Swallow-tailed  Falcon,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  60.

Swallow-tailed  Hawk,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  70.  PI.  51.  Fig.  2.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXII.

Bill  short,  strong,  curved,  compressed  towards  the  tip,  opening  to  be-
neath the  eye ; upper  mandible  cerate,  its  dorsal  outline  curved  from  the
base,  the  edges  acute  and  overlapping,  the  tip  trigonal,  very  acute ; lower
mandible  rounded  on  the  back,  the  edges  acute,  the  tip  rounded  and  de-
clinate.  Head  large,  neck  short,  body  robust.  Feet  rather  short ; tarsus
very  short,  scaly  all  round  ; toes  scaly,  scutellate  above,  excepting  at  the
base  ; claws  curved,  very  acute.

Plumage  rather  compact,  blended,  glossy.  Wings  very  long  and


SWALLOW-TAILED  HAWK.


371


acute,  the  third  quill  longest,  the  first  equal  to  the  fifth,  the  primaries
widely  graduated;  the  secondaries  comparatively  very  short.  Tail  very
deeply  forked,  of  twelve  feathers,  the  lateral  ones  extremely  elongated.

Bill  bluish-black  above,  light  blue  on  the  cere,  and  the  edges  of
both  mandibles.  Edges  of  the  eyelids  light  blue  ; iris  black.  Feet  light
blue,  tinged  with  green ; claws  flesh-coloured.  The  head,  the  neck  all
round,  and  the  under  parts,  are  white,  tinged  with  bluish-grey ; the  shafts
of  the  head,  neck,  and  breast  blackish.  The  rest  of  the  plumage  is
black,  with  blue  and  purple  reflections.

Length  25  inches,  extent  of  wings  51|  ; beak  along  the  back
The  female  is  similar  to  the  male.


The  Garter  Snake.

This  is  one  of  our  most  abundant  species,  and  is  found  everywhere
in  the  meadows,  the  fields,  the  gardens,  and  the  forests.  It  moves  with
ease,  and  now  and  then  ascends  low  bushes.  It  is  quite  harmless.


A a 2


( 372  )


THE  WOOD  THRUSH.

TuBDUS  MUSTELINUS^  GmEL.

PLATE  LXXIIL  Male  and  Female.

Kind  reader,  you  now  see  before  you  my  greatest  favourite  of  the
feathered  tribes  of  our  woods.  To  it  I owe  much.  How  often  has  it  re-
vived my  drooping  spirits,  when  I have  listened  to  its  wild  notes  in  the
forest,  after  passing  a restless  night  in  my  slender  shed,  so  feebly  secured
against  the  violence  of  the  storm,  as  to  shew  me  the  futility  of  my  best
efforts  to  rekindle  my  little  fire,  whose  uncertain  and  vacillating  light  had
gradually  died  away  under  the  destructive  weight  of  the  dense  torrents  of
rain  that  seemed  to  involve  the  heavens  and  the  earth  in  one  mass  of  fear-
ful murkiness,  save  when  the  red  streaks  of  the  flashing  thunderbolt  burst
on  the  dazzled  eye,  and,  glancing  along  the  huge  trunk  of  the  stateliest
and  noblest  tree  in  my  immediate  neighbourhood,  were  instantly  followed
by  an  uproar  of  crackling,  crashing,  and  deafening  sounds,  rolling  their
volumes  in  tumultuous  eddies  far  and  near,  as  if  to  silence  the  very
breathings  of  the  unformed  thought  ! How  often,  after  such  a night,
when  far  from  my  dear  home,  and  deprived  of  the  presence  of  those
nearest  to  my  heart,  wearied,  hungry,  drenched,  and  so  lonely  and  deso-
late as  almost  to  question  myself  why  I was  thus  situated,  when  I have
seen  the  fruits  of  my  labours  on  the  eve  of  being  destroyed,  as  the  water,
collected  into  a stream,  rushed  through  my  little  camp,  and  forced  me  to
stand  erect,  shivering  in  a cold  fit  like  that  of  a severe  ague,  when  I have
been  obliged  to  wait  with  the  patience  of  a martyr  for  the  return  of  day,
trying  in  vain  to  destroy  the  tormenting  moschettoes,  silently  counting
over  the  years  of  my  youth,  doubting  perhaps  if  ever  again  I should  re-
turn to  my  home,  and  embrace  my  family  ! — how  often,  as  the  first
glimpses  of  morning  gleamed  doubtfully  amongst  the  dusky  masses  of
the  forest-trees,  has  there  come  upon  my  ear,  thrilling  along  the  sensitive
cords  which  connect  that  organ  with  the  heart,  the  delightful  music  of
this  harbinger  of  day  ! — and  how  fervently,  on  such  occasions,  have  I
blessed  the  Being  who  formed  the  Wood  Thrush,  and  placed  it  in  those
solitary  forests,  as  if  to  console  me  amidst  my  privations,  to  cheer  my  de-
pressed mind,  and  to  make  me  feel,  as  I did,  that  never  ought  man  to  de-


WOOD  THRUSH.


373


spair,  whatever  may  be  his  situation,  as  he  can  never  be  certain  that  aid
and  deliverance  are  not  at  hand.

The  Wood  Thrush  seldom  commits  a mistake  after  such  a storm  as
I have  attempted  to  describe ; for  no  sooner  are  its  sweet  notes  heard
than  the  heavens  gradually  clear,  the  bright  refracted  light  rises  in  glad-
dening rays  from  beneath  the  distant  horizon,  the  effulgent  beams  in-
crease in  their  iutensity,  and  the  great  orb  of  day  at  length  bursts  on  the
sight.  The  grey  vapour  that  floats  along  the  ground  is  quickly  dissi-
pated, the  world  smiles  at  the  happy  change,  and  the  woods  are  soon
heard  to  echo  the  joyous  thanks  of  their  many  songsters.  At  that  mo-
ment, all  fears  vanish,  giving  place  to  an  inspiriting  hope.  The  hunter
prepares  to  leave  his  camp.  He  listens  to  the  Wood  Thrush,  while  he
thinks  of  the  course  which  he  ought  to  pursue,  and  as  the  bird  approaches
to  peep  at  him,  and  learn  somewhat  of  his  intentions,  he  raises  his  mind
towards  the  Supreme  Disposer  of  events.  Seldom,  indeed,  have  I heard
the  song  of  this  Thrush,  without  feeling  all  that  tranquillity  of  mind,  to
which  the  secluded  situation  in  which  it  delights  is  so  favourable.  The
thickest  and  darkest  woods  always  appear  to  please  it  best.  The  bor-
ders of  murmuring  streamlets,  overshadowed  by  the  dense  foliage  of  the
lofty  trees  growing  on  the  gentle  declivities,  amidst  which  the  sunbeams
seldom  penetrate,  are  its  favourite  resorts.  There  it  is,  kind  reader,  that
the  musical  powers  of  this  hermit  of  the  woods  must  be  heard,  to  be  fully
appreciated  and  enjoyed.

The  song  of  the  Wood  Thrush,  although  composed  of  but  few  notes,  is
so  powerful,  distinct,  clear,  and  mellow,  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  per-
son to  hear  it  without  being  struck  by  the  effect  which  it  produces  on  the
mind.  I do  not  know  to  what  instrumental  sounds  I can  compare  these
notes,  for  I really  know  none  so  melodious  and  harmonica!.  They  gra-
dually rise  in  strength,  and  then  fall  in  gentle  cadences,  becoming  at
length  so  low  as  to  be  scarcely  audible ; like  the  emotions  of  the  lover,
who  at  one  moment  exults  in  the  hope  of  possessing  the  object  of  his  af-
fections, and  the  next  pauses  in  suspense,  doubtful  of  the  result  of  all  his
efforts  to  please.

Several  of  these  birds  seem  to  challenge  each  other  from  different  por-
tions of  the  forest,  particularly  towards  evening,  and  at  that  time  nearly
all  the  other  songsters  being  about  to  retire  to  rest,  the  notes  of  the
Wood  Thrush  are  doubly  pleasing.  One  would  think  that  each  indivi-
dual is  anxious  to  excel  his  distant  rival,  and  I have  frequently  thought


374


WOOD  THRUSH.


that  on  such  occasions  their  music  is  more  than  ordinarily  effective,  as  it
then  exhibits  a degree  of  skilful  modulation  quite  beyond  my  power  to
describe.  These  concerts  are  continued  for  some  time  after  sunset,  and
take  place  in  the  month  of  June,  when  the  females  are  sitting.

This  species  glides  swiftly  through  the  woods,  whilst  on  wing,  and
performs  its  migrations  without  appearing  in  the  open  country.  It  is  a
constant  resident  in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  to  which  the  dispersed  indi-
viduals resort,  as  to  winter  quarters,  from  the  different  parts  of  the
United  States,  to  which  they  had  gone  to  breed.  They  reach  Pennsyl-
vania about  the  beginning  or  middle  of  April,  and  gradually  proceed
farther  north.

Their  food  consists  of  different  kinds  of  berries  and  small  fruits,  which
they  procure  in  the  woods,  without  ever  interfering  with  the  farmer.
They  also  occasionally  feed  on  insects  and  various  lichens.

The  nest  is  usually  placed  in  a low  horizontal  branch  of  the  Dog-
wood Tree,  occasionally  on  smaller  shrubs.  It  is  large,  well  saddled  on
the  branch,  and  composed  externally  of  dry  leaves  of  various  kinds,
with  a second  bed  of  grasses  and  mud,  and  an  internal  layer  of  fine
fibrous  roots.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a beautiful  uniform  light
blue.  The  nest  is  generally  found  in  deep  swampy  hollows,  on  the  sides
of  hills.

On  alighting  on  a branch,  this  Thrush  gives  its  tail  a few  jets,  utter-
ing at  each  motion  a low  chuckling  note  peculiar  to  itself,  arid  very  dif-
ferent from  those  of  the  Hermit  or  Tawny  Thrush.  It  then  stands  still
for  a while,  with  the  feathers  of  the  hind  part  a little  raised.  It  walks
and  hops  along  the  branches  with  much  ease,  and  often  bends  down  its
head  to  peep  at  the  objects  around.  It  frequently  alights  on  the  ground,
and  scratches  up  the  dried  leaves  in  search  of  worms  and  beetles,  but
suddenly  flies  back  to  the  trees,  on  the  least  alarm.

The  sight  of  a fox  or  raccoon  causes  them  much  anxiety,  and  they  ge-
nerally follow  these  animals  at  a respectful  distance,  uttering  a mournful
clucla,  well  known  to  hunters.  Although,  during  winter,  these  birds  are
numerous  in  Louisiana,  they  never  form  themselves  into  flocks,  but  go
singly  at  this  period,  and  only  in  pairs  in  the  breeding  season.  They  are
easily  reared  from  the  nest,  and  sing  nearly  as  well  in  confinement  as
while  free.  Their  song  is  occasionally  heard  during  the  whole  winter,
particularly  when  the  sun  reappears  after  a shower.  Their  flesh  is  ex-
tremely delicate  and  juicy,  and  many  of  them  are  killed  with  the  blow-gun.


WOOD  THRUSH.


375


Having  given  you  a description  of  the  Dogwood  before,  when  I pre«
sented  that  tree  in  bloom,  I have  only  to  say  here,  that  you  now  see  it  in
its  autumnal  colouring,  adorned  with  its  berries,  of  which  the  Wood
Thrush  is  fond.


Turdus  mustelinus,  Gmel,  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  817- — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  L
p.  331. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  tiie  United  States,  p.  75.

Tawny  Thrush,  Lath.  Syn.  vol.  iii.  p.  28.

Wood  Thrush,  Turdus  melodius,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  voL  i.  p.  35.  PI.  2.  fig.  1,

Adult  Male.  Plate  LX XI II.  Pig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  compressed  towards  the  end ;
upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  a little  convex,  the  tip  slightly
declinate,  the  margins  acute,  inflected  towards  the  end,  slightly  notched
close  upon  the  tip ; lower  mandible  slightly  convex  in  its  dorsal  line,  the
tip  rather  obtuse.  Head  of  ordinary  size ; neck  and  body  rather  slender.
Feet  rather  long ; tarsus  longish,  compressed,  slender,  anteriorly  covered
with  a few  elongated  scutella,  posteriorly  edged,  longer  than  the  middle
toe  ; toes  scutellate  above,  lateral  ones  almost  equal,  the  outer  connected
as  far  as  the  second  joint.

Plumage  rather  loose.  A few  longish  bristles  at  the  base  of  the  upper
mandible.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  the  third  quill  longest,  the  first
very  short.  Tail  rather  short,  even,  of  twelve  broad  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  flesh-colour  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet
pale  flesh-colour.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  yellow-
ish-brown, the  tail  and  wings  a little  darker,  the  lower  part  of  the  back
and  the  upper  tail-coverts  green.  Eyes  margined  with  a whitish  circle.
Under  parts  yellowish- white,  spotted  with  blackish-brown,  excepting  the
throat,  the  under  tail-coverts,  and  the  middle  part  of  the  breast  and  ab-
domen.

Length  8 inches,  extent  of  wings  13;  bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  1 ; tarsus  1 J,  middle  toe  -f|^.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXIII.  Fig.  %

The  female  scarcely  differs  from  the  male  in  external  appearance.


376


WOOD  THRUSH.


The  Dog-wood.

CORNUS  FLORIDA,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  i.  p.  661.  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.
Sept.  t.  iii.  p.  138.  PI.  iii.  Pursh,  FI.  Amer.  p.  108. — Tetrandria  Monogynia,
Linn.  Caprifolia,  Juss.

This  plant  has  already  been  described  at  p.  45,  a twig  of  it  in  flower
having  been  represented  in  Plate  VIII.


( 377  )


THE  INDIGO  BIRD

Fringilla  cyanea,  Wils.

IPLATE  LXXIV.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

The  species  here  presented  for  inspection  is  best  known  to  the  Cre-
oles of  Louisiana  by  the  name  of  Petit  Papehleu.  This  is  in  accordance
with  the  general  practice  of  the  first  settlers  of  that  State,  who  named  all
the  Finches,  Buntings,  and  Orioles,  Papes ; and  all  the  Warblers  and
Fly-catchers,  Grassets.  They  made  an  exception,  however,  in  favour  of
the  Rice  Bird,  which  they  honoured  with  the  name  of  Ortolan^  an  appel-
lation given  in  the  Island  of  St  Domingo  to  the  Ground  Dove,  which,
however,  is  seldom  seen  near  New  Orleans.

The  Indigo  Bird  arrives  in  the  Southern  States  from  the  direction  of
Mexico,  along  with  its  relative  the  Painted  Finch,  and  is  caught  in  trap-
cages,  but  with  more  difficulty  than  the  latter  bird.  It  spreads  far  and
wide  over  the  United  States,  extending  from  the  borders  of  our  Atlantic
shores  to  those  of  our  great  lakes.  It  is  not  a forest  bird,  but  prefers  the
skirts  of  the  woods,  the  little  detached  thickets  in  and  along  the  fields,
the  meadows,  the  gardens,  and  orchards,  and  is  frequently  seen  hopping
along,  or  perched  on  a fence,  from  which  it  does  not  disdain  to  send  forth
its  pretty  little  song.  The  highest  top  of  a detached  tree  is,  however,
preferred  for  this  purpose,  and  the  Indigo  Bird  is  to  be  observed  perched
on  this  pinnacle,  singing  at  short  intervals  for  half  an  hour  at  a time.  Its
song  is  at  first  loud  and  clear,  falling  in  cadences  to  a very  low  key.  The
whole  consists  of  eight  or  ten  notes.  The  bird  now  and  then  launches
into  the  air,  to  cross  a field,  and  sings  until  it  has  espied  a favourite  spot
amongst  the  clover,  when  it  immediately  becomes  silent  and  dives  to  the
ground.  The  whole  of  this  parade  is  performed  by  the  male,  which  is
alone  to  be  seen,  the  female  at  this  season  keeping  amongst  the  grass  or
the  briars  along  the  fields,  where  her  humble  plumage  hides  her  in  a great
measure  from  observation.  Some  persons  have  thought  that  this  practice
was  changed  towards  the  latter  part  of  summer,  when,  by  a casual  obser-
ver, only  the  females  are  to  be  seen.  The  true  reason  of  this,  however,  is,
that  the  young  birds  of  both  sexes  resemble  the  mother  during  the  first


season.


378


INDIGO  BIRD.


The  Indigo  Bird  is  an  active  and  lively  little  fellow,  possesses  much
elegance  in  his  shape,  and  also  a certain  degree  of  firmness  in  his  make,
which  renders  him  equally  a favourite  with  the  Painted  Finch,  although
he  does  not  possess  the  variegated  plumage  of  the  latter.  When  the  male
of  the  species  now  before  you  is  in  full  plumage,  the  richness  of  his  ap-
parel cannot  fail  to  attract  and  please  the  eye  of  any  observer.  It  is  highly
glossy,  and  changes  from  the  brightest  azure  to  green,  when  placed  in  a
strong  light.  It  requires  three  years  to  attain  this  perfect  state.  The
female  continues  in  the  same  very  humble  vesture  which  nature  first  ac-
corded to  her.  The  males,  in  the  first  spring,  and  not  unfrequently  du-
ring the  first  autumn,  are  mottled  with  dull  light  blue,  interspersed  among
the  original  deep  buff  of  their  earlier  stage.  The  blue  increases  in  extent,
and  acquires  a deeper  tint,  as  the  age  of  the  bird  advances,  I have  often
seen  males  two  years  old  which  were  still  much  inferior  in  the  beauty  of
their  plumage  to  those  which  had  passed  through  three  springs.  Should
the  birds  be  caught  when  in  full  plumage,  they  gradually  lose  their  brilliant
tints,  which  at  length  become  extremely  dull.  A similar  alteration  is
observed  to  take  place  in  Painted  Finches  which  have  been  kept  in  cages
for  a certain  period,  as  well  as  in  the  Baltimore  and  Orchard  Orioles,  and
in  the  Bulfinch,  Chaffinch,  and  other  European  birds.

The  nest  of  the  Indigo  Bird  is  usually  fixed  amongst  the  rankest
stalks  of  weeds  or  grass,  now  and  then  amongst  the  stems  of  a briar,  or
even  in  a small  hollow  in  a decayed  tree.  In  all  cases  its  composition  is
the  same  ; but  when  amongst  grass,  clover,  or  briars,  it  is  attached  to  two
or  three  of  the  stalks  by  its  sides.  It  is  formed  of  coarse  grasses,  hemp
stalks,  and  flax,  and  is  lined  with  slender  grasses.  The  female  lays  from
four  to  six  eggs,  which  are  blue,  with  a spot  or  two  of  purple  at  the  lar-
ger end.

Towards  fall,  the  young  congregate  into  loose  flocks  or  parties  of  eight
or  ten  individuals,  and  proceed  southward.  I think  their  migration,  at
both  periods  of  the  year,  is  performed  during  night.  Two  broods  are  ge-
nerally raised  in  a season.  The  food  of  the  Indigo  Bird  consists  of  small
seeds  of  various  kinds,  as  well  as  insects,  some  of  which  it  occasionally  pur-
sues on  wing  with  great  vigour.  They  are  fond  of  basking  and  rolling  them-
selves in  the  roads,  from  which  they  gather  small  particles  of  sand  or  gravel.

I have  frequently  seen  live  birds  of  this  species  offered  for  sale  in  Europe.

I have  represented  an  adult  female,  two  young  males  of  the  first  and
second  year,  in  autumn,  and  a male  in  the  full  beauty  of  its  plumage.


INDIGO  BIRD.


379


They  are  placed  on  a plant  usually  called  the  Wild  Sarsaparilla.  It
grows  in  Louisiana,  on  the  skirts  of  the  forests,  in  low  damp  places,  and
along  the  fields,  where  the  Indigo  Birds  are  to  be  found.  It  is  a creep-
ing plant,  and  is  considered  valuable  on  account  of  its  medicinal  proper^
ties.

Fringtlla  cyanea,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  107.

Indigo  Bird,  Fringilla  cyanea,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  100.  PL  4.  fig.  5.

Male Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  PL  2.  fig.  3.  Female.

Male  in  fuU  plumage.  Plate  LXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  conical,  a little  bulging,  straight,  acute ; upper
mandible  broader,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip  ; gap-line  a bttle  declinate
at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  partially  concealed  by  the  frontal
feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  ovate.
Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather  slender ; tarsus  covered  anteriorly  with  a
few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long,  posteriorly  edged ; toes  free,  scutellate
above;  claws  slender,  compressed,  arched,  acute.

Plumage  glossy,  somewhat  silky,  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,
the  second  and  third  quills  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  distinctly
emarginate,  of  twelve  obtuse  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet
yellowish-brown.  The  general  colour  is  a rich  sky-blue,  deeper  on  the
head,  lighter  beneath,  and  in  certain  lights  changing  to  verdigris-green.
The  quills,  larger  wing-coverts,  and  tail-feathers,  dark  brown,  margined
externally  with  blue.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  74  ; bill  along  the  ridge  4,  along
the  gap  nearly  4 ; tarsus  |.

Male  in  the  second  year.  Plate  LXXIV.  Fig.  3.

Bill  lighter,  irides  and  feet  as  in  the  adult.  Head,  neck  and  body,
blue,  but  of  a lighter  tint ; tail  as  in  the  adult ; wings,  including  the
lesser  coverts,  dull  brown,  the  secondary  coverts  and  some  of  the  quills
margined  with  blue.

Male  in  the  first  autumn.  Plate  LXXIV.  Fig.  S.

Bill,  irides  and  feet  as  in  the  last.  Head  and  body  of  a lighter  and
duller  blue,  interspersed  with  brown  patches ; wings  brown,  secondary
coverts  tipped  with  whitish.


380


INDIGO  BIRD.


Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXIV.  Fig.  4.

Bill  light  brown,  tinged  with  blue.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  yellowish-
brown.  The  general  colour  is  light  yellowish-brown,  the  under  parts
and  the  sides  of  the  head  lighter  ; the  wings  deep  brown,  margined  with
lighter.  The  female  is  also  considerably  smaller.


The  Wild  Sarsaparilla.

ScHiSANDRA  cocciNEA,  Mich.  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  218.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol  i.
p.  212 — -Pentandria  Polygynia,  Linn.

A climbing  shrubby  plant,  distinguished  by  its  carmine-coloured
flowers,  consisting  of  nine  sepals ; its  numerous,  one-seeded  berries,  and
elliptico-lanceolate  leaves,  acute  at  both  ends,  and  supported  upon  a long
petiole.


( 381  )


LE  PETIT  CAPORAL.

Falco  temerarius.

PLATE  LXXXV.

This  beautiful  little  Hawk  appears  to  be  nearly  allied  to  the
European  Hobby  {Falco  Suhbuteo^  Linn.),  and  is  not  inferior  to  that
species  in  spirit  and  activity.  I procured  the  individual  represented,  in
April  1812,  near  Fatland  Ford  in  Pennsylvania,  whilst  in  pursuit  of  a
Dove,  which  it  would  doubtless  have  secured,  had  I not  terminated  its
career.  When  I first  discovered  this  species,  the  individual  was  stand-
ing perched  on  an  old  fence-stake,  in  the  position  in  which  it  is  figured.
Never  having  met  with  another  of  the  kind,  I conclude  that  it  is  ex-
tremely rare  in  the  United  States.  Of  its  nest  or  young  I am  unable  to
say  any  thing  at  present.

The  name  which  I have  given  to  this  new  and  rare  species  was
chosen  at  the  time  when  Napoleon  le  grand  was  in  the  zenith  of  his
glory.  Every  body  knows  that  his  soldiers  frequently  designated  him
by  the  nickname  of  Le  Petit  Caporal,  which  I thought  more  suitable  to
to  our  little  Hawk,  than  the  names  Napoleon  or  Bonaparte,  which  I
should  have  adopted,  had  I been  so  fortunate  as  to  procure  a new  Eagle.

Falco  temerarius.

Plate  LXXV.

Bill  short,  as  broad  as  deep  at  the  base,  compressed  towards  the  end,
the  dorsal  outline  convex  from  the  base ; upper  mandible  cerate,  with  the
edges  acute,  slightly  inflected,  and  forming  a sharp  projecting  process  on
each  side,  the  tip  trigonal,  acute,  descending  ; lower  mandible  inflected  at
the  edges,  with  a notch  near  the  end  on  each  side,  abrupt  at  the  tip.
Nostrils  roundish,  with  a central  tubercle,  perforated  in  the  cere.  Head
rather  large,  neck  short,  body  robust.  Legs  of  ordinary  length  ; tarsus
scutellate  before  and  behind  ; toes  scutellate  above,  scaly  on  the  sides,
scabrous  and  tuber culate  beneath  ; middle  toe  much  longer  than  the


382


LE  PETIT  CAPORAL.


outer,  which  is  connected  with  it  at  the  base  by  a membrane ; claws  long,
curved,  roundish,  very  acute.

Plumage  ordinary  compact.  Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow,
of  the  back  broad  and  rounded,  of  the  breast  oblong.  Tibial  feathers
elongated  externally.  Space  between  the  bill  and  eye  covered  with
bristly  feathers.  Orbital  spaces,  and  projecting  edge  of  eyebrow  bare.
Wings  nearly  as  long  as  the  tail ; the  primary  quills  narrow  and  taper-
ing, the  second  longest ; the  secondary  quills  short  and  rounded.  Tail
longish,  nearly  even.

Bill  bluish-black  above,  yellow  beneath.  Cere,  orbits  and  eyebrow
greenish-yellow.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  pale  orange.  The  general  colour  of
the  upper  parts  is  light  bluish-grey,  darker  on  the  head  and  wings,  each
feather  with  a black  line  along  the  shaft.  Quills  brownish-black.  Tail
marked  with  alternate  broad  bands  of  light  ash-grey  and  brownish-black,
the  last  black  band  much  broader,  the  feathers  tipped  with  white.  Chin
and  throat  yellowish- white ; sides  of  the  neck  light  yellowish-red,  streaked
with  dark  brown ; lower  part  of  the  fore  neck,  the  whole  of  the  breast,
and  the  sides,  yellowish- white,  with  large  spots  of  brown.  Abdomen  and
under  tail-coverts  brownish-white  *,  tibial  feathers  light  reddish,  each
with  a central  line  of  blackish-brown.

Length  lOf  inches ; bill  along  the  back  f ; tarsus  1^,  middle  toe  1/^.


( 383  )


HOSPITALITY  IN  THE  WOODS.

Hospitality  is  a virtue,  the  exercise  of  which,  although  always  agree-
able to  the  stranger,  is  not  always  duly  appreciated.  The  traveller  who
has  acquired  celebrity,  is  not  unfrequently  received  with  a species  of  hos-
pitality, which  is  so  much  alloyed  by  the  obvious  attention  of  the  host  to
his  own  interest,  that  the  favour  conferred  upon  the  stranger  must  have
less  weight,  when  it  comes  mingled  with  almost  interminable  questions  as
to  his  perilous  adventures.  Another  receives  hospitality  at  the  hands  of
persons,  who,  possessed  of  all  the  comforts  of  life,  receive  the  way-worn
wanderer  with  pomposity,  lead  him  from  one  part  of  their  spacious  man-
sion to  another,  and  bidding  him  good  night,  leave  him  to  amuse  himself
in  his  solitary  apartment,  because  he  is  thought  unfit  to  be  presented  to
a party  of  friends.  A third  stumbles  on  a congenial  spirit,  who  receives
him  with  open  arms,  offers  him  servants,  horses,  perhaps  even  his  purse,
to  enable  him  tp  pursue  his  journey,  and  parts  from  him  with  regret.  In
all  these  cases,  the  traveller  feels  more  or  less  under  obligation,  and  is  ac-
cordingly grateful.  But,  kind  reader,  the  hospitality  received  from  the
inhabitant  of  the  forest,  who  can  offer  only  the  shelter  of  his  humble  roof,
and  the  refreshment  of  his  homely  fare,  remains  more  deeply  impressed
on  the  memory  of  the  bewildered  traveller  than  any  other.  This  kind  of
hospitality  I have  myself  frequently  experienced  in  our  woods,  and  now
proceed  to  relate  an  instance  of  it.

I had  walked  several  hundred  miles,  accompanied  by  my  son,  then  a
stripling,  and,  coming  upon  a clear  stream,  observed  a house  on  the  oppo-
site shore.  We  crossed  in  a canoe,  and  finding  that  we  had  arrived  at  a
tavern,  determined  upon  spending  the  night  there.  As  we  were  both
greatly  fatigued,  I made  an  arrangement  with  our  host  to  be  conveyed  in
a light  Jersey  waggon  a distance  of  a hundred  miles,  the  period  of  our
departure  to  be  determined  by  the  rising  of  the  moon.  Fair  Cynthia,
with  her  shorn  beams,  peeped  over  the  forest  about  two  hours  before
dawn,  and  our  conductor,  provided  with  a long  twig  of  hickory,  took  his
station  in  the  fore-part  of  the  waggon.  Off  we  went  at  a round  trot,
dancing  in  the  cart  like  pease  in  a sieve.  The  road,  which  was  just  wide
enough  to  allow  us  to  pass,  was  full  of  deep  ruts,  and  covered  here  and
there  with  trunks  and  stumps,  over  all  which  we  were  hurried.  Our  con-


384


HOSPITALITY.


ductor  Mr  Flint,  the  landlord  of  the  tavern,  boasting  of  his  perfect
knowledge  of  the  country,  undertook  to  drive  us  by  a short-cut,  and  we
willingly  confided  ourselves  to  his  management.  So  we  jogged  along,
now  and  then  deviating  to  double  the  fallen  timber.  Ha,y  commenced
with  promise  of  fine  weather,  but  several  nights  of  white  frost  having  oc-
curred, a change  was  expected.  To  our  sorrow,  the  change  took  place
long  before  we  got  to  the  road  again.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents ; the
thunder  bellowed ; the  lightning  blazed.  It  was  now  evening,  but  the
storm  had  brought  perfect  night,  black  and  dismal.  Our  cart  had  no
cover.  Cold  and  wet,  we  sat  silent  and  melancholy,  with  no  better  ex-
pectation than  that  of  passing  the  night  under  the  little  shelter  the  cart
could  afford  us.

To  stop  was  considered  worse  than  to  proceed.  So  we  gave  the  reins
to  the  horses,  with  some  faint  hope  that  they  would  drag  us  out  of  our
forlorn  state.  Of  a sudden  the  steeds  altered  their  course,  and  soon  after
we  perceived  the  glimmer  of  a faint  light  in  the  distance,  and  almost  at
the  same  moment  heard  the  barking  of  dogs.  Our  horses  stopped  by
a high  fence,  and  fell  a-neighing,  while  I hallooed  at  such  a rate,  that  an
answer  was  speedily  obtained.  The  next  moment,  a flaming  pine  torch
crossed  the  gloom,  and  advanced  to  the  spot  where  we  stood.  The  Negro
boy  who  bore  it,  without  waiting  to  question  us,  enjoined  us  to  follow
the  fence,  and  said  that  Master  had  sent  him  to  shew  the  strangers  to  the
house.  We  proceeded,  much  relieved,  and  soon  reached  the  gate  of  a
little  yard,  in  which  a small  cabin  was  perceived.

A tall  fine-looking  young  man  stood  in  the  open  door,  and  desired  us
to  get  out  of  the  cart  and  walk  in.  We  did  so,  when  the  following  con-
versation took  place.  A bad  night  this,  strangers  ; how  came  you
to  be  along  the  fence  ? you  certainly  must  have  lost  your  way,  for  there
is  no  public  road  within  twenty  miles.”  Aye,”  answered  Mr  Flint,
‘‘  sure  enough  we  lost  our  way ; but,  thank  God  ! we  have  got  to  a
house,  and  thank  ^ou  for  your  reception.”  “ Reception  !”  replied  the
woodsman,  “ no  very  great  thing  after  all ; you  are  all  here  safe,  and
that’s  enough. — Eliza,”  turning  to  his  wife,  “ see  about  some  victuals
for  the  strangers,  and  you,  Jupiter,”  addressing  the  Negro  lad,  “ bring
some  wood  and  mend  the  fire.  Eliza,  call  the  boys  up,  and  treat  the
strangers  the  best  way  you  can.  Come,  gentlemen,  pull  oflp  your  wet
clothes,  and  draw  to  the  fire.  Eliza,  bring  some  socks  and  a shirt  or
two.”


HOSPITALITY.


385


For  my  part,  kind  reader,  knowing  my  countrymen  as  I do,  I was
not  much  struck  at  all  this ; but  my  son,  who  had  scarcely  reached  the
age  of  fourteen,  drew  near  to  me,  and  observed  how  pleasant  it  was  to
have  met  with  such  good  people.  Mr  Flint  bore  a hand  in  getting  his
horses  put  under  a shed.  The  young  wife  was  already  stirring  with  so
much  livehness,  that  to  have  doubted  for  a moment  that  all  she  did  was
not  a pleasure  to  her  would  have  been  impossible.  Two  Negro  lads  made
their  appearance,  looked  at  .us  for  a moment,  and  going  out,  called  the
dogs.  Soon  after  the  cries  of  the  poultry  informed  us  that  good  cheer
was  at  hand.  J upiter  brought  more  wood,  the  blaze  of  which  illumined
the  cottage.  Mr  Flint  and  our  host  returned,  and  we  already  began  to
feel  the  comforts  of  hospitality.  The  woodsman  remarked  that  it  was  a
pity  we  had  not  chanced  to  come  that  day  three  weeks  ; for,”  said  he,
“ it  was  our  wedding-day,  and  father  gave  us  a good  house-warming,  and
you  might  have  fared  better ; but,  however,  if  you  can  eat  bacon  and
eggs,  and  a broiled  chicken,  you  shall  have  that.  I have  no  whisky  in
the  house,  but  father  has  some  capital  cider,  and  I’ll  go  over  and  bring  a
keg  of  it.”  I asked  how  far  olf  his  father  lived.  “ Only  three  miles.
Sir,  and  I’ll  be  back  before  Eliza  has  cooked  your  supper.”  Off  he  went
accordingly,  and  the  next  moment  the  gallopping  of  his  horse  was  heard.
The  rain  fell  in  torrents,  and  now  I also  became  struck  with  the  kindness
of  our  host.

To  all  appearance  the  united  ages  of  the  pair  under  whose  roof  we
had  found  shelter  did  not  exceed  two  score.  Their  means  seemed  barely
sufficient  to  render  them  comfortable,  but  the  generosity  of  their  young
hearts  had  no  limits.  The  cabin  was  new.  The  logs  of  which  it  was
formed  were  all  of  the  tulip-tree,  and  were  nicely  pared.  Every  part
was  beautifully  clean.  Even  the  coarse  slabs  of  wood  that  formed  the
floor  looked  as  if  newly  washed  and  dried.  Sundry  gowns  and  petticoats
of  substantial  homespun  hung  from  the  logs  that  formed  one  of  the  sides
of  the  cabin,  while  the  other  was  covered  with  articles  of  male  attire.  A
large  spinning-wheel,  with  rolls  of  wool  and  cotton,  occupied  one  corner.
In  another  was  a small  cupboard,  containing  the  little  stock  of  new  dishes,
cups,  plates,  and  tin  pans.  The  table  was  small  also,  but  quite  new,
and  as  bright  as  polished  walnut  could  be.  The  only  bed  that  I saw
was  of  domestic  manufacture,  and  the  counterpane  proved  how  expert
tlie  young  wife  was  at  spinning  and  weaving.  A fine  rifle  ornamented
the  chimney-piece.  The  fire-place  was  of  such  dimensions  that  it  looked

B b


386


HOSPITALITY.


as  if  it  had  been  purposely  constructed  for  holding  the  numerous  progeny
expected  to  result  from  the  happy  union.

The  black  boy  was  engaged  in  grinding  some  coffee.  Bread  was
prepared  by  the  fair  hands  of  the  bride,  and  placed  on  a flat  board  in
front  of  the  fire.  The  bacon  and  eggs  already  murmured  and  spluttered
in  the  frying-pan,  and  a pair  of  chickens  puffed  and  swelled  on  a gridiron
over  the  embers,  in  front  of  the  hearth.  The  cloth  was  laid,  and  every
thing  arranged,  when  the  clattering  of  hoofs  announced  the  return  of  the
husband.  In  he  came,  bearing  a two-gallon  keg  of  cider.  His  eyes
sparkled  with  pleasure  as  he  said,  ‘‘  Only  think,  Eliza  ; father  wanted
to  rob  us  of  the  strangers,  and  was  for  coming  here  to  ask  them  to  his
own  house,  just  as  if  we  could  not  give  them  enough  ourselves ; but  here’s
the  drink — Come  gentlemen,  sit  down  and  help  yourselves.”  We  did
so,  and  I,  to  enjoy  the  repast,  took  a chair  of  the  husband’s  making  in
preference  to  one  of  those  called  Windsor,  of  which  there  were  six  in  the
cabin.  This  chair  was  bottomed  with  a piece  of  deer’s  skin  tightly
stretched,  and  afforded  a very  comfortable  seat.

The  wife  now  resumed  her  spinning,  and  the  husband  filled  a jug
with  the  sparkling  cider,  and,  seated  by  the  blazing  fire,  was  drying  his
clothes.  The  happiness  he  enjoyed  beamed  from  his  eye,  as  at  my  re-
quest he  proceeded  to  give  us  an  account  of  his  affairs  and  prospects,
which  he  did  in  the  following  words  : — I will  be  twenty-two  next
Christmas-day,”  said  our  host ; My  father  came  from  Virginia  when
young,  and  settled  on  the  large  tract  of  land  where  he  yet  lives,  and
where  with  hard  working  he  has  done  well.  There  were  nine  children
of  us.  Most  of  them  are  married  and  settled  in  the  neighbourhood.  The
old  man  has  divided  his  lands  among  some  of  us,  and  bought  others  for
the  rest.  The  land  where  I am  he  gave  me  two  years  ago,  and  a finer
piece  is  not  easily  to  be  found.  I have  cleared  a couple  of  fields,  and
planted  an  orchard.  Father  gave  me  a stock  of  cattle,  some  hogs,  and
four  horses,  with  two  Negro  boys.  I camped  here  for  most  of  the  time
when  clearing  and  planting ; and  when  about  to  marry  the  young  woman
you  see  at  the  wheel,  father  helped  me  in  raising  this  hut.  My  wife,  as
luck  would  have  it,  had  a Negro  also,  and  we  have  begun  the  world  "^as

well  off  as  most  folks,  and,  the  Lord  willing,  may but,  gentlemen,

you  don’t  eat ; do  help  yourselves — Eliza,  maybe  the  strangers  would
like  some  milk.”  The  wife  stopped  her  work,  and  kindly  asked  if  we
preferred  sweet  or  sour  milk ; for  you  must  know,  reader,  that  sour  milk


HOSPITALITY.


387


is  by  some  of  our  farmers  considered  a treat.  Both  sorts  were  produced,
but,  for  my  part,  I chose  to  stick  to  the  cider.

Supper  over,  we  all  neared  the  fire,  and  engaged  in  conversation.  At
length  our  kind  host  addressed  his  wife  as  follows  : — Eliza,  the  gen-
tlemen would  like  to  lie  down,  I guess.  What  sort  of  bed  can  you  fix
for  them  .p”  Eliza  looked  up  with  a smile,  and  said  : Why,  Willy,

we  will  divide  the  bedding,  and  arrange  half  on  the  floor,  on  which  we
can  sleep  very  well,  and  the  gentlemen  will  have  the  best  we  can  spare
them.”  To  this  arrangement  I immediately  objected,  and  proposed  lying
on  a blanket  by  the  fire  *;  but  neither  Willy  nor  Eliza  would  listen.  So,
they  arranged  a part  of  their  bedding  on  the  floor,  on  which,  after  some
debate,  we  at  length  settled.  The  Negroes  were  sent  to  their  own  cabin,
the  young  couple  went  to  bed,  and  Mr  Flimt  lulled  us  all  asleep,  with
a long  story  intended  to  shew  us  how  passing  strange  it  was  that  he
should  have  lost  his  way.

Tired  nature’s  sweet  restorer,  balmy  sleep,”— and  so  forth.  But
Aurora  soon  turned  her  off.  Mr  Speed,  our  host,  rose,  went  to  the  door,
and  returning  assured  us  that  the  weather  was  too  bad  for  us  to  attempt
proceeding.  I really  believe  he  was  heartily  glad  of  it ; but  anxious  to
continue  our  journey,  I desired  Mr  Flint  to  see  about  his  horses.  Eliza
by  this  time  was  up  too,  and  I observed  her  whispering  to  her  husband,
when  he  immediately  said  aloud,  “ To  be  sure,  the  gentlemen  will  eat
breakfast  before  they  go,  and  I will  shew  them  the  way  to  the  road.”  Ex-
cuses were  of  no  avail.  Breakfast  was  prepared  and  eaten.  The  weather
brightened  a little,  and  by  nine  we  were  under  way.  Willy  on  horse-
back headed  us.  In  a few  hours,  our  cart  arrived  at  a road,  by  follow-
ing which  we  at  length  got  to  the  main  one,  and  parted  from  our  woods-
man with  the  greater  regret  that  he  would  accept  nothing  from  any  of
us.  On  the  contrary,  telling  Mr  Flint  with  a smile,  that  he  hoped  he
might  some  time  again  follow  the  longest  track  for  a short  cut,  he  bade
us  adieu,  and  trotted  back  to  his  fair  Eliza  and  his  happy  home.


B b 2


( 388  )


THE  VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.

PeRDIX  VIRGINIAN Lath.

PLATE  LXXVI.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

The  common  name  given  to  this  bird  in  the  Eastern  and  Middle
Districts  of  our  Union  is  that  of  Quail,  but  in  the  Western  and  Southern
States,  the  more  appropriate  appellation  of  Partridge  is  bestowed  upon
it.  It  is  abundantly  met  with  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  but  more
especially  towards  the  interior.  In  the  States  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky,
where  they  are  very  abundant,  they  are  to  be  seen  in  the  markets,  both
dead  and  alive,  in  large  quantities.

This  species  performs  occasional  migrations  from  the  north-west  to  the
south-east,  usually  in  the  beginning  of  October,  and  somewhat  in  the  man-
ner of  the  Wild  Turkey.  For  a few  weeks  at  this  season,  the  northwest-
ern shores  of  the  Ohio  are  covered  with  flocks  of  Partridges.  They  ram-"
ble  through  the  woods  along  the  margin  of  the  stream,  and  generally  fly
across  towards  evening.  Like  the  Turkeys,  many  of  the  weaker  Par-
tridges often  fall  into  the  water,  while  thus  attempting  to  cross,  and  ge-
nerally perish ; for  although  they  swim  surprisingly,  they  have  not  mus-
cular power  suflicient  to  keep  up  a protracted  struggle,  although,  when
they  have  fallen  within  a few  yards  of  the  shore,  they  easily  escape  being
drowned.  I have  been  told  by  a friend  that  a person  residing  in  Phila-
delphia had  a hearty  laugh  on  hearing  that  I had  described  the  Wild
Turkey  as  swimming  for  some  distance,  when  it  had  accidentally  fallen
into  the  water.  But  be  assured,  kind  reader,  almost  every  species  of
land-bird  is  capable  of  swimming  on  such  occasions,  and  you  may  easily
satisfy  yourself  as  to  the  accuracy  of  my  statement  by  throwing  a Turkey,
a Common  Fowl,  or  any  other  bird  into  the  water.  As  soon  as  the  Par-
tridges have  crossed  the  principal  streams  in  their  way,  they  disperse  in
flocks  over  the  country,  and  return  to  their  ordinary  mode  of  life.

The  flight  of  these  birds  is  generally  performed  at  a short  distance
from  the  ground.  It  is  rapid,  and  is  continued  by  numerous  quick  flaps
of  the  wings  for  a certain  distance,  after  which  the  bird  sails  until  about
to  alight,  when  again  it  flaps  its  wings  to  break  its  descent.  When  chased
by  dogs,  or  started  by  any  other  enemy,  they  fly  to  the  middle  branches


VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.


389


of  trees  of  ordinary  size,  where  they  remain  until  danger  is  over.  They
walk  with  ease  on  the  branches.  If  they  perceive  that  they  are  observed,
they  raise  the  feathers  of  their  head,  emit  a low  note,  and  fly  off*  either  to
some  higher  branch  of  the  same  tree,  or  to  another  tree  at  a distance!
When  these  birds  rise  on  wing  of  their  own  accord,  the  whole  flock  takes
the  same  course ; but  when  put  up  (in  the  sportsman’s  phrase),  they  dis-
perse, after  alighting  call  to  each  other,  and  soon  after  unite,  each
running  or  flying  towards  the  well-known  cry  of  the  patriarch  of  the
covey.  During  deep  and  continued  snows,  they  often  remain  on  the
branches  of  trees  for  hours  at  a time.

The  usual  cry  of  this  species  is  a clear  whistle,  composed  of  three
notes ; the  first  and  last  nearly  equal  in  length,  the  latter  less  loud  than
the  first,  but  more  so  than  the  intermediate  one.  When  an  enemy  is
perceived  they  immediately  utter  a lisping  note,  frequently  repeated,  and
run  off*  with  their  tail  spread,  their  crest  erected,  and  their  wings  droop-
ing, towards  the  shelter  of  some  thicket  or  the  top  of  a fallen  tree.  At
other  times,  when  one  of  the  flock  has  accidentally  strayed  to  a distance
from  its  companions,  it  utters  two  notes  louder  than  any  of  those  men-
tioned above,  the  first  shorter  and  lower  than  the  second,  when  an  answer
is  immediately  returned  by  one  of  the  pack.  This  species  has  moreover
a love-call,  which  is  louder  and  clearer  than  its  other  notes,  and  can  be
heard  at  a distance  of  several  hundred  yards.  It  consists  of  three  distinct
notes,  the  two  last  being  loudest,  and  is  peculiar  to  the  male  bird.  A
fancied  similarity  to  the  words  Boh  White  renders  this  call  familiar  to  the
sportsman  and  farmer  ; but  these  notes  are  always  preceded  by  another,
easily  heard  at  a distance  of  thirty  or  forty  yards.  The  three  togetlier
resemble  the  words  Ah  Boh  White.  The  first  note  is  a kind  of  aspiration,
and  the  last  is  very  loud  and  clear.  This  whistle  is  seldom  heard  after
the  breeding  season,  during  which  an  imitation  of  the  peculiar  note  of
the  female  will  make  the  male  fly  towards  the  sportsman,  who  may  then
easily  shoot  it.

In  the  Middle  Districts,  the  love-call  of  the  male  is  heard  about  the
middle  of  April,  and  in  Louisiana  much  earlier.  The  male  is  seen  perch-
ed on  a fence-stake,  or  on  the  low  branch  of  a tree,  standing  nearly  in
the  same  position  for  hours  together,  and  calling  Ah  Boh  White  at  every
interval  of  a few  minutes.  Should  he  hear  the  note  of  a female,  he  sails
directly  towards  the  spot  whence  it  proceeded.  Several  males  may  be
heard  from  different  parts  of  a field  challenging  each  other,  and  should


390


VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.


they  meet  on  the  ground,  they  fight  with  great  courage  and  obstinacy,
until  the  conqueror  drives  off  his  antagonist  to  another  field.

The  female  prepares  a nest  composed  of  grasses,  arranged  in  a circu-
lar form,  leaving  an  entrance  not  unlike  that  of  a common  oven.  It  is
placed  at  the  foot  of  a tuft  of  rank  grass  or  some  close  stalks  of  corn,  and
is  partly  sunk  in  the  ground.  The  eggs  are  from  ten  to  eighteen,  rather
sharp  at  the  smaller  end,  and  of  a pure  white.  The  male  at  times  assists
in  hatching  them.  This  species  raises  only  one  brood  in  the  year,  unless
the  eggs  or  the  young  when  yet  small  have  been  destroyed.  When  this
happens,  the  female  immediately  prepares  another  nest ; and  should  it  also
be  ravaged,  sometimes  even  a third.  The  young  run  about  the  moment
after  they  make  their  appearance,  and  follow  their  parents  until  spring,
when,  having  acquired  their  full  beauty,  they  pair  and  breed.

The  Partridge  rests  at  night  on  the  ground,  either  amongst  the  grass
or  under  a bent  log.  The  individuals  which  compose  the  flock  form  a
ring,  and  moving  backwards,  approach  each  other  until  their  bodies  are
nearly  in  contact.  This  arrangement  enables  the  whole  covey  to  take
wing  when  suddenly  alarmed,  each  flying  off  in  a direct  course,  so  as  not
to  interfere  with  the  rest.

These  birds  are  easily  caught  in  snares,  common  dead-falls,  traps  and
pens^  like  those  for  the  Wild  Turkey,  but  proportionate  to  the  size  of
the  bird.  Many  are  shot,  but  the  principal  havock  is  effected  by  means
of  nets,  especially  in  the  Western  and  Southern  States.  The  method
employed  is  as  follows :

A number  of  persons  on  horseback,  provided  with  a net,  set  out  in
search  of  Partridges,  riding  along  the  fences  or  briar-thickets,  which  the
birds  are  known  to  frequent.  One  or  two  of  the  party  whistle  in  imita-
tion of  the  second  call-note  above  described,  and  as  Partridges  are  plen-
tiful, the  call  is  soon  answered  by  a covey,  when  the  sportsmen  imme-
diately proceed  to  ascertain  their  position  and  number,  seldom  consider-
ing it  worth  while  to  set  the  net  when  there  are  only  a few  birds.  They
approach  in  a careless  manner,  talking  and  laughing  as  if  merely  passing
by.  When  the  birds  are  discovered,  one  of  the  party  gallops  off  in  a
circuitous  manner,  gets  in  advance  of  the  rest  by  a hundred  yards  or
more,  according  to  the  situation  of  the  birds,  and  their  disposition  to  run,
while  the  rest  of  the  sportsmen  move  about  on  their  horses,  talking  to
each  other,  but  at  the  same  time  watching  every  motion  of  the  Partridges.
The  person  in  advance  being  provided  with  the  net,  dismounts,  and  at


VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.


391


once  falls'^to  placing  it,  so  that  his  companions  can  easily  drive  the  Par-
tridges into  it.  No  sooner  is  the  machine  ready,  than  the  net-bearer  re-
mounts and  rejoins  the  party.  The  sportsmen  separate  to  a short  dis-
tance," and  follow  the  Partridges,  talking  and  whistling,  clapping  their
hands,  or  knocking  upon  the  fence-rails.  The  birds  move  with  great
gentleness,  following  each  other,  and  are  kept  in  the  right  direction  by
the  sportsmen.  The  leading  bird  approaches  and  enters  the  mouth  of
the  net,  the  others  follow  in  succession,  when  the  net-bearer  leaps  from
his  horse,  runs  up  and  secures  the  entrance,  and  soon  dispatches  the
birds.  In  this  manner,  fifteen  or  twenty  Partridges  are  caught  at  one
driving,  and  sometimes  many  hundreds  in  the  course  of  a day.  Most
netters  give  liberty  to  a pair  out  of  each  flock,  that  the  breed  may  be
continued.

The  success  of  driving  depends  much  on  the  state  of  the  weather.
Drizzly  rain  or  melting  snow  are  the  best,  for  in  such  weather  Partridges
and  Gallinaceous  Birds  in  general  will  run  to  a great  distance  rather  than
fly;  whereas  if  the  weather  be  dry  and  clear,  they  generally  take  to
wing  the  moment  they  discover  an  intruder,  or  squat  so  that  they  cannot
be  driven  without  very  particular  care.  Again,  when  the  flocks  are
found  in  the  woods,  they  run  off  so  briskly  and  so  far,  that  it  is  difficult
for  the  net- bearer  to  place  his  machine  in  time.

The  net  is  cylindrical,  thirty  or  forty  feet  in  length,  by  about  two  in
diameter,  excepting  at  the  mouth  or  entrance,  where  it  is  rather  larger,
and  at  the  extremity,  where  it  assumes  the  form  of  a bag.  It  is  kept
open  by  means  of  small  wooden  hoops,  at  a distance  of  two  or  three  feet
from  each  other.  The  mouth  is  furnished  with  a semicircular  hoop,
sharpened  at  both  ends,  which  are  driven  into  the  ground,  thus  afford-
ing an  easy  entrance  to  the  birds.  Two  pieces  of  netting  called  wings,  of
the  same  length  as  the  cylindrical  one,  are  placed  one  on  each  side  of  the
mouth,  so  as  to  form  an  obtuse  angle  with  each  other,  and  are  supported
by  sticks  thrust  into  the  ground,  the  wings  having  the  appearance  of
two  low  fences  leading  to  a gate.  The  whole  is  made  of  light  and  strong
materials.

The  Virginian  Partridge  is  easily  kept  in  cages  or  coops,  and  soon
becomes  very  fat.  Attempts  at  rearing  them  from  the  eggs  have  gene-
rally failed,  probably  for  want  of  proper  care,  and  a deficiency  of  insects,
on  which  the  young  feed.  The  ordinary  food  of  the  species  consists  of
seeds  of  various  kinds,  and  such  berries  as  grow  near  the  surface  of  the


392


VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.


ground,  along  with  which  they  pick  up  a quantity  of  sand  or  gravel.
Towards  autumn,  when  the  young  have  nearly  attained  their  full  size,
their  flesh  becomes  fat,  juicy  and  tender,  and  being  moreover  white  and
extremely  agreeable  to  the  palate,  is  in  much  request.  Twenty  years
ago,  they  were  commonly  sold  at  twelve  cents  the  dozen ; but  now  they
are  more  commonly  sold  at  fifty  cents.  They  suffer  greatly  in  the  Mid-
dle Districts  during  severe  winters,  and  are  killed  in  immense  numbers.

This  bird  has  been  introduced  into  various  parts  of  Europe,  but  is
not  much  liked  there,  being  of  such  pugnacious  habits  as  to  drive  off  the
common  Grey  Partridge,  which  is  considered  a better  bird  for  the  table.

In  the  Plate  I have  represented  a group  of  Partridges  attacked  by  a
Hawk.  The  different  attitudes  exhibited  by  the  former  cannot  fail  to  give
you  a lively  idea  of  the  terror  and  confusion  which  prevail  on  such  oc-
casions.

Perdix  VIRGINIAN  a,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  650. — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Sjnops.  of
Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  124.

Tetrao  virginianfs,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  277.

Quail  or  Partridge,  Perdix  virginiana.  Wits.  Americ.  Ornith.  vol.  vi.  p.  21.
PI.  47.  fig.  2.  Male.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXVI.  Fig.  1,  1,  1,  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  rather  obtuse,  the  base  covered  by  feathers ; upper
mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  curved,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges
overlapping,  the  tip  declinate ; under  mandible  nearly  straight  in  its
dorsal  outline,  arched  on  the  edges,  the  sides  convex.  Nostrils  concealed
among  the  feathers.  Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  short  and
bulky.  Feet  of  ordinary  length  ; tarsus  anteriorly  scutellate,  a little
compressed,  spurless  ; toes  scutellate  above,  pectinate  on  the  sides  ; claws
arched,  obtuse.

Plumage  compact,  glossy.  Feathers  of  the  upper  part  of  the  head
erectile  into  a tuft.  Wings  short,  broad,  much  curved  and  rounded,  the
fourth  quill  longest.  Tail  short,  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  greyish-blue.  The  forehead,  a
broad  line  over  each  eye,  and  the  throat  and  fore-neck,  white.  Lore,  au-
ricular coverts,  and  a broad  irregular  semilunar  band  on  the  fore-neck,
more  or  less  black.  Upper  part  of  the  head,  hind  and  lower  part
of  the  neck  all  round,  reddish-brown.  Upper  back  and  wing-coverts


VIRGINIAN  PARTRIDGE.


S93


bright  brownish-red ; the  lower  part  of  the  back  light  red  tinged  with
yellow.  Primaries  dusky,  externally  margined  with  blue ; secondaries
irregularly  barred  with  light  red.  Tail  greyish-blue,  excepting  the  mid-
dle feathers,  which  are  dull  greyish-yellow,  sprinkled  with  black.  Sides
of  the  neck  spotted  with  white.  Under  parts  white,  streaked  with  brown-
ish-red, transversely  and  undulatingly  barred  with  black.  Sides  and  un-
der tail-coverts  reddish.

Length  10  inches,  extent  of  wings  15 ; bill  along  the  back  along
the  gap  /g  ; tarsus  J,  middle  toe  nearly  the  same.

Young  Male.  Plate  LXXVI.  Fig.  2,  2.

Similar  to  the  adult  male  in  the  general  distribution  of  the  colours  ;
but  the  white  of  the  head  and  throat  bright  reddish-yellow,  the  black  of
the  fore-neck  and  sides  of  the  head  deep  brown,  the  under  parts  less  pure
and  more  dusky,  and  the  tail  of  a duller  grey.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXVI.  Fig.  3,  3,  3.

The  female  resembles  the  young  male,  but  is  more  decidedly  colour-
ed, the  bill  darker,  the  head  of  a more  uniform  and  richer  reddish-yel-
low, the  sides  of  the  neck  spotted  with  yellow  and  black.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  14.

Y oung  Female.  Plate  LXXVI.  Fig.  4,  4.  4.

The  young  females  are  somewhat  smaller  and  lighter  in  their  tints
than  the  yonng  males.

Very  Young  Birds.  Plate  LXXVI.  Fig.  5,  5,  5,  5,  5,  5,  5.

Bill  brownish-yellow.  Iris  light  hazel.  The  general  colour  of  the
upper  parts  light  yellowish-brown,  patched  with  grey  ; sides  of  the  head
dusky.  _


( 394  )


THE  BELTED  KINGSFISHEB.

Alcedo  Alcyon,  Linn.

PLATE  LXXVII.  Male  and  Female.

You  must  not  suppose,  good-natured  reader,  that  the  lives  which  I
try  to  write,  are  short  or  lengthy  according  to  the  natural  dimensions  of
the  objects  themselves ; for  if  with  the  representation  of  a large  bird,  I
present  you  with  a long  history  of  its  habits,  it  is  merely  because  that
bird,  being  perhaps  more  common,  and  therefore  more  conspicuous,  I have
had  better  and  more  frequent  opportunities  of  studying  them.  This  hap-
pens to  be  the  case  with  the  bird  which  I proceed  to  describe.

The  Belted  Kingsfisher  ! — Now,  kind  reader,  were  I infected  with  the
desire  of  giving  new  names  to  well-known  objects,  you  may  be  assured
that,  notwithstanding  the  partly  appropriate  name  given  to  this  bird,  I
should  call  it,  as  I think  it  ought  to  have  been  called,  the  United  States"'
Kingsjisher.  My  reason  for  this  will,  I hope,  become  apparent  to  you,
w^hen  I say  that  it  is  the  only  bird  of  its  genus  found  upon  the  inland
streams  of  the  Union.  Another  reason  of  equal  force  might  be  adduced,
which  is,  that,  although  the  males  of  all  denominations  have,  from  time
immemorial,  obtained  the  supremacy,  in  this  particular  case  the  term
Belted  applies  only  to  the  female,  the  male  being  destitute  of  the  belt  or
band  by  which  she  is  distinguished.  But  names  already  given  and  re-
ceived, whether  apt  or  inapt,  I am  told,  must  not  be  meddled  with.  To
this  law  I humbly  submit,  and  so  proceed,  contenting  myself  with  feeling
assured  that  many  names  given  to  birds  might,  with  much  benefit  to  the
student  of  nature,  become  the  subjects  of  reform.

The  Belted  Kingsfisher  is  a constant  resident  in  the  States  of  Loui-
siana, Mississippi,  Arkansas,  and  all  the  districts  that  lie  to  the  south  of
North  Carolina.  Its  inland  migrations  along  the  windings  of  our  noble
rivers  extend  far  and  wide,  over  the  whole  of  the  United  States.  In  all
those  portions  which  I have  visited  it  also  breeds,  although  it  returns  to
the  south  from  many  parts  during  severe  winters.

The  flight  of  this  bird  is  rapid,  and  is  prolonged  according  to  its  ne-
cessities, extending  at  times  to  considerable  distances,  in  which  case  it  is
performed  high  in  the  air.  When,  for  instance,  the  whole  course  of  one


BELTED  KINGSFISHER.


395


of  our  northern  rivers  becomes  frozen,  the  Kingsfisher,  instead  of  skim-
ming closely  over  the  surface  that  no  longer  allows  it  to  supply  itself
with  food,  passes  high  above  the  tallest  trees,  and  takes  advantage  of
every  short  cut  which  the  situation  of  the  river  affords.  By  this  means  it
soon  reaches  a milder  climate.  This  is  also  frequently  the  case,  when  it
seems  tired  of  the  kind  of  fish  that  occurs  in  a lake,  and  removes  to  another
in  a direct  line,  passing  over  the  forests,  not  unfrequently  by  a course  of
twenty  or  thirty  miles  towards  the  interior  of  the  country.  Its  motions
when  on  wing  consist  of  a series  of  flaps,  about  five  or  six  in  number,  fol-
lowed by  a direct  glide,  without  any  apparent  undulation.  It  moves  in
the  same  way  when  flying  closely  over  the  water.

If,  in  the  course  of  such  excursions,  the  bird  passes  over  a small  pool,
it  suddenly  checks  itself  in  its  career,  poises  itself  in  the  air,  like  a Spar-
row-hawk or  Kestril,  and  inspects  the  water  beneath,  to  discover  whether
there  may  be  fishes  in  it  suitable  to  its  taste.  Should  it  find  this  to  be
the  case,  it  continues  poised  for  a few  seconds,  dashes  spirally  headlong
into  the  water,  seizes  a fish,  and  alights  on  the  nearest  tree  or  stump,
where  it  swallows  its  prey  in  a moment.

The  more  usual  range  of  the  Belted  Kingsfisher,  however,  is  confined
to  the  rivers  and  creeks  that  abound  throughout  the  United  States  ; all
of  which,  according  to  the  seasons,  are  amply  supphed  with  various
fishes,  on  the  fry  of  which  this  bird  feeds.  It  follows  their  course  up  to
the  very  source  of  the  small  rivulets  ; and  it  is  not  unusual  to  hear  the
hard,  rapid,  rattling  notes  of  our  Kingsfisher,  even  amongst  the  murmur-
ing cascades  of  our  higher  mountains.  When  the  bird  is  found  in  such
sequestered  situations,  well  may  the  angler  be  assured  that  trout  is  abun-
dant. Mill-ponds  are  also  favourite  resorts  of  the  Kingsfisher,  the  usual
calmness  of  the  water  in  such  places  permitting  it  to  discover  its  prey
with  ease.  As  the  freshets  are  proportionally  less  felt  on  the  adjoining
shores,  the  holes  dug  in  the  earth  or  sand  by  this  species,  in  which  it  de-
posits its  eggs,  are  generally  found  in  places  not  far  from  a mill  worked
by  water.

I have  laid  open  to  my  view  several  of  these  holes,  in  different  situa-
tions and  soils,  and  have  generally  found  them  to  be  formed  as  follows.
The  male  and  female,  after  having  fixed  upon  a proper  spot,  are  seen
clinging  to  the  bank  of  the  stream  in  the  manner  of  Woodpeckers.
Their  long  and  stout  bills  are  set  to  work,  and  as  soon  as  the  hole  has
acquired  a certain  depth,  one  of  the  birds  enters  it,  and  scratches  out  the


396


BELTED  KINGSFISHER.


sand,  earth  or  clay,  with  its  feet,  striking  meanwhile  with  its  bill  to  ex-
tend the  depth.  The  other  bird  all  the  while  appears  to  cheer  the  la-
bourer, and  urge  it  to  continue  its  exertions ; and,  when  the  latter  is  fa-
tigued, takes  its  place.  Thus,  by  the  co-operation  of  both,  the  hole  is
dug  to  the  depth  of  four,  five,  or  sometimes  six  feet,  in  a horizontal  di-
rection, at  times  not  more  than  eighteen  inches  below  the  surface  of  the
ground,  at  others  eight  or  ten  feet.  At  the  Chicasaw  Bluffs,  on  the  Mis-
sissippi, I have  seen  some  of  these  holes  more  than  fifty  feet  below  the
surface,  but  generally  beyond  reach  of  the  highest  freshets.  The  hole  is
just  large  enough  to  admit  the  passage  of  a single  bird  at  a time.  The
end  is  rounded  and  finished  in  the  form  of  a common  oven,  to  allow  the
pair  or  the  whole  brood  to  turn  round  in  it  at  ease.  Here,  on  a few
sticks  and  feathers,  the  eggs  are  deposited  to  the  number  generally  of  six.
They  are  pure  white.  Incubation  continues  for  sixteen  days.  In  the
Middle  States,  these  birds  seldom  raise  more  than  one  brood  in  the  year,
but  in  the  southern  usually  two.  Incubation  is  performed  by  both  pa-
rents, which  evince  great  solicitude  for  the  safety  of  their  young.  The
mother  sometimes  drops  on  the  water,  as  if  severely  wounded,  and  flut-
ters and  flounders  as  if  unable  to  rise  from  the  stream,  in  order  to  induce
the  intruder  to  wade  or  swim  after  her,  whilst  her  mate,  perched  on  the
nearest  bough,  or  even  on  the  edge  of  the  bank,  jerks  his  tail,  erects  his
crest,  rattles  his  notes  with  angry  vehemence,  and  then  springing  offj
passes  and  repasses  before  the  enemy,  with  a continued  cry  of  despair.

I have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  the  young  are  fed
with  macerated  food  disgorged  by  the  parents  into  their  bills,  but  I have
reason  to  think  so,  and  I have  always  observed  the  old  ones  to  swallow
the  fishes  which  they  had  caught,  before  they  entered  the  hole.  The
young  are,  however,  afterwards  fed  directly  on  the  entire  fish  ; and  I
have  frequently  seen  them  follow  the  parent  birds,  and  alight  on  the
same  branch,  flapping  their  wings,  and  calling  with  open  bill  for  the  food
just  taken  out  of  the  water,  when  the  petition  was  seldom  denied.

The  Kingsfisher  resorts  to  the  same  hole,  to  breed  and  roost,  for
many  years  in  succession.  On  one  occasion,  when  I attempted  two  even-
ings to  seize  one  of  these  birds,  long  after  night  had  closed,  I tried  in
vain  the  first  time.  I fitted  a small  net  bag  to  the  entrance,  and  return-
ed home.  Next  morning  the  bird  had  scratched  a passage  under  the
net,  and  thus  escaped.  The  following  evening  I saw  it  enter  the  hole,
and  having  procured  a stick  that  filled  the  entrance  for  upwards  of  a


BELTED  KINGSFISHER.


397


foot,  I felt  certain  of  obtaining  it  ; but  before  I reached  the  place  next
day,  it  had  worked  its  way  out.  After  this,  I abandoned  my  attempt,
although  the  bird  continued  to  repose  in  the  same  hole.

No  superstitious  notions  exist  in  the  United  States  respecting  this
species.  The  flesh  is  extremely  fishy,  oily,  and  disagreeable  to  the  taste.
On  the  contrary,  the  eggs  are  fine  eating.  ■ -

I was  ready  to  put  my  pen  aside, ^ kind  reader,  when,  on  consulting
my  journals,  all  of  which  are  now  at  hand,  I happened  to  read,  that  I
have  seen  instances  of  this  bird’s  plunging  into  the  sea  after  small  fry,  at
Powles  Hook,  in  the  bay  opposite  to  the  City  of  New  York.  I am  not
aware  that  this  is  a common  occurrence.


Alcedo  Alcyon,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  180. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  257. —
Ch.  BonapartCy  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  48.

Belted  Kingsfisher,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  ii.  p.  637. — Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  iii.
p.  59,  PI.  23,  fig.  1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXVII.  Fig.  I,  %

Bill  long,  straight,  tetragonal,  tapering  to  an  acute  point,  compressed
towards  the  end ; upper  mandible  keeled,  with  the  dorsal  line  straight,
the  edges  overlapping ; lower  mandible  with  the  dorsal  line  slightly  con-
vex, the  tip  ascending ; gap-line  extending  to  beneath  the  eyes.  Nos-
trils basal,  dorsal,  oblong,  oblique,  half-closed  by  a bare  membrane.
Head  large,  neck  short,  body  robust.  Feet  very  short ; tarsus  roundish,
anteriorly  scutellate,  half  the  length  of  the  middle  toe  ; outer  and  middle
toes  nearly  equal,  inner  much  shorter,  hind  toe  small ; claws  rather
strong,  arched,  acute,  channelled  beneath.

Plumage  compact.  Feathers  of  the  head  long,  narrow,  rather  loose,
pointed,  and  erectile,  in  the  form  of  a longitudinal  crest,  of  which  the  an-
terior feathers  are  longest.  Wings  longish,  the  third  primary  longest.
Tail  short,  even,  of  twelve  broad  rounded  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black,  light  greenish-blue  at  the  base.  Iris  hazel.
Feet  greyish-blue;  claws  black.  Head,  cheeks,  hind  neck  and  upper
parts,  generally  light  blue,  the  shaft  of  each  feather  blackish.  A white
spot  before  the  eye,  and  a slight  streak  of  the  same  colour  on  the  under
eyelid.  Quills  brownish-black,  the  base  of  the  primaries  barred  with
white,  the  secondaries  blue  on  the  outer  web.  Two  middle  tail-feathers
blue,  as  are  the  outer  edges  of  the  rest,  excepting  the  outermost ; all,  ex-


398


BELTED  KINGSFISHER.


cepting  the  two  middle  ones,  brownish-black,  barred  with  white.  A
broad  band  of  white  across  the  neck,  broader  anteriorly  and  including
the  chin  and  throat.  A band  of  blue  across  the  fore  part  of  the  breast.
The  rest  of  the  under  parts  white,  excepting  the  sides,  which  are  mottled
with  blue.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  20  ; bill  along  the  ridge  2,  along
the  gap  2| ; tarsus  i,  middle  toe  1

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXVII.  Fig.  S,

The  blue  of  the  female  is  much  duller.  The  band  on  the  upper  part  of
the  breast  is  of  dull  greyish  blue  and  light  red  intermixed ; below  this  is
a narrow  band  of  white,  and  across  the  middle  of  the  breast  a broad  band
of  yellowish-red,  of  which  colour  also  are  the  sides.  The  rest  of  the  un-
der parts  are  white,  tinged  with  red.


1


( 399  )


THE  GREAT  CAROLINA  WREN.

Troglodytes  LUDOviciANus,  Ch.  Bonaparte.-
PLATE  LXXVIII.  Male  and  Female.  -

Permit  me  to  suggest,  kind  reader,  that  I think  it  always  best  to  see
and  judge  of  individuals  in  their  own  country.  There  independence
and  ease  are  more  commonly  met  with,  and  the  observer  is  less  attended
to.  This  being  admitted,  I shall  give  you  the  history  and  life  of  the
Great  Carolina  Wren,  as  studied  in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  where  that
bird  is  a constant  resident.

Its  flight  is  performed  by  short  flappings  of  the  wings,  the  concave
under  surfaces  of  which  occasion  a low  rustling,  as  the  bird  moves  to  the
distance  of  a few  steps  only  at  each  start.  It  is  accompanied  by  violent
jerks  of  the  tail  and  body,  and  is  by  no  means  graceful.  In  this  manner
the  Carolina  Wren  moves  from  one  fence-rail  to  another,  from  log  to
log,  up  and  down  among  the  low  branches  of  bushes,  piles  of  wood,  and
decayed  roots  of  prostrate  trees,  or  between  the  stalks  of  canes.  Its  tail
is  almost  constantly  erect,  and  before  it  starts  to  make  the  least  flight  or
leap,  it  uses  a quick  motion,  which  brings  its  body  almost  into  contact
with  the  object  on  which  it  stands,  and  then  springs  from  its  legs.  All
this  is  accompanied  with  a strong  chlrr-up,  uttered  as  if  the  bird  were  in
an  angry  mood,  and  repeated  at  short  intervals.

The  quickness  of  the  motions  of  this  active  little  bird  is  fully  equal  to
that  of  the  mouse.  Like  the  latter,  it  appears  and  is  out  of  sight  in  a mo-
ment, peeps  into  a crevice,  passes  rapidly  through  it,  and  shews  itself  at
a different  place  the  next  instant.  When  satiated  with  food,  or  fatigued
with  these  multiplied  exertions,  the  little  fellow  stops,  droops  its  tail,  and
sings  with  great  energy  a short  ditty  something  resembling  the  words
come-to-me,  come-to-me,  repeated  several  times  in  quick  succession,  so
loud,  and  yet  so  mellow,  that  it  is  always  agreeable  to  listen  to  them.
During  spring,  these  notes  are  heard  from  all  parts  of  the  plantations,
the  damp  woods,  the  swamps,  the  sides  of  creeks  and  rivers,  as  well  as
from  the  barns,  the  stables  and  the  piles  of  wood,  within  a few  yards  of
the  house.  \ have  frequently  heard  these  Wrens  singing  from  the  roof


400


GREAT  CAROLINA  WREN.


of  an  abandoned  flat-boat,  fastened  to  the  shore,  a small  distance  below
the  city  of  New  Orleans.  When  its  song  was  finished,  the  bird  went  on
creeping  from  one  board  to  another,  thrust  itself  through  an  auger-hole,
entered  through  the  boat’s  side  at  one  place,  and  peeped  out  at  another,
catching  numerous  spiders  and  other  insects  all  the  while.  It  sometimes
ascends  to  the  higher  branches  of  a tree  of  moderate  size,  by  climbing
along  a grape-vine,  searching  diligently  amongst  the  leaves  and  in  the
chinks  of  the  bark,  alighting  sidewise  against  the  trunk,  and  moving  like
a true  Creeper.  It  possesses  the  power  of  creeping  and  of  hopping  in  a
nearly  equal  degree.  The  latter  kind  of  motion  it  employs  when  nearer
the  ground,  and  among  piles  of  drifted  timber.  So  fond  is  this  bird  of
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  water,  that  it  would  be  next  to  impossi-
ble to  walk  along  the  shore  of  any  of  the  islands  of  the  Mississippi,  from
the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  to  New  Orleans,  without  observing  several  on  each
island.

Amongst  the  many  species  of  insects  which  they  destroy,  several  are
of  an  aquatic  nature,  and  are  procured  by  them  whilst  creeping  about
the  masses  of  drifted  wood.  Their  chirr-up  and  come-to-me  come-to-me
seldom  cease  for  more  than  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  at  a time,  com-
mencing with  the  first  glimpse  of  day,  and  continuing  sometimes  after
sunset.

The  nest  of  the  Carolina  Wren  is  usually  placed  in  a hole  in  some
low  decayed  tree,  or  in  a fence-stake,  sometimes  even  in  the  stable,  barn
or  coach-house,  should  it  there  find  a place  suitable  for  its  reception.  I
have  found  some  not  more  than  two  feet  from  the  ground,  in  the  stump
of  a tree  that  had  long  before  been  felled  by  the  axe,  The  materials
employed  in  its  construction  are  hay,  grasses,  leaves,  feathers,  and  horse-
hair, or  the  dry  fibres  of  the  Spanish  moss  ; the  feathers,  hair  or  moss
forming  the  lining,  the  coarse  materials  the  outer  parts.  When  the  hole  is
sufficiently  large,  the  nest  is  not  unfrequently  five  or  six  inches  in  depth,
although  only  just  wide  enough  to  admit  one  of  the  birds  at  a time.
The  number  of  eggs  is  from  five  to  eight.  They  are  of  a broad  oval
form,  greyish-white,  sprinkled  with  reddish-brown.  Whilst  at  Oakley,
the  residence  of  my  friend  James  Peukie,  Esq.  near  Bayou  Sara,  I
discovered  that  one  of  these  birds  was  in  the  habit  of  roosting  in  a W ood
Thrush’s  nest  that  was  placed  on  a low  liorizontal  branch,  and  had  been
filled  with  leaves  that  had  fallen  during  the  autumn.  It  was  in  the  habit  of


GREAT  CAROLINA  WREN.


401


thrusting  his  body  beneath  the  leaves,  and  I doubt  not  found  the  place
very  comfortable.

They  usually  raise  two,  sometimes  three  broods  in  a season.  The
young  soon  come  out  from  the  nest,  and  in  a few  days  after  creep  and  hop
about  with  as  much  nimbleness  as  the  old  ones.  Their  plumage  under-
goes no  change,  merely  becoming  firmer  in  the  colouring.

Many  of  these  birds  are  destroyed  by  Weasels  and  Minxes.  It  is,
notwithstanding,  one  of  the  most  common  birds  which  we  have  as  resi-
dent in  Louisiana.  They  ascend  along  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi  as
high  as  the  Missouri  River,  and  along  the  Ohio  nearly  to  Pittsburg,  al-
though they  do  not  occur  in  great  numbers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that
city.  They  are  common  in  Georgia,  the  Carolinas,  Kentucky,  Ohio  and
Indiana.  A few  are  to  be  seen  along  the  Atlantic  shores  as  far  as  Penn-
sylvania and  New  Jersey.  In  the  latter  State  I have  found  its  nest,  near
a swamp,  a few  miles  from  Philadelphia.  I never  observed  them  farther
to  the  eastward.

The  Dwarf  Buck-eye,  on  a blossomed  twig  of  which  you  observe  a
pair  of  Great  Carolina  Wrens,  is  by  nature  as  well  as  name  a low  shrub.
It  grows  near  swampy  ground  in  great  abundance.  Its  flowers,  which
are  scentless,  are  much  resorted  to  by  the  Humming  Birds,  on  their  first
arrival,  as  they  appear  at  a very  early  season.  The  wood  resembles  that
of  the  Common  Horse-chestnut,  and  its  fruit  is  nearly  the  same  in  form
and  colour,  but  much  smaller.  I know  of  no  valuable  property  possessed
by  this  beautiful  shrub.


Troglodytes  ludovicianus,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,
p.  93.

Sylvia  ludoviciana,  Lath.  Ind.  Oitiith.  vol.  ii.  p 548.

Great  Carolina  Wren,  Certhia  caroliniana,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  ii.
p.  61,  PI.  12.  fig.  6.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXVIII.  Pig.  1.

Bill  nearly  as  long  as  the  head,  subulato-conical,  slightly  arched,
compressed  towards  the  tip  ; upper  mandible  with  the  sides  convex  to-
wards the  end,  concave  at  the  base,  the  edges  acute  and  overlapping ;
under  mandible  with  the  back  and  sides  convex.  Nostrils  oblong,
straight,  basal,  with  a cartilaginous  lid  above,  open  and  bare.  Head  ob-
long, neck  of  ordinary  size,  body  ovate.  Legs  of  ordinary  length  ; tar-


402


GREAT  CAROLINA  WREN.


sus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  compressed,  anteriorly  scutate,  posterior-
ly edged ; toes,  scutellate  above,  inferiorly  granulate ; second  and  fourth
nearly  equal,  the  hind  toe  almost  as  long  as  the  middle  one,  third  and
fourth  united  as  far  as  the  second  joint ; claws  long,  slender,  acute,  ar-
cuate, much  compressed.

Plumage  soft,  lax,  and  tufty.  Wings  short,  very  convex,  broad  and
rounded,  the  first  quill  very  short,  the  fourth  longest.  Tail  rather  long,
curved  downwards,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  narrowish,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  wood-brown  above,  bluish  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Legs  flesh-co-
lour. The  general  colour  of  the  upper  part  is  brownish-red.  A yellowish-
white  streak  over  the  eye,  extending  far  down  the  neck,  and  edged  above
with  dark  brown.  Quills,  coverts  and  tail  barred  with  blackish-brown  ;
secondary  and  middle  coverts  tipped  with  white  ; shafts  of  the  scapulars
white.  Throat  greyish-white,  under  parts  reddish-buff,  paler  behind.
Under  tail-coverts  white,  barred  with  blackish.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  7J  ; bill  along  the  ridge  f,  along
the  gap  ; tarsus  f.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXVIII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  in  being  lighter  above,  tinged  with
grey  beneath,  and  in  w^anting  the  white  tips  of  the  wing-coverts.

This  species  and  the  Marsh  Wren  form  the  transition  from  Troglo-
dytes to  Certhia,  resembling  the  former  in  habits  and  colouring,  and  the
latter  in  the  form  of  the  bill,  as  well  as  partly  in  habits.


The  Dwarf  Buck-eye.

iEscuLUS  Pavia,  Willcf.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  ii.  p.  286.  Pursh^  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  254.

Heptandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Acera,  Juss.

Leaves  quinate,  smooth,  unequally  serrated ; racemes  lax ; generally
with  ternate  flowers  ; corollas  tetrapetalous,  their  connivent  claws  of  the
length  of  the  calyx  ; stamens  seven,  shorter  than  the  corolla.  The  flowers
are  scarlet.


( 403  ) ^


THE  TYRANT  FLY  CATCHER.

MuSCICAPA  TYRANNUS,  BriSS.

PLATE  LXXIX.  Male  and  Female.

The  Tyrant  Fly-catcher,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  named,  the  Field
Martin,  or  King  Bird,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  visitors  of  the  United
States,  where  it  is  to  be  found  during  spring  and  summer,  and  where,
were  its  good  qualities  appreciated  as  they  deserve  to  be,  it  would  remain
unmolested.  But  man  being  generally  disposed  to  consider  in  his  sub-
jects a single  fault  sufficient  to  obliterate  the  remembrance  of  a thousand
good  qualities,  even  when  the  latter  are  beneficial  to  his  interest,  and  tend
to  promote  his  comfort,  persecutes  the  King  Bird  without  mercy,  and
extends  his  enmity  to  its  whole  progeny.  This  mortal  hatred  is  occa-
sioned by  a propensity  which  the  Tyrant  Fly-catcher  now  and  then  shews
to  eat  a honey-bee,  which  the  narrow-minded  farmer  looks  upon  as  ex-
clusively his  own  property,  although  he  is  presently  to  destroy  thousands
of  its  race,  for  the  selfish  purpose  of  seizing  upon  the  fruits  of  their  la-
bours, which  he  does  with  as  little  remorse  as  if  nature’s  bounties  were
destined  for  man  alone.

The  Field  Martin  arrives  in  Louisiana,  from  the  south,  about  the
middle  of  March.  Many  individuals  remain  until  the  middle  of  Septem-
ber, but  the  greater  number  proceed  gradually  northwards,  and  are  dis-
persed over  every  portion  of  the  United  States.  For  a few  days  after  its
arrival,  it  seems  fatigued  and  doleful,  and  remains  perfectly  silent.  But
no  sooner  has  it  recovered  its  naturally  lively  spirits,  than  its  sharp  tre-
mulous cry  is  heard  over  the  fields,  and  along  the  skirts  of  all  our  woods.
It  seldom  enters  the  forests,' but  is  fond  of  orchards,  large  fields  of  clover,
the  neighbourhood  of  rivers,  and  the  gardens  close  to  the  houses  of  the
planters.  In  this  last  situation,  its  habits  are  best  observed.

Its  flight  has  now  assumed  a different  manner.  The  love-season  is  at
hand.  The  male  and  female  are  seen  moving  about  through  the  air,  with
a continued  quivering  motion  of  their  wings,  at  a height  of  twenty  or
thirty  yards  above  the.  ground,  uttering  a continual,  tremulous,  loud
shriek.  The  male  follows  in  the  wake  of  the  female,  and  both  seem  pant-
ing for  a suitable  place  in  which  to  form  their  nest.  Meanwhile,  they

c c 2


404


TYRANT  FLY-CATCHER.


watch  the  motions  of  different  insects,  deviate  a little  from  the  course  of
their  playful  rounds,  and  with  a sweeping  dart  secure  and  swallow  the
prey  in  an  instant.  Probably  the  next  sees  them  perched  on  the  twig  of
a tree,  close  together,  and  answering  the  calls  of  nature.

The  choice  of  a place  being  settled  by  the  happy  pair,  they  procure
small  dry  twigs  from  the  ground,  and  rising  to  a horizontal  branch,  ar-
range them  as  the  foundation  of  their  cherished  home.  Flakes  of  cotton,
wool  or  tow,  and  other  substances  of  a similar  nature,  are  then  placed  in
thick  and  regular  layers,  giving  great  bulk  and  consistence  to  the  fabric,
which  is  finally  lined  with  fibrous  roots  and  horse-hair.  The  female  then
deposits  her  eggs,  which  are  from  four  to  six  in  number,  broadly  ovate,
reddish-white,  or  blush  colour,  irregularly  spotted  with  brown.  No  soon-
er has  incubation  commenced,  than  the  male,  full  of  ardour,  evinces  the
most  daring  courage,  and  gallantly  drives  off  every  intruder.  Perched
on  a twig  not  far  from  his  beloved  mate,  in  order  to  protect  and  defend
her,  he  seems  to  direct  every  thought  and  action  to  these  objects.  His
snow-white  breast  expands  with  the  warmest  feelings ; the  feathers  of  his
head  are  raised  and  spread,  the  bright  orange  spot  laid  open  to  the  rays
of  the  sun  ; he  stands  firm  on  his  feet,  and  his  vigilant  eye  glances  over
the  wide  field  of  vision  around  him.  Should  he  spy  a Crow,  a Vulture,
a Martin,  or  an  Eagle,  in  the  neighbourhood  or  at  a distance,  he  spreads
his  wings  to  the  air,  and  pressing  towards  the  dangerous  foe,  approaches
him,  and  commences  his  attack  with  fury.  He  mounts  above  the  enemy,
sounds  the  charge,  and  repeatedly  plunging  upon  the  very  back  of  his
more  powerful  antagonist,  essays  to  secure  a hold.  In  this  manner,  ha-
rassing his  less  active  foe  with  continued  blows  of  his  bill,  he  follows  him
probably  for  a mile,  when,  satisfied  that  he  has  done  his  duty,  he  gives
his  wings  their  usual  quivering  motion,  and  returns  exulting  and  elated
to  his  nest,  trilling  his  notes  all  the  while.

Few  Hawks  will  venture  to  approach  the  farm-yard  while  the  King
Bird  is  near.  Even  the  cat  in  a great  measure  remains  at  home ; and,
should  she  appear,  the  little  warrior,  fearless  as  the  boldest  Eagle,  plun-
ges towards  her,  with  such  rapid  and  violent  motions,  and  so  perplexes
her  with  attempts  to  peck  on  all  sides,  that  grimalkin,  ashamed  of  herself,
returns  discomfited  to  the  house.

The  many  eggs  of  the  poultry  which  he  saves  from  the  plundering
Crow,  the  many  chickens  that  are  reared  under  his  protection,  safe  from
the  clutches  of  the  prowling  Hawks,  the  vast  number  of  insects  which  he


• TYRANT  FLY-CATCHER.


405


devours,  and  which  would  otherwise  torment  the  cattle  and  horses,  are
benefits  conferred  by  him,  more  than  sufficient  to  balance  the  few  rasp-
berries and  figs  which  he  eats,  and  calculated  to  insure  for  him  the  favour
and  protection  of  man.

The  King  Bird  fears  none  of  his  aerial  enemies  save  the  Martin ; and
although  the  latter  frequently  aids  him  in  protecting  his  nest,  and  watch-
ing over  the  farm-yard,  it  sometimes  attacks  him  with  such  animosity  as
to  force  him  to  retreat,  the  flight  of  the  Martin  being  so  superior  to  that
of  the  King  Bird  in  quickness  and  power,  as  to  enable  it  to  elude  the  blows
which  the  superior  strength  of  the  latter  might  render  fatal.  I knew  an
instance  in  which  some  Martins,  that  had  been  sole  proprietors  of  a farm-
yard for  several  seasons,  shewed  so  strong  an  antipathy  to  a pair  of  King
Birds,  which  had  chanced  to  build  their  nest  on  a tree  within  a few  yards
of  the  house,  that,  no  sooner  had  the  female  begun  to  sit  on  her  eggs,  than
the  Martin  attacked  the  male  with  unremitting  violence  for  several
days,  and,  notwithstanding  his  courage  and  superior  strength,  repeatedly
felled  him  to  the  ground,  until  he  at  length  died  of  fatigue,  when  the  fe-
male was  beaten  off  in  a state  of  despair,  and  forced  to  seek  a new  pro-
tector.

The  King  Bird  is  often  seen  passing  on  the  wing  over  a field  of  clover,
diving  down  to  the  very  blossoms,  and  reascending  in  graceful  undula-
tions, snapping  his  bill,  and  securing  various  sorts  of  insects,  now  and
then  varying  his  mode  of  chase  in  curious  zigzag  lines,  shooting  to  the
right  and  left,  up  and  down,  as  if  the  object  which  he  is  pursuing  were
manoeuvring  for  the  purpose  of  eluding  him.

About  the  month  of  August,  this  species  becomes  comparatively  mute,
and  resorts  to  the  old  abandoned  fields  and  meadows.  There,  perched  on
a fence-stake  or  a tall  mullein  stalk,  he  glances  his  eye  in  various  direc-
tions, watching  the  passing  insects,  after  which  he  darts  with  a more  di-
rect motion  than  in  spring.-  Having  secured  one,  he  returns  to  the  same
or  another  stalk,  beats  the  insect,  and  then  swallows  it.  He  frequently
flies  high  over  the  large  rivers  and  lakes,  sailing  and  dashing  about  in
pursuit  of  insects.  Again,  gliding  down  towards  the  water,  he  drinks  in
the  manner  of  various  species  of  Swallow.  When  the  weather  is  very
warm,  he  plunges  repeatedly  into  the  water,  alights  after  each  plunge  on
the  low  branch  of  a tree  close  by,  shakes  off  the  water  and  plumes  him-
self, when,  perceiving  some  individuals  of  his  tribe  passing  high  over
head,  he  ascends  to  overtake  them,  and  bidding  adieu  to  the  country,
proceeds  towards  a warmer  region.


406


TYRANT  FLY  CATCHER.


The  King  Bird  leaves  the  Middle  States  earlier  than  most  other  spe-
cies. While  migrating  southwards,  at  the  approach  of  winter,  it  flies
with  a strong  and  continued  motion,  flapping  its  wings  six  or  seven  times
pretty  rapidly,  and  sailing  for  a few  yards  without  any  undulations,  at
every  cessation  of  the  flappings.  On  the  first  days  of  September,  I have
several  times  observed  them  passing  in  this  manner,  in  detached  parties
of  twenty  or  thirty,  perfectly  silent,  and  so  resembling  the  Turdus  mi-
grator lus  in  their  mode  of  flight,  as  to  induce  the  looker-on  to  suppose
them  of  that  species,  until  he  recognises  them  by  their  inferior  size.
Their  flight  is  continued  through  the  night,  and  by  the  1st  of  October
none  are  to  be  found  in  the  Middle  States.  The  young  acquire  the  full
colouring  of  their  plumage  before  they  leave  us  for  the  south.

The  flesh  of  this  bird  is  delicate  and  savoury.  Many  are  shot  along
the  Mississippi,  not  because  these  birds  eat  bees,  but  because  the  French
of  Louisiana  are  fond  of  bee-eaters.  I have  seen  some  of  these  birds  that
had  the  shafts  of  the  tail-feathers  reaching  a quarter  of  an  inch  beyond
the  end  of  the  webs.

I have  placed  a male  and  a female  Field  Martin  on  a twig  of  the  Cot-
ton-wood Tree.  This  plant  is  very  appropriately  named,  for  not  only
are  the  grape-like  bunches  of  seeds  filled  with  a beautiful  soft  cottony
substance,  but  the  wood  can  scarcely  be  sawed  on  account  of  the  looseness
of  its  inner  fibres.  It  grows  to  a great  height  and  size,  particularly
along  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio,  and  in  all  alluvial  grounds
to  the  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains.  It  is  principally  used  for  fire-
wood and  fence-rails,  but  is  of  indifferent  quality  for  either  purpose.

Muscicapa  tyrannus,  Briss.  vol.  ii.  p.  391 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the
United  States,  p.  66.

Lanius  tyrannus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  l^G.^Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  81.

Tyrant  Shrike,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  184.

Tyrant  Fly-catcher,  Muscicapa  tyrannus.  Wits.  Anier.  Ornith.  vol.i  i.  p.  66.
PI.  13.  % 1.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  moderate  length,  rather  stout,  subtrigonal,  depressed  at  the
base,  straight ; upper  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  nearly  straight,
and  sloping  to  near  the  tip,  which  is  deflected  and  acute,  the  edges  sharp
and  overlapping  ; lower  mandible  with  the  back  broad,  the  sides  slant-
ing, the  end  slightly  declinate.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  roundish,  partly


TYRANT  FLY-CATCHER.


407


covered  by  the  bristly  feathers.  Head  rather  large,  neck  stout,  body
ovate.  Feet  rather  short;  tarsus  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  scutella,
compressed,  acute  behind,  about  the  same  length  as  the  middle  toe  ; toes
free,  scutellate  above ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  glossy.  Basirostral  bristles  long,  directed
outwards.  Feathers  of  the  head  narrow,  elongated,  and  erectile,  forming
a short  longitudinal  tuft.  Wings  rather  long,  the  second  and  third  quills
longest.  Tail  rather  long,  even,  of  twelve  broadly  acuminate  feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  greyish-blue.  The  general  co-
lour of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  bluish-grey,  the  head  darker.  Feathers
along  the  middle  of  the  crown  forming  a rich  flame-coloured  patch,  mar-
gined with  yellow.  Quills  brownish-black,  as  are  the  coverts,  which,  to-
gether with  the  secondary  quills,  are  externally  margined  and  tipped  with
dull  white.  Tail  brownish-black,  deeper  towards  the  end,  each  feather
largely  tipped  with  white,  of  which  colour  also  is  part  of  the  outer  web
of  the  lateral  feathers.  Under  parts  greyish-white,  throat  and  fore-neck
pure  white,  the  breast  tinged  with  ash-grey.

Length  8|  inches,  extent  of  wings  14^ ; bill  along  the  ridge
along  the  gap  1.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  duller  in  colouring  ; the  upper  parts  being  lighter  and
tinged  with  brown,  the  under  parts  more  dusky,  the  orange  spot  on  the
head  smaller  and  not  so  bright,  and  the  white  tip  of  the  tail  less  pure  and
not  so  extensive.


The  Cotton- wood.

PopuLus  cANDicANS,  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  806.  Pursh.  FI.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  618.

Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  iii.  PI.  13.— Dkecia  octandria,  Linn.

Ament  ACE.®,  Juss.

This  species  of  Poplar  is  distinguished  by  its  broadly  cordate,  acumi-
nate, unequally  and  obtusely  serrated,  venous  leaves  ; hairy  petioles,  re-
sinous buds,  and  round  twigs.  The  leaves  are  dark  green  above,  whitish
beneath.  The  resinous  Substance  with  which  the  buds  are  covered  has
an  agreeable  smell.  The  bark  is  smooth,  of  a greenish  tint.


( 408  )


THE  PRAIRIE  TITLARK.

An  THUS  PI  PIE  NS,

PLATE  LXXX.  Male.

I SHOT  two  of  these  birds  whilst  traversing  one  of  the  extensive  prairies
of  our  North-western  States.  Five  of  them  had  been  running  along  the
foot-path  before  me,  for  some  time.  I at  first  looked  upon  them  as  of
the  Common  Brown  Titlark  species  (Jnthus  Spmoletta),  hut  as  they  rose
on  the  wing,  the  difference  of  their  notes  struck  me,  and,  shooting  at  them,

I had  the  good  fortune  to  kill  two,  which  I discovered,  on  examination,
to  be  of  a new  and  distinct  species,  although  in  the  general  appearance
of  their  plumage  they  were  very  nearly  allied  to  the  Brown  Titlark.  The
rest  I pursued  in  vain,  and  was  forced  to  abandon  the  chase  on  account
of  the  approach  of  night,  and  the  necessity  of  preparing  for  rest  after  a
long  walk.

The  flight  of  the  Prairie  Titlark  is  irregular,  and  performed  by  jerks,
although  greatly  protracted,  when  the  bird  is  pursued  or  frightened.  At
short  intervals  these  birds  plunged  through  the  air,  came  towards  the
ground,  and  flew  close  over  the  prairie,  as  if  about  to  alight,  and  again  \

rising,  made  a large  circuit.  In  this  manner  they  continued  all  the  time
I saw  them  on  wing.  Whilst  on  the  ground  they  ran  briskly,  vibrating
their  tail,  whenever  they  stopped,  and  picking  up  the  insects  near  them.

The  notes  of  the  Prairie  Titlark  are  clear  and  sharp,  consisting  of  a
number  of  tweets^  the  last  greatly  prolonged.  The  two  individuals  which  I
procured  proved  to  be  males.  They  seemed  to  be  in  imperfect  plumage^
it  being  then  the  month  of  October,  and  the  crescent  on  their  breast  not
being  so  distinctly  defined  at  the  surface,  as  it  was  deeper  among  the
feathers.  Of  their  mode  of  nestling,  and  other  habits,  I can  say  nothing,
as  I never  happened  to  meet  with  another  individual  of  the  species.

Anthus  PiriENS.

Male.  Plate  LXXX.

Bill  straight,  slender,  compressed,  acuminate ; upper  mandible  cari-
nated  at  tlie  base,  rounded  on  the  sides,  the  edges  inflected  towards  the


PRAIRIE  TITLARK.


409


tip,  which  is  slightly  declinate  and  notched ; lower  mandible  ascending
in  its  dorsal  outline.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half  closed  above
by  a membrane.  The  general  form  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  length  ;
tarsus  slender,  compressed  ; toes  free ; claws  of  the  fore  toes  arched,  com-
pressed, acute,  of  the  hind  toe  very  long,  subulate-compressed,  nearly
straights

Plumage  soft,  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  first,  second,  and
third  quills  longest,  the  secondaries  notched  at  the  tip.  Tail  long,  emar-
ginate.

Bill  dark  brown,  the  under  mandible  orange  at  the  base.  Iris  hazel.
Feet  brownish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dull
olive-brown ; a brownish- white  line  over  the  eye ; auricular  coverts
blackish.  Under  parts  pale  yellowish-grey  ; an  obscure  lunule  of  brown-
ish-black on  the  fore  neck,  the  lower  part  of  which,  and  the  sides,  are
streaked  with  dark  brown,  and  tinged  with  reddish-brown.

Length  inches,  bill  along  the  ridge  i,  along  the  gap  f ; tarsus
middle  toe  |,  hind  toe  f .


Phlox  subulata,  Willd.  Sp.  PL  vol.  i.  p.  842.  Pursh^  FI.  Amer.  vol.  i.  p.  15l.—
Pentandria  Monogynia,  Linn.  Polemonia,  Juss.

Caespitose,  pubescent ; leaves  linear,  pungent,  ciliate ; corymbs  few-
flowered  ; pedicels  trifid ; divisions  of  the  corolla  wedge-shaped,  emargi-
nate ; teeth  of  the  calyx  subulate,  scarcely  shorter  than  the  tube  of  the
coroUa.  The  flowers  are  pink,  with  a purple  star  in  the  centre.  It  grows
in  rocky  places,  and  on  barren,  gravelly  ground,  flowering  through  the


summer.


( 410  )


THE  ORIGINAL  PAINTER.

As  I was  lounging  one  fair  and  very  warm  morning  on  the  Levee  at
New  Orleans,  I chanced  to  observe  a gentleman,  whose  dress  and  other
accompaniments  greatly  attracted  my  attention.  I wheeled  about,  and
followed  him  for  a short  space,  when,  judging  by  every  thing  about  him
that  he  was  a true  original,  I accosted  him.

But  here,  kind  reader,  let  me  give  you  some  idea  of  his  exterior.
His  head  was  covered  by  a straw  hat,  the  brim  of  which  might  cope  with
those  worn  by  the  fair  sex  in  1830;  his  neck  was  exposed  to  the  wea-
ther ; the  broad  frill  of  a shirt,  then  fashionable,  flapped  about  his  breast,
whilst  an  extraordinary  collar,  carefully  arranged,  fell  over  the  top  of  his
coat.  The  latter  was  of  a light  green  colour,  harmonizing  well  with  a
pair  of  flowing  yellow  nankeen  trowsers,  and  a pink  waistcoat,  from  the
bosom  of  which,  amidst  a large  bunch  of  the  splendid  flowers  of  the
Magnolia,  protruded  part  of  a young  alligator,  which  seemed  more
anxious  to  glide  through  the  muddy  waters  of  some  retired  swamp,  than
to  spend  its  life  swinging  to  and  fro  among  folds  of  the  finest  lawn.  The
gentleman  held  in  one  hand  a cage  full  of  richly-plumed  Nonpareils,
whilst  in  the  other  he  sported  a silk  umbrella,  on  which  I could  plainly  read
Stolen  from  /,”  these  words  being  painted  in  large  white  characters.
He  walked  as  if  conscious  of  his  own  importance,  that  is,  with  a good
deal  of  pomposity,  singing  ‘‘  My  love  is  but  a lassie  yet,”  and  that
with  such  thorough  imitation  of  the  Scotch  emphasis,  that  had  not  his
physiognomy  brought  to  my  mind  a denial  of  his  being  from  “ within  a
mile  of  Edinburgh,”  I should  have  put  him  down  in  my  journal  for  a
true  Scot.  But  no : — his  tournure,  nay,  the  very  shape  of  his  visage,
pronounced  him  an  American,  from  the  farthest  parts  of  our  eastern  At-
lantic shores.

All  this  raised  my  curiosity  to  such  a height,  that  I accosted  him
with  Pray,  Sir,  will  you  allow  me  to  examine  the  birds  you  have  in
that  cage The  gentleman  stopped,  straightened  his  body,  almost
closed  his  left  eye,  then  spread  his  legs  apart,  and,  with  a look  altogether
quizzical,  answered,  Birds,  Sir,  did  you  say  birds  ?”  I nodded,  and
he  continued,  What  the  devil  do  you  know  about  birds.  Sir .?”

Reader,  this  answer  brought  a blush  into  my  face.  I felt  as  if  caught


THE  ORIGINAL  PAINTER.


41]


in  a trap,  for  I was  struck  by  the  force  of  the  gentleman’s  question;
which,  by  the  way,  was  not  much  in  discordance  with  a not  unusual
mode  of  granting  an  answer  in  the  United  States.  Sure  enough,  thought
I,  little  or  perhaps  nothing  do  I know  of  the  nature  of  those  beautiful
denizens  of  the  air ; but  the  next  moment  vanity  gave  me  a pinch,  and
urged  me  to  conceive  that  I knew  at  least  as  much  about  birds  as  the
august  personage  in  my  presence.  Sir,”  replied  I,  I am  a student  of
nature,  and  admire  her  works,  from  the  noblest  figure  of  man  to  the
crawling  reptile  which  you  have  in  your  bosom.”  Ah  I”  replied  he,
a^a^a  naturalist,  I presume  !”  Just  so,  my  good  Sir,”  was  my  answer.
The  gentleman  gave  me  the  cage ; and  I observed  from  the  corner  of
one  of  my  eyes,  that  his  were  cunningly  inspecting  my  face.  I examined
the  pretty  finches  as  long  as  I wished,  returned  the  cage,  made  a"  low
bow,  and  was  about  to  proceed  on  my  walk,  when  this  odd  sort  of  being
asked  me  a question  quite  accordant  with  my  desire  of  knowing  more  of
him:  Will  you  come  with  me.  Sir.?  If  you  will,  you  shall  see  some

more  curious  birds,  some  of  which  are  from  diflFerent  parts  of  the  world.
I keep  quite  a collection.”  I assured  him  I should  feel  gratified,  and
accompanied  him  to  his  lodgings.

We  entered  a long  room,  where,  to  my  surprise,  the  first  objects  that
attracted  my  attention  were  a large  easel,  with  a full  length  unfinished
portrait  upon  it,  a table  with  pallets  and  pencils,  and  a number  of  pic-
tures of  various  sizes  placed  along  the  walls.  Several  cages  containing
birds  were  hung  near  the  windows,  and  two  young  gentlemen  were  busily
engaged  in  copying  some  finished  portraits.  1 was  delighted  with  all  I
saw.  Each  picture  spoke  for  itself : the  drawing,  the  colouring,  the  hand-
ling, the  composition,  and  the  keeping- — all  proved,  that,  whoever  was
the  artist,  he  certainly  was  possessed  of  superior  talents.

I did  not  know  if  my  companion  was  the  painter  of  the  picture,  but,
as  we  say  in  America,  I strongly  guessed,  and  without  waiting  any
longer,  paid  him  the  compliments  which  I thought  he  fairly  deserved.
“ Aye,”  said  he,  the  world  is  pleased  with  my  work,  I wish  I were  so
too,  but  time  and  industry  are  required  as  well  as  talents,  to  make  a
good  artist.  If  you  will  examine  the  birds.  I’ll  to  my  labour.’’  - So
sayings  the  artist  took  up  his  pallet,  and  was  searching  for  a rest-stick,
but  not  finding  the  one  with  which  he  usually  supported  his  hand,  he
drew  the  rod  of  a gun,  and  was  about  to  sit,  when  he  suddenly  threw
down  his  implements  on  the  table,  and,  taking  the  gun,  walked  to


412


THE  ORIGINAL  PAINTER.


me,  and  asked  if  I had  ever  seen  a percussion-lock.”  I had  not,  for
that  improvement  was  not  yet  in  vogue.  He  not  only  explained  the  supe-
riority of  the  lock  in  question,  but  undertook  to  prove  that  it  was  capable
of  acting  effectually  under  water.  The  bell  was  rung,  a flat  basin  of
water  was  produced,  the  gun  was  charged  with  powder,  and  the  lock
fairly  immersed.  The  report  terrified  the  birds,  causing  them  to  beat
against  the  gilded  walls  of  their  prisons.  I remarked  this  to  the  artist.  He
replied,  The  devil  take  the  birds  ! — more  of  them  in  the  market ; why.
Sir,  I wish  to  shew  you  that  I am  a marksman  as  well  as  a painter.”  The
easel  was  cleared  of  the  large  picture,  rolled  to  the  further  end  of  the  roomj
and  placed  against  the  wall.  The  gun  was  loaded  in  a trice,  and  the  painter,
counting  ten  steps  from  the  easel,  and  taking  aim  at  the  supporting-pin
on  the  left,  fired.  The  bullet  struck  the  head  of  the  wooden  pin  fairly,
and  sent  the  splinters  in  all  directions.  A bad  shot,  sir,”  said  this  ex-
traordinary person,  the  ball  ought  to  have  driven  the  pin  farther  into
the  hole,  but  it  struck  on  one  side  ; I’ll  try  at  the  hole  itself.”  After  re-
loading his  piece,  the  artist  took  aim  again,  and  fired.  The  bullet  this
time  had  accomplished  its  object,  for  it  had  passed  through  the  aperture,
and  hit  the  wall  behind.  ‘‘  Mr ring  the  bell  and  close  the  win-

dows,” said  the  painter,  and  turning  to  me,  continued,  Sir,  I will  shew
you  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  shooting.”  I was  quite  amazed,  and  yet  so  de-
lighted, that  I bowed  my  assent.  A servant  having  appeared,  a lighted
candle  was  ordered.  When  it  arrived,  the  artist  placed  it  in  a proper
position,  and  retiring  some  yards,  put  out  the  light  with  a bullet,  in  the
manner  which  I have  elsewhere,  in  this  volume,  described.  When  light
was  restored,  I observed  the  uneasiness  of  the  poor  little  alligator,  as  it
strove  to  effect  its  escape  from  the  artist’s  waistcoat.  I mentioned  this  to
him.  “ True,  true,”  he  replied,  ‘‘  I had  quite  forgot  the  reptile,  he  shall
have  a dram and  unbuttoning  his  vest,  unclasped  a small  chain,  and
placed  the  alligator  in  the  basin  of  water  on  the  table.

Perfectly  satisfied  with  the  acquaintance  which  I had  formed  with
this  renowned  artist,  I wished  to  withdraw,  fearing  I might  inconvenience
him  by  my  presence.  But  my  time  was  not  yet  come.  He  bade  me  sit
down,  and  paying  no  more  attention  to  the  young  pupils  in  the  room  than
if  they  had  been  a couple  of  cabbages,  said,  “ If  you  have  leisure  and  will
stay  awhile,  I will  shew  you  how  I paint,  and  will  relate  to  you  an  in-
cident of  my  life,  which  will  prove  to  you  how  sadly  situated  an  artist  is
at  times.”  In  full  expectation  that  more  eccentricities  were  to  be  witness-


THE  ORIGINAL  PAINTER.


413


ed,  or  that  the  story  would  prove  a valuable  one,  even  to  a naturalist,
who  is  seldom  a painter,  I seated  myself  at  his  side,  and  observed  with
interest  how  adroitly  he  transferred  the  colours  from  his  glistening  pallet
to  the  canvas  before  him.  I was  about  to  compliment  him  on  his  facility
of  touch,  when  he  spoke  as  follows  :

‘‘  This  is,  sir,  or,  I ought  to  say  rather,  this  will  be  the  portrait  of  one
of  our  best  navy  officers,  a man  as  brave  as  C^sar,  and  as  good  a sailor
as  ever  walked  the  deck  of  a seventy-four.  Do  you  paint.  Sir.?”  I replied
“ Not  yet.”  Not  yet  ! what  do  you  mean  .?”  “ I mean  what  I say  •.  I

intend  to  paint  as  soon  as  I can  draw  better  than  I do  at  present.”
“ Good,”  said  he,  “ you  are  quite  right,  to  draw  is  the  first  object ; but,
sir,  if  you  should  ever  paint,  and  paint  portraits,  you  will  often  meet  with
difficulties.  For  instance,  the  brave  Commodore,  of  whom  this  is  the
portrait,  although  an  excellent  man  at  every  thing  else,  is  the  worst  sit-
ter I ever  saw  ; and  the  incident  I promised  to  relate  to  you,  as  one  cu-
rious enough,  is  connected  with  his  bad  mode  of  sitting.  Sir,  I forgot

to  ask  if  you  would  take  any  refreshment — a glass  of  wine,  or .”  I

assured  him  I needed  nothing  more  than  his  agreeable  company,  and  he
proceeded.  “ Well,  Sir,  the  first  morning  that  the  Commodore  came  to
sit,  he  was  in  full  uniform,  and  with  his  sword  at  his  side.  After  a few
moments  of  conversation,  and  when  all  was  ready  on  my  part,  I bade
him  ascend  this  throne,  place  himself  in  the  attitude  which  I contemplated,
and  assume  an  air  becoming  an  officer  of  the  navy.”  He  mounted,
placed  himself  as  I had  desired,  but  merely  looked  at  me  as  if  I had  been
a block  of  stone.  I waited  a few  minutes,  when,  observing  no  change
on  his  placid  countenance,  I ran  the  chalk  over  the  canvas,  to  form  a
rough  outline.  This  done,  I looked  up  to  his  face  again,  and  opened  a
conversation  which  I thought  would  warm  his  warHke  nature ; but  in
vain.  I waited  and  waited,  talked  and  talked,  until  my  patience — Sir,
you  must  know  I am  not  overburdened  with  phlegm — being  almost  run
out,  I rose,  threw  my  pallet  and  brushes  on  the  floor,  stamped,  walking  to
and  fro  about  the  room,  and  vociferated  such  calumnies  against  our  navy,
that  I startled  the  good  Commodore.  He  still  looked  at  me  with  a placid
countenance,  and,  as  he  has  told  me  since,  thought  I had  lost  my
senses.  But  I observed  him  all  the  while,  and,  fully  as  determined  to
carry  my  point,  as  he  would  be  to  carry  off  an  enemy’s  ship,  I gave  my
oaths  additional  emphasis,  addressed  him  as  a representative  of  the  navy,
and,  steering  somewhat  clear  of  personal  insult,  played  off  my  batteries


414


THE  ORIGINAL  PAINTER.


against  the  craft.  The  Commodore  walked  up  to  me,  placed  his  hand
on  the  hilt  of  his  sword,  and  told  me,  in  a resolute  manner,  that  if  I in-
tended to  insult  the  navy,  he  would  instantly  cut  off  my  ears.  His  fea-
tures exhibited  all  the  spirit  and  animation  of  his  noble  nature,  and  as  I
had  now  succeeded  in  rousing  the  lion,  I judged  it  time  to  retreat.  So,
changing  my  tone,  I begged  his  pardon,  and  told  him  he  now  looked
precisely  as  I wished  to  represent  him.  He  laughed,  and  returning  to  his
seat,  assumed  a bold  countenance.  And  now.  Sir,  see  the  picture

At  some  future  period,  I may  present  you  with  other  instances  of  the
odd  ways  in  which  this  admired  artist  gave  animation  to  his  sitters.  For
the  present,  kind  reader,  we  shall  leave  him  finishing  the  Commodore,
while  we  return  to  our  proper  studies.


( 415  )


THE  FISH  HAWK,  OR  OSPREY.

PLATE  LXXXI.  Male.

Comparing  the  great  size  of  this  bird,  its  formidable  character,  its
powerful  and  protracted  flight,  and  the  dexterity  with  which,  although  a
land  bird,  it  procures  its  prey  from  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  with  the  very
inferior  powers  of  the  bird  named  the  Kingsfisher,  I should  be  tempted
to  search  for  a more  appropriate  appellation  than  that  of  Fish-Hawk,
and,  were  I not  a member  of  a republic,  might  fancy  that  of  Imperial
Fisher  more  applicable  to  it.

The  habits  of  this  famed  bird  differ  so  materially  from  those  of  almost
all  others  of  its  genus,  that  an  accurate  description  of  them  cannot  fail
to  be  highly  interesting  to  the  student  of  nature.

The  Fish  Hawk  may  be  looked  upon  as  having  more  of  a social  dis-
position than  most  other  Hawks.  Indeed,  with  the  exception  of  the
Swallow-tailed  Hawk  (JFcdco  Jiircatus)^  I know  none  so  gregarious  in  its
habits.  It  migrates  in  numbers,  both  during  spring,  when  it  shews  itself
along  our  Atlantic  shores,  lakes,  and  rivers,  and  during  autumn,  when  it
retires  to  warmer  climes.  At  these  seasons,  it  appears  in  flocks  of  eight
or  ten  individuals,  following  the  windings  of  our  shores  in  loose  bodies,
.advancing  in  easy  sailings  or  flappings,  crossing  each  other  in  their  gyra-
tions. During  the  period  of  their  stay  in  the  United  States,  many  pairs
are  seen  nestling,  rearing  their  young,  and  seeking  their  food,  within  so
short  a distance  of  each  other,  that  while  following  the  margins  of  our
eastern  shores,  a Fish  Hawk  or  a nest  belonging  to  the  species,  may  be
met  with  at  every  short  interval.

The  Fish  Hawk  may  be  said  to  be  of  a mild  disposition.  Not  only
do  these  birds  live  in  perfect  harmony  together,  but  they  even  allow  other
birds  of  very  different  character  to  approach  so  near  to  them  as  to  build
their  nests  of  the  very  materials  of  which  the  outer  parts  of  their  own  are
constructed.  I have  never  observed  a Fish  Hawk  chasing  any  other  bird
whatever.  So  pacific  and  timorous  is  it,  that,  rather  than  encounter  a
foe  but  little  more  powerful  than  itself,  it  abandons  its  prey  to  the  White-
headed  Eagle,  which,  next  to  man,  is  its  greatest  enemy.  It  never  forces
its  young  from  the  nest,  as  some  other  Hawk»  do,  but>  on  the  contrary.


416


FISH  HAWK.


is  seen  to  feed  them  even  when  they  have  begun  to  procure  food  for
themselves.

Notwithstanding  all  these  facts,  a most  erroneous  idea  prevails  among
our  fishermen,  and  the  farmers  along  our  coasts,  that  the  Fish  Hawk’s
^ nest  is  the  best  scare-crow  they  can  have  in  the  vicinity  of  their  houses  or
grounds.  As  these  good  people  affirm,  no  Hawk  will  attempt  to  commit
depredations  on  their  poultry,  so  long  as  the  Fish  Hawk  remains  in  the
country.  But  the  absence  of  most  birds  of  prey  from  those  parts  at  the
time  when  the  Fish  Hawk  is  on  our  coast,  arises  simply  from  the  neces-
sity of  retiring  to  the  more  sequestered  parts  of  the  interior  for  the  pur-
pose of  rearing  their  young  in  security,  and  the  circumstance  of  their  vi-
siting the  coasts  chiefly  at  the  period  when  myriads  of  water-fowl  resort
to  our  estuaries  at  the  approach  of  winter,  leaving  the  shores  and  salt-
marshes  at  the  return  of  spring,  when  the  Fish  Hawk  arrives.  However,
as  this  notion  has  a tendency  to  protect  the  latter  bird,  it  may  be  so  far
useful,  the  fisherman  always  interposing  when  he  sees  a person  bent  upon
the  destruction  of  his  favourite  bird.

The  Fish  Hawk  differs  from  all  birds  of  prey  in  another  important
particular,  which  is,  that  it  never  attempts  to  secure  its  prey  in  the  air,
although  its  rapidity  of  flight  might  induce  an  observer  to  suppose  it  per-
fectly able  to  do  so.  I have  spent  weeks  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  where
these  birds  are  numerous,  and  have  observed  them  sailing  and  plung-
ing into  the  water,  at  a time  when  numerous  shoals  of  flying-fish  were
emerging  from  the  sea  to  evade  the  pursuit  of  the  dolphins.  Yet  the.
Fish  Hawk  never  attempted  to  pursue  any  of  them  while  above  the
surface,  but  would  plunge  after  one  of  them  or  a bonita-fish,  after  they
had  resumed  their  usual  mode  of  swimming  near  the  surface.

The  motions  of  the  Fish  Hawk  in  the  air  are  graceful,  and  as  majes-
tic as  those  of  the  Eagle.  It  rises  with  ease  to  a great  height  by  exten-
sive circlings,  performed  apparently  by  mere  inclinations  of  the  wings  and
tail.  It  dives  at  times  to  some  distance  with  the  wings  partially  closed,
and  resumes  its  sailing,  as  if  these  plunges  were  made  for  amusement
only.  Its  wings  are  extended  at  right  angles  to  the  body,  and  when  thus
flying  it  is  easily  distinguishable  from  all  other  Hawks  by  the  eye  of  an
observer  accustomed  to  note  the  flight  of  birds.  Whilst  in  search  of  food,
it  flies  with  easy  flappings  at  a moderate  height  above  the  water,  and  with
an  apparent  listlessness,  although  in  reality  it  is  keenly  observing  the  ob-
jects beneath.  No  sooner  does  it  spy  a fish  suited  to  its  taste,  than  it

2


FISH  HAWK


417


checks  its  course  with  a sudden  shake  of  its  wings  and  tail,  which  gives
it  the  appearance  of  being  poised  in  the  air  for  a moment,  after  which  it
plunges  headlong  with  great  rapidity  into  the  water,  to  secure  its  prey,
or  continue  its  flight,  if  disappointed  by  having  observed  the  fish  sink
deeper.

When  it  plunges  into  the  water  in  pursuit  of  a fish,  it  sometimes  pro-
ceeds deep  enough  to  disappear  for  an  instant.  The  surge  caused  by  its
descent  is  so  great  as  to  make  the  spot  around  it  present  the  appearance
of  a mass  of  foam.  On  rising  with  its  prey,  it  is  seen  holding  it  in  the
manner  represented  in  the  Plate.  It  mounts  a few  yards  into  the  air,
shakes  the  water  from  its  plumage,  squeezes  the  fish  with  its  talons,  and
immediately  proceeds  towards  its  nest,  to  feed  its  young,  or  to  a tree,  to
devour  the  fruit  of  its  industry  in  peace.  When  it  has  satisfied  its  hunger,
it  does  not,  like  other  Hawks,  stay  perched  until  hunger  again  urges  it
forth,  but  usually  sails  about  at  a great  height  over  the  neighbouring
waters.

The  Fish  Hawk  has  a great  attachment  to  the  tree  to  which  it  carries
its  prey,  and  will  not  abandon  it,  unless  frequently  disturbed,  or  shot  at
whilst  feeding  there.  It  shews  the  same  attachment  to  the  tree  on  which
it  has  built  its  first  nest,  and  returns  to  it  year  after  year.

This  species  arrives  on  the  southern  coasts  of  the  United  States  early
in  the  month  of  February,  and  proceeds  eastward  as  the  season  advances.
In  the  Middle  Districts,  the  fishermen  hail  its  appearance  with  joy,  as  it
is  the  harbinger  of  various  species  of  fish  which  resort  to  the  Atlantic
coasts,  or  ascend  the  numerous  rivers.  It  arrives  in  the  Middle  States
about  the  beginning  of  April,  and  returns  southward  at  the  first  appear-
ance of  frost.  I have  occasionally  seen  a few  of  these  birds  on  the  muddy
lakes  of  Louisiana,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Orleans,  during  the
winter  months  ; but  they  appeared  emaciated,  and  were  probably  unable
to  follow  their  natural  inclinations,  and  proceed  farther  south.

As  soon  as  the  females  make  their  appearance,  which  happens  eight
or  ten  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  males,  the  love-season  commences,  and
soon  after,  incubation  takes  place.  The  loves  of  these  birds  are  conducted
in  a different  way  from  those  of  the  other  Falcons.  The  males  are  seen
playing  through  the  air  amongst  themselves,  chasing  each  other  in  sport,
or  sailing  by  the  side  or  after  the  female  which  they  have  selected,  uttering
cries  of  joy  and  exultation,  alighting  on  the  branches  of  the  tree  on  which
their  last  year’s  nest  is  yet  seen  remaining,  and  doubtless  congratulating

I)  d


418


FISH  HAWK.


each  other  on  finding  their  home  again.  Their  caresses  are  mutual.
They  begin  to  augment  their  habitation,  or  to  repair  the  injuries  which  it
may  have  sustained  during  the  winter,  and  are  seen  sailing  together  to-
wards the  shores,  to  collect  the  drifted  sea- weeds  with  which  they  line  the
nest  anew.  They  alight  on  the  beach,  search  for  the  driest  and  largest
weeds,  collect  a mass  of  them,  clench  them  in  their  talons,  and  fly  towards
their  nest  with  the  materials  dangling  beneath.  They  both  alight  and
labour  together.  In  a fortnight  the  nest  is  complete,  and  the  female  de-
posits her  eggs,  which  are  three  or  four  in  number,  of  a broadly  oval
form,  yellowish-white,  densely  covered  with  large  irregular  spots  of  red-
dish-brown.

The  nest  is  generally  placed  in  a large  tree  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  the  water,  whether  along  the  seashore,  on  the  margins  of  the  inland
lakes,  or  by  some  large  river.  It  is,  however,  sometimes  to  be  seen  in
the  interior  of  a wood,  a mile  or  more  from  the  water.  I have  concluded
that,  in  the  latter  case,  it  was  on  account  of  frequent  disturbance,  or  at-
tempts at  destruction,  that  the  birds  had  removed  from  their  usual  haunt.
The  nest  is  very  large,  sometimes  measuring  fully  four  feet  across,  and  is
composed  of  a quantity  of  materials  sufficient  to  render  its  depth  equal  to
its  diameter.  Large  sticks,  mixed  with  sea-weeds,  tufts  of  strong  grass,  and
other  materials,  form  its  exterior,  while  the  interior  is  composed  of  sea-
weeds and  finer  grasses.  I have  not  observed  that  any  particular  species
of  tree  is  preferred  by  the  Fish  Hawk.  It  places  its  nest  in  the  forks  of
an  oak  or  a pine  with  equal  pleasure.  But  I have  observed  that  the  tree
chosen  is  usually  of  considerable  size,  and  not  unfrequently  a decayed  one.
I dare  not,  however,  affirm  that  the  juices  of  the  plants  which  compose  the
nest,  ever  become  so  detrimental  to  the  growth  of  a tree  as  ultimately  to
kill  it.  In  a few  instances,  I have  seen  the  Fish  Crow  and  the  Purple
Grakle  raising  their  families  in  nests  built  by  them  among  the  outer
sticks  of  the  Fish  Hawk’s  nest.

The  male  assists  in  incubation,  during  the  continuance  of  which  the
one  bird  supplies  the  other  with  food,  although  each  in  turn  goes  in  quest
of  some  for  itself.  At  such  times  the  male  bird  is  now  and  then  observed
rising  to  an  immense  height  in  the  air,  over  the  spot  where  his  mate  is
seated.  This  he  does  by  ascending  almost  in  a direct  line,  by  means  of
continued  flappings,  meeting  the  breeze  with  his  white  breast,  and  occa-
sionally uttering  a cackling  kind  of  note,  by  which  the  bystander  is
enabled  to  follow  him  in  his  progress.  When  the  Fish  Hawk  has  at-


FISH  HAWK.


419


tained  its  utmost  elevation,  which  is  sometimes  such  that  the  eye  can  no
longer  perceive  him,  he  utters  a loud  shriek,  and  dives  smoothly  on  half-
extended  wings  towards  his  nest.  But  before  he  reaches  it,  he  is  seen  to
expand  his  wings  and  tail,  and  in  this  manner  he  glides  towards  his  be-
loved female,  in  a beautifully  curved  line.  The  female  partially  raises
herself  from  her  eggs,  emits  a low  cry,  resumes  her  former  posture,  and
her  delighted  partner  flies  off  to  the  sea,  to  seek  a favourite  fish  for  her
whom  he  loves.

The  young  are  at  length  hatched.  The  parents  become  more  and
more  attached  to  them,  as  they  grow  up.  Abundance  of  food  is  procured
to  favour  their  development.  So  truly  parental  becomes  the  attachment
of  the  old  birds,  that  an  attempt  to  rob  them  of  those  dear  fruits  of  their
love,  generally  proves  more  dangerous  than  profitable.  Should  it  be
made,  the  old  birds  defend  their  brood  with  great  courage  and  persever-
ance, and  even  sometimes,  with  extended  claWs  and  bill,  come  in  contact
with  the  assailant,  who  is  glad  to  make  his  escape  with  a sound  skin.

The  young  are  fed  until  fully  fledged,  and  often  after  they  have  left
the  nest,  which  they  do  apparently  with  great  reluctance.  I have  seen
some  as  large  as  the  parents,  filling  the  nest,  and  easily  distinguished  by  the
white  margins  of  their  upper  plumage,  which  may  be  seen  with  a good
glass  at  a considerable  distance.  So  much  fish  is  at  times  carried  to  the
nest,  that  a quantity  of  it  falls  to  the  ground,  and  is  left  there  to  putrify
around  the  foot  of  the  tree.  Only  one  brood  is  raised  each  season.

The  Fish  Hawk  seldom  alights  on  the  ground,  and  when  it  does  so,
walks  with  difficulty,  and  in  an  extremely  awkward  manner.  The  only
occasions  on  which  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  alight,  are  when  they  collect
materials  for  the  purpose  of  repairing  their  nest  at  the  approach  of
autumn,  or  for  building  a new  one,  or  repairing  the  old,  in  spring.

I have  found  this  bird  in  various  parts  of  the  interior  of  the  United
States,  but  always  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  rivers  or  lakes.
When  I first  removed  to  Louisville  in  Kentucky,  several  pairs  were  in
the  habit  of  raising  their  brood  annually  on  a piece  of  ground  immediate-
ly  opposite  the  foot  of  the  Falls  of  the  Ohio  in  the  State  of  Indiana.  The
ground  belonged  to  the  venerable  General  Clark,  and  I was  several
times  invited  by  him  to  visit  the  spot.  . Increasing  population,  however,
has  driven  off  the  birds,  and  few  are  now  seen  on  the  Ohio,  unless  during
th^ir  migrations  to  and  from  Lake  Erie,  where  I have  met  with  them.

I have  observed  many  of  these  birds  at  the  approach  cf  winter,  sail-

D d 3


420


FISH  HAWK.


ing  over  the  lakes  near  the  Mississippi,  where  they  feed  on  the  fish  which
the  Wood  Ibis  kills,  the  Hawks  themselves  being  unable  to  discover
them  whilst  alive  in  the  muddy  water  with  which  these  lakes  are  filled.
There  the  Ibises  wade  among  the  water  in  immense  flocks,  and  so  trample
the  bottom  as  to  convert  the  lakes  into  filthy  puddles,  in  which  the  fishes
are  unable  to  respire  with  ease.  They  rise  to  the  surface,  and  are  in-
stantly killed  by  the  Ibises.  The  whole  surface  is  sometimes  covered  in
this  manner  with  dead  fish,  so  that  not  only  are  the  Ibises  plentifully
supplied,  but  Vultures,  Eagles  and  Fish  Hawks,  come  to  participate  in
the  spoil.  Except  in  such  places,  and  on  such  occasions,  I have  not  ob-
served the  Fish  Hawk  to  eat  of  any  other  prey  than  that  which  it  had
procured  by  plunging  headlong  into  the  water  after  it.

I have  frequently  heard  it  asserted  that  the  Fish  Hawk  is  sometimes
drawn  under  the  water  and  drowned,  when  it  has  attempted  to  seize  a
fish  which  is  too  strong  for  it,  and  that  some  of  these  birds  have  been
found  sticking  by  their  talons  to  the  back  of  Sturgeons  and  other  large
fishes.  But,  as  nothing  of  this  kind  ever  came  under  my  observation,  I
am  unable  to  corroborate  these  reports.  The  roosting  place  of  this  bird
is  generally  on  the  top-branches  of  the  tree  on  which  its  nest  is  placed,  or
of  one  close  to  it.

Fish  Hawks  are  very  plentiful  on  the  coast  of  New  Jersey,  near
Great  Egg  Harbour,  where  I have  seen  upwards  of  fifty  of  their  nests
in  the  course  of  a day’s  walk,  and  where  I have  shot  several  in  the  course
of  a morning.  When  wounded,  they  defend  themselves  in  the  manner
usually  exhibited  by  Hawks,  erecting  the  feathers  of  the  head,  and  try-
ing to  strike  with  their  powerful  talons  and  bill,  whilst  they  remain  pros-
trate on  their  back.

The  largest  fish  which  I have  seen  this  bird  take  out  of  the  water,
was  a Weak- Fish,  such  as  is  represented  in  the  plate,  but  sufficiently
large  to  weigh  more  than  five  pounds.  The  bird  carried  it  into  the  air
with  difficulty,  and  dropped  it,  on  hearing  the  report  of  a shot  fired  at  it.


Falco  Haliaetus,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  129. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  I7.

Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  26.

Carolina  Osprey,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  74.

Fish  Hawk,  Falco  Haliaetls,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  v.  p.  13.  PI.  5.  fig.  1.


Adult  Male;  Plate  LXXXI.


FISH  HAWK.


421


Bill  short,  as  broad  as  deep  at  the  base,  the  sides  convex,  dorsal
outline  straight  at  the  base,  curved  towards  the  end ; upper  mandible
cerate,  the  edges  acute,  with  a festoon  at  the  curvature,  the  tip  trigo-
nal, deflected,  very  acute ; lower  mandible  inflected  at  the  edges,  which
are  slightly  arched,  the  tip  obtusely  truncate,  the  dorsal  line  slightly  con-
cave at  the  base,  convex  towards  the  end.  Nostrils  oval,  oblique,  lateral,
in  the  fore  part  of  the  cere.  Head  rather  large.  Body  robust.  Legs
rather  long;  tarsus  short,  remarkably  thick,  covered  all  round  with
hexagonal  scales ; toes  also  remarkably  thick,  the  outer  versatile,  covered
anteriorly  with  broad,  laterally  with  small  hexagonal  scales  ; claws  curved,
roundish,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  imbricated ; feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow,
of  the  back  broad  and  rounded,  of  the  breast  also  rounded.  Tibial
feathers  short,  tarsus  feathered  anteriorly  one-third  down.  Wings  very
long,  acute,  the  third  quill  longest,  the  second  and  fourth  equal,  the  first
not  much  shorter.  Tail  rather  long,  of  twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  brownish-black,  blue  at  the  base  and  margin ; cere  light-blue.
Iris  yellow.  Feet  pale  greyish-blue,  tinged  with  brown ; claws  black.
The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dusky  brown,  the  tail  barred
'with  pale  brown.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  and  neck  white,  the  middle
part  of  the  crown  dark  brown.  A broad  band  of  the  latter  colour  from
the  bill  down  the  side  of  the  neck  on  each  side.  Under  parts  of  the  neck
brownish  white,  streaked  with  dark  brown.  Under  parts  generally
white.  Anterior  tarsal  feathers  tinged  with,  brown.

Length  23  inches,  extent  of  wings  54;  bill  along  the  back  tarsus
middle  toe  3>


The  Weak  Fish.

The  Weak  Fish  makes  its  appearance  along  our  eastern  shores  about
the  middle  of  April,  and  remains  until  autumn.  It  is  caught  in  the
'seine,  and  sold  in  our  markets,  being  a delicate  well-flavoured  fish.  It
seldom  attains  any  remarkable  size.  It  is  particularly  plentiful  about
Great  Egg  Harbour,  in  New  Jersey.


( 422  )


WHIP-POOR-WILL.

CJPRIMULGUS  VOCIFURUS,  WiLS.

PLATE  LXXXII.  Male  and  Female.

This  bird  makes  its  appearance  in  most  parts  of  our  Western  and
Southern  Districts,  at  the  approach  of  spring,  but  is  never  heard,  and  in-
deed scarcely  ever  seen,  in  the  State  of  Louisiana.  The  more  barren
and  mountainous  parts  of  the  Union  seem  to  suit  it  best.  Accordingly,
the  open  Barrens  of  Kentucky,  and  the  country  through  which  the  Alle-
ghany ridges  pass,  are  more  abundantly  supplied  with  it  than  any  other
regions.  Yet,  wherever  a small  tract  of  country,  thinly  covered  with
timber,  occurs  in  the  Middle  Districts,  there  the  Whip-poor-will  is  heard
during  the  spring  and  early  autumn.

This  species  of  Night-jar,  like  its  relative  the  Chuck-wilFs-widow,  is
seldom  seen  during  the  day,  unless  when  accidentally  discovered  in  a state
of  repose,  when,  if  startled,  it  rises  and  flies  off,  but  only  to  such  a dis-
tance as  it  considers  necessary,  in  order  to  secure  it  from  the  farther  in-
trusion of  the  disturber  of  its  noon-day  slumbers.  Its  flight  is  very  low,
light,  swift,  noiseless,  and  protracted,  as  the  bird  moves  over  the  places
which  it  inhabits,  in  pursuit  of  the  moths,  beetles  and  other  insects,  of
which  its  food  is  composed.  During  the  day,  it  sleeps  on  the  ground,
the  lowest  branches  of  small  trees  and  bushes,  or  the  fallen  trunks  of
trees  so  abundantly  dispersed  through  the  woods.  In  such  situations,  you
may  approach  within  a few  feet  of  it ; and,  should  you  observe  it  whilst
asleep,  and  not  make  any  noise  sufficient  to  alarm  it,  it  will  suffer  you  to
pass  quite  near  it,  without  taking  flight,  as  it  seems  to  sleep  with  great
soundness,  especially  about  the  middle  of  the  day.  In  rainy  or  very
cloudy  weather,  it  sleeps  less,  and  is  more  on  the  alert.  Its  eyes  are
then  kept  open  for  hours  at  a time,  and  it  flies  off  as  soon  as  it  discovers
an  enemy  approaching,  which  it  can  do,  at  > such  times,  at  a distance  of
twenty  or  thirty  yards.  It  always  appears  with  its  body  parallel  to  the
direction  of  the  branch  or  trunk  on  which  it  sits,  and,  I beheve,  never
alights  across  a branch  or  a fence-rail.

No  sooner  has  the  sun  disappeared  beneath  the  horizon,  than  this  bird
bestirs  itself,  and  sets  out  in  pursuit  of  insects.  It  passes  low  over  the


WHIP-POOR-WILL.


423


bushes^  moves  to  the  right  or  left,  alights  on  the  ground  to  secure  its  prey,
passes  repeatedly  and  in  different  directions  over  the  same  field,  skims
along  the  skirts  of  the  woods,  and  settles  occasionally  on  the  tops  of
the  fence-stakes  or  on  stumps  of  trees,  from  whence  it  sallies,  like  a Fly-
catcher, after  insects,  and,  on  seizing  them,  returns  to  the  same  spot.
When  thus  situated,  it  frequently  alights  on  the  ground,  to  pick  up  a
beetle.  Like  the  Chuck- will’s- widow,  it  also  balances  itself  in  the  air,  in
front  of  the  trunks  of  trees,  or  against  the  sides  of  banks,  to  discover  ants,
and  other  small  insects  that  may  be  lurking  there.  Its  flight  is  so  light
and  noiseless,  that  whilst  it  is  passing  within  a few  feet  of  a person,  the
motion  of  its  wings  is  not  heard  by  him,  and  merely  produces  a gentle
undulation  in  the  air.  During  all  this  time,  it  utters  a low  murmuring
sound,  by  which  alone  it  can  be  discovered  in  the  dark,  when  passing,
within  a few  yards  of  one,  and  which  I have  often  heard  when  walking
or  riding  through  the  barrens  at  night.

Immediately  after  the  arrival  of  these  birds,  their  notes  are  heard  in
the  dusk  and  through  the  evening,  in  every  part  of  the  thickets,  and
along  the  skirts  of  the  woods.  They  are  clear  and  loud,  and  to  me  are
more  interesting  than  those  of  the  Nightingale.  This  taste  I have  pro-
bably acquired,  by  listening  to  the  Whip-poor-will  in  parts  where  Nature
exhibited  all  her  lone  grandeur,  and  where  no  discordant  din  interrupted
the  repose  of  all  around.  Only  think,  kind  readerj  how  grateful  to  me
must  have  been  the  cheering  voice  of  this  my  only  companion,  when,
fatigued  and  hungry,  after  a day  of  unremitted  toil,  I have  planted  my
camp  in  the  wilderness,  as  the  darkness  of  night  put  a stop  to  my  labours  I
I have  often  listened  to  the  Nightingale,  but  never  under  such  circum-
stances, and  therefore  its  sweetest  notes  have  never  awaked  the  same
feeling.

The  Whip-poor-will  continues  its  lively  song  for  several  hours  after
sunset,  and  then  remains  silent  until  the  first  dawn  of  day,  when  its
notes  echo  through  every  vale,  and  along  the  declivities  of  the  mountains,
until  the  beams  of  the  rising  sun  scatter  the  darkness  that  overhung  the
face  of  nature.  Hundreds  are  often  heard  at  the  same  time  in  different
parts  of  the  woods,  each  trying  to  out-do  the  others;  and  when  you  are
told  that  the  notes  of  this  bird  may  be  heard  at  the  distance  of  several
hundred,  yards,  you  may  form  an  idea  of  the  pleasure  which  every
lover  of  nature  must  feel  during  the  time  when  this  chorus  is  con-
tinued.


424


WHIP-POOR-WILL.


Description  is  incapable  of  conveying  to  your  mind  any  accurate  idea
of  the  notes  of  this  bird,  much  less  of  the  feelings  which  they  excite.
Were  I to  tell  you  that  they  are,  in  fact,  not  strictly  musical,  you  might
be  disappointed.  The  cry  consists  of  three  distinct  notes,  the  first  and
last  of  which  are  emphatical  and  sonorous,  the  intermediate  one  less  so.
These  three  notes  are  preceded  by  a low  cluck,  which  seems  preparatory
to  the  others,  and  which  is  only  heard  when  one  is  near  the  bird.  A
fancied  resemblance  which  its  notes  have  to  the  syllables  whip-poor-will,
has  given  rise  to  the  common  name  of  the  bird.

This  species  is  easily  shot,  when  the  moon  is  shining,  and  the  night
clear,  as  you  may  then  approach  it  without  much  caution.  It  is,  however,
difficult  to  hit  it  on  wing,  on  account  of  the  zig-zag  lines  in  which  it  flies,
as  well  as  the  late  hour  at  which  it  leaves  its  resting-place.  It  is  seldom
killed,  however,  being  too  small  to  be  sought  as  an  article  of  food,  al-
though its  flesh  is  savoury,  and  it  is  too  harmless  to  excite  dislike.

It  deposits  its  eggs  about  the  middle  of  May,  on  the  bare  ground,  or
on  dry  leaves,  in  the  most  retired  parts  of  the  thickets  which  it  frequents.
They  are  always  two  in  number,  of  a short  elliptical  form,  much  rounded,
and  nearly  equal  at  both  ends,  of  a greenish-white  colour,  spotted  and
blotched  with  bluish-grey,  and  light  brown.  The  young  burst  the
shell  in  fourteen  days  after  the  commencement  of  incubation,  and  look
at  first  like  a mouldy  and  almost  shapeless  mass,  of  a yellowish  co-
lour. When  first  able  to  fly  they  are  of  a brown  colour,  interspersed
with  patches  of  bufl‘,  the  brown  being  already  beautifully  sprinkled
with  darker  dots  and  zig-zag  lines.  They  attain  their  full  plumage
before  they  depart,  with  their  parents,  for  the  south.  I think  their
southward  migration,  which  is  performed  by  night,  must  be  very  rapid,
as  I have  never  found  any  of  these  birds  in  Louisiana  at  that  season,
whereas  they  proceed  slowly  on  their  return  in  spring.  Both  birds  sit
on  the  eggs,  and  feed  the  young  for  a long  time  after  they  are  able  to  fly,
either  on  wing,  in  the  manner  of  the  Common  House  Swallow,  or  while
perched  on  the  fences,  wood-piles,  or  houses.  The  food  of  the  young  at
first  consists  of  ants,  and  partially  digested  beetles  and  large  moths,
which  the  parents  disgorge  ; but  at  the  end  of  a fortnight  the  parents
present  the  food  whole  to  the  young,  which  then  swallow  it  with  ease.

Much  has  been  said  respecting  the  difference  existing  between  the
Whip-poor-will  and  the  Night  Hawk,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  them
to  be  distinct  species.  On  this  subject  I shall  only  say,  that  although


WHIP-POOR-WILL.


425


I have  known  both  birds  from  my  early  youth,  I have  seldom  seen  a
farmer  or  even  a boy  in  the  United  States,  who  did  not  know  the  dif-
ference between  them.

It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  even  the  largest  moths  on  which  the
Whip-poor-will  feeds,  are  always  swallowed  tail  foremost,  and  when
swallowed,  the  wings  and  legs  are  found  closely  laid  together,  and  as  if
partially  glued  by  the  saliva  or  gastric  juice  of  the  bird.  The  act  of  de-
glutition must  be  greatly- aided  by  the  long  bristly  feathers  of  the  upper
mandible,  as  these  no  doubt  force  the  wings  of  the  insects  close  together,
before  they  enter  the  mouth.

I have  represented  a male  and  two  females,  as  well  as  some  of  the
insects  on  which  they  feed.  The  former  are  placed  on  a branch  of  Red
Oak,  that  tree  being  abundant  on  the  skirts  of  the  Kentucky  Barrens,
where  the  Whip-poor-will  is  most  plentiful.


Caprimulgus  vociferus,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,

p.  62.

Whip-poor-will,  Caprimulgus  vociferus,  TFits.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  v.  p.  71*
.Pl.  41.  fig..  1.  Male,  fig.  2.  Female,  fig.  3.  Young.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  extremely  short,  feeble,  opening  to  beyond  the  eyes,  making  the
mouth,  when  open,  of  enormous  dimensions ; upper  mandible  arched  in  its
dorsal  outline,  very  broad  at  the  base,  suddenly  contracted  at  the  tip,
which  is  compressed  and  rather  obtuse;  lower  mandible  decurved.  Nos-
trils basal,  oval,  prominent,  covered  above  by  a membrane.  Head  dis-
proportionately large.  Eyes  and  ears  very  large.  Neck  short.  Body
rather  slender.  Feet  very  short;  tarsus  partly  feathered,  anteriorly
scutellate  below ; fore  toes  three,  connected  to  the  second  joint  by  mem-
branes, scutellate  above  ; claws  depressed,  arched,  that  of  the  middle  toe
with  the  inner  edge  expanded  and  pectinate.

Plumage  blended,  soft  and  silky,  without  much  gloss.  Upper  man-
dible margined  at  the  base  with  stiff  bristles,  much  longer  than  the  bill,
extending  forwards  and  outwards.  Wings  long,  narrow,  the  second  and
third  quills  longest.  Tail  rather  long,  ample,  even,  of  ten  broad  rounded
feathers.

Bill  dark  brown.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Feet  reddish-purple,  the  scales
and  claws  blackish.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dark


423


WHIP-POOR-WILL.


brownish-grey,  streaked  and  minutely  sprinkled  with  brownish-black.
Cheeks  brownish-red.  The  quills  and  coverts  are  dark  brown,  spotted
in  bars  with  light  brown,  the  tips  of  the  former  mottled  with  light  and
dark  brown.  Four  middle  tail-feathers  like  those  of  the  back,  the  three
lateral  white  in  their  terminal  half,  deep  brown,  spotted  with  light  brown
towards  the  base,  the  latter  colours  running  along  the  outer  web  of  the
outermost  to  near  the  tip.  Throat  and  breast  similar  to  the  back,  with
a transverse  band  of  yellowish- white  across  the  fore-neck ; the  rest  of  the
under  parts  paler  and  mottled.

Length  9 inches,  extent  of  wings  19;  bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  1/^.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXII.  Fig.  2,  3.

The  female  resembles  the  male  in  colouring,  but  the  lateral  tail-fea-
thers are  reddish- white  towards  the  tip  only,  and  the  band  across  the
fore-neck  is  pale  yellowish-brown.


Black  Oak  or  Quercitron.

Quercus  tinctoria,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  444.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.

p.  629.  Mich.  Abr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  110.  PI.  2 Moncecia

PoLYANDRiA,  Limt.  Asientaceae,  Juss.

Leaves  obovato-oblong,  sinuate,  pubescent  beneath,  their  lobes
acuminate,  obsoletely  denticulate ; the  cup  scutellato-turbinate  ; the  acorn
globular  depressed.  This  is  one  of  the  largest  trees  of  the  United  States,
and  attains  a height  from  eighty  to  ninety  feet,  with  a diameter  of  from
four  to  five.  The  bark  is  deeply  cracked,  and  of  a black  colour.  The
wood  is  reddish,  coarse-grained,  and  not  so  much  esteemed  as  that  of
the  White  Oak,  and  some  other  species.  The  bark  is  used  for  tanning,
as  well  as  for  dyeing  wool  of  a yellow  colour.  It  is  generally  distributed,
especially  in  the  mountainous  parts.


( 427  )


THE  HOUSE  WREN.

Troglodytes  ^dok,  Vieill.

PLATE  LXXXIII.  Male,  Female,  and  Young.

Although  Louisiana  is  supplied  with  thousands  of  the  Great  Caro-
lina Wren,  not  a single  individual  of  the  present  species  is  ever  to  be
.found  there.  It  appears,  indeed,  that  the  central  districts  of  our  Atlan^
tic  coasts  are  their  principal  places  of  resort,  probably  because  certain
portions  of  the  country  are  intended  to  be  occupied  by  different  species  of
the  same  genus.  Thus,  I think  it  highly  probable  that  the  Great  Caro-
lina Wren  has  been  intended  for  the  Southern  Districts,  the  House  Wren
for  the  Middle  States,  Bewick’s  Long-tailed  Wren  for  the  regions  of  the
-Rocky  Mountains,  and  the  Little  Wren  for  our  north-eastern  territories,
along  the  St  Lawrence,  although  it  also  breeds  in  the  State  of  New
York,  and  even  in  that  of  Pennsylvania,  where  I have  found  it  in  the
Great  Pine  Swamp.  I am  induced  to  think  that  a fifth  species  of  Wren
will  yet  be  found  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States.  From  this  ar-
rangement I exclude  the  bird  called  the  Marsh  Wren,  which  more  pro-
perly belongs  to  the  genus  Certhiai  But,  as  I have  already  said,  I leave
all  these  matters  to  be  discussed  by  the  system-makers.

The  opinion  expressed  by  a former  writer,  that  the  House  Wren
occurs  in  the  United  States,  is  as  incorrect  as  the  assertion  of  a subse-
quent author,  that  the  Florida  Jay  is  met  with  on  the  Mississippi  and
Ohio.  During  a residence  of  twenty  years  in  the  different  States  through
which  these  great  streams  pass,  I never  saw  either  the  one  or  the  other
of  these  birds.  These  are  errors,  however,  which  are  to  be  attributed  to
the  circumstance  that  one  of  the  writers  alluded  to  never  visited  the
Southern  or  Western  States,  while  the  other  merely  passed  once  through
them.

From  whence  the  House  Wren  comes,  or  to  what  parts  it  retires
during  winter,  is  more  than  I have  been  able  to  ascertain.  Although  it
is  extremely  abundant  in  the  States  of  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Virginia,
and  Maryland,  from  the  middle  of  April  until  the  beginning  of  October,  I
have  never  been  able  to  trace  its  motions,  nor  do  I know  of  any  naturalist
in  our  own  country,  or  indeed  in  any  other,  who  has  been  more  fortunate.


428


HOUSE  WREN.


Its  flight  is  short,  generally  low,  and  performed  by  a constant  tremor
of  the  wings,  without  any  jerks  of  either  the  body  or  tail,  although  the
latter  is  generally  seen  erect,  unless  when  the  bird  is  singing,  when  it  is
always  depressed.  When  passing  from  one  place  to  another,  during  the
love-season,  or  whilst  its  mate  is  sitting,  this  sweet  little  bird  flutters  still
-more  slowly  through  the  air,  singing  all  the  while.  It  is  sprightly,  active,
vigilant,  and  courageous.  It  delights  in  being  near  and  about  the  gardens,
orchards,  and  the  habitations  of  man,  and  is  frequently  found  in  abun-
dance in  the  very  centre  of  our  eastern  cities,  where  many  little  boxes  are
put  up  against  the  walls  of  houses,  or  the  trunks  of  trees,  for  its  accom-
modation, as  is  also  done  in  the  country.  In  these  it  nestles  and  rears
its  young.  It  is  seldom,  however,  at  a loss  for  a breeding  place,  it  being
satisfied  with  any  crevice  or  hole  in  the  walls,  the  sill  of  a window,  the
eaves,  the  stable,  the  barn,  or  the  upper  side  of  a piece  of  timber,  under
the  roof  of  a piazza.  Now  and  then,  its  nest  may  be  seen  in  the  hollow
branch  of  an  apple  tree.  I knew  of  one  in  the  pocket  of  an  old  broken-
down  carriage,  and  many  in  such  an  old  hat  as  you  see  represented  in  the
plate,  which,  if  not  already  before  you,  I hope  you  will  procure,  and
look  at  the  little  creatures  anxiously  peeping  out  or  hanging  to  the  side
of  the  hat,  to  meet  their  mother,  which  has  just  arrived  with  a spider,
whilst  the  male  is  on  the  lookout,  ready  to  interpose  should  any  intruder
come  near.  The  same  nest  is  often  resorted  to  for  several  successive
years,  merely  receiving  a little  mending.

The  familiarity  of  the  House  Wren  is  extremely  pleasing.  In  Penn-
sylvania a pair  of  these  birds  had  formed  a nest,  and  the  female  was  sit-
ting in  a hole  of  the  wall,  within  a few  inches  of  my  (literally  so-called)
drawing-room.  The  male  was  continually  singing  within  a few  feet  of
my  wife  and  myself,  whilst  I was  engaged  in  portraying  birds  of  other
species.  When  the  window  was  open,  its  company  was  extremely  agree-
able, as  was  its  little  song,  which  continually  reminded  us  of  its  happy
life.  It  would  now  and  then  dive  into  the  garden  at  the  foot  of  the  win-
dow, procure  food  for  its  mate,  return  and  creep  into  the  hole  where  it
had  its  nest,  and  be  off  again  in  a moment.  Having  procured  some  flies
and  spiders,  I now  and  then  threw  some  of  them  towards  him,  when  he
would  seize  them  with  great  alacrity,  eat  some  himself,  and  carry  the  rest
to  his  mate.  In  this  manner,  it  became  daily  more  acquainted  with  us,
entered  the  room,  and  once  or  twice  sang  whilst  there.  One  morning  I
took  it  in  to  draw  its  portrait,  and  suddenly  closing  the  window,  easily


HOUSE  WREN.


429


caught  it,  held  it  in  my  hand,  and  finished  its  likeness,  after  which  I re-
stored it  to  liberty.  This,  however,  made  it  more  cautious,  and  it  never
again  ventured  within  the  window,  although  it  sang  and  looked  at  us  as
at  first.  It  is  it  which  you  see  placed  on  the  hat.

The  antipathy  which  the  House  Wren  shews  to  cats  is  extreme.
Although  it  does  not  attack  puss,  it  follows  and  scolds  her  until  she  is
out  of  sight.  In  the  same  manner,  it  makes  war  on  the  Martin,  the  Blue
Bird  and  the  House  Swallow,  the  nest  of  any  of  which  it  does  not  scru-
ple to  appropriate  to  itself,  whenever  occasion  offers.  Its  own  nest  is
formed  of  dry  crooked  twigs,  so  interwoven  as  scarcely  to  admit  entrance
to  any  other  bird.  Within  this  outer  frame- work  grasses  are  arranged  in
a circular  manner,  and  the  whole  is  warmly  lined  with  feathers  and  other
equally  soft  materials.  The  eggs  are  five  or  six,  of  a regularly  oval  form,
and  uniform  pale  reddish  colour.  Two  broods  are  raised  in  the  season.

The  male  seems  to  delight  in  attempting  to  surpass  in  vocal  powers
others  of  his  species,  during  the  time  of  incubation  ; and  is  frequently
seen  within  sight  of  another,  straining  his  little  throat,  and  gently  turn-
ing his  body  from  side  to  side,  as  if  pivoted  on  the  upper  joints  of  his
legs.  For  a moment  he  conceives  the  musical  powers  of  his  rival  supe-
rior to  his  own,  and  darts  towards  him,  when  a battle  ensues,  which  over,^
he  immediately  resumes  his  song,  whether  he  has  been  the  conqueror  or
not.

When  the  young  issue  from  the  nest,  it  is  interesting  to  see  them  fol-
low the  parents  amongst  the  currant  bushes  in  the  gardens,  like  so  many
mice,  hopping  from  twig  to  twig,  throwing  their  tail  upwards,  and  put-
ting their  bodies  into  a hundred  different  positions,  all  studied  from  the
parents,  whilst  the  latter  are  heard  scolding,  even  without  cause,  but  as  if
to  prevent  the  approach  of  enemies,  so  anxious  are  they  for  the  safety  of
their  progeny.  They  leave  Pennsylvania  about  the  1st  of  October.

Troglodytes  -®don,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  92.

House  Wren,  Sylvia  domestica,  Wils.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  i.  p.  129,  PI.  8,  fig.  3.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  slender,  acute,  subtrigonal  at
the  base,  compressed  towards  the  tip ; upper  mandible  with  the  ridge  ob-
tuse, the  sides  convex  towards  the  end,  concave  at  the  base,  the  edges


430


HOUSE  WREN.


acute  and  overlapping ; under  mandible  with  the  back  and  sides  convex.
Nostrils  oblong,  straight,  basal,  with  a cartilaginous  lid  above,  open  and
bare.  Head  ovate,  eyes  of  moderate  size,  neck  of  ordinary  length,  body
ovate,  nearly  equal  in  breadth  and  depth.  Legs  of  ordinary  length  ;
tarsus  longer  then  the  middle  toe,  compressed,  covered  anteriorly
with  six  scutella,  posteriorly  with  a long  plate  forming  an  acute  angle.
Toes  scutellate  above,  inferiorly  granulate,  second  and  fourth  nearly
equal,  the  hind  toe  almost  equal  to  the  middle  one,  third  and  fourth  uni-
ted as  far  as  the  second  joint ; claws  long,  slender,  acute,  arcuate,  much
compressed.

Plumage  soft,  tufty,  slightly  glossed.  No  bristly  feathers  about  the
beak.  Wings  shortish,  broad,  rounded  : first  quill  half  the  length  of  the
second,  which  is  very  little  shorter  than  the  third  and  fourth.  Tail  of
ordinary  length,  of  twelve  narrow,  lax  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  yellowish-brov/n  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet
flesh-colour.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  reddish-brown,
darker  on  the  head,  brighter  on  the  tail-coverts,  indistinctly  barred  with
dark  brown  ; wings  and  tail  undulatingly  banded,  tips  of  the  larger
wing-coverts  whitish.  A yellowish-grey  line  from  the  upper  mandible
over  the  eye  ; cheeks  of  the  same  colour,  mottled  with  brownish-red.
Under  parts  brownish-grey  ; sides  barred  with  brown,  as  are  the  under
tail-coverts.

Length  4^  inches,  extent  of  wings  5^  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  f ; tarsus  |^,  middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXIII.  Fig.  S.

The  female  scarcely  differs  from  the  male  in  external  appearance.
Young  Birds.  Plate  LXXXIII.  Fig.  3.

The  young  are  of  a lighter  brown,  more  indistinctly  barred,  but  re-
semble the  old  birds  in  the  general  distribution  of  their  colouring.

This  species  differs  from  the  Winter  Wren,  chiefly  in  having  the
bill  a little  stouter,  the  tail  considerably  longer,  and  the  under  parts
less  distinctly  barred.


( 431  )


THE  BLUE-GREY  FLY-CATCHER.

MuSCICAPA  C(ERULEA,  Wils.

PLATE  LXXXIV.  Male  and  Female.

This  diminutive  lively  bird  is  rendered  peculiarly  conspicuous  by  its
being  frequently  the  nurse  or  foster-parent  of  the  young  Cow  Bunting,
the  real  mother  of  which  drops  her  egg  in  its  nest.  A few  individuals
of  this  species  remain  in  Louisiana  during  spring  and  summer,  and  breed
there ; but  the  greater  number  proceed  far  eastward,  and  spread  over  the
United  States,  although  they  are  not  common  in  any  part.

The  Blue-grey  Fly-catcher  arrives  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Or-
leans about  the  middle  of  March,  when  it  is  observed  along  the  water-
courses, flitting  about  and  searching  diligently,  amidst  the  branches  of
the  Golden  Willow,  for  the  smaller  kinds  of  winged  insects,  devouring
amongst  others  great  numbers  of  moschettoes.  Its  flight  resembles  that
of  the  Long-tailed  Titmouse  of  Europe.  It  moves  to  short  distances,  vi-
brating its  tail  while  on  wing,  and,  on  alighting,  is  frequently  seen  hang-
ing to  the  buds  and  bunches  of  leaves,  at  the  extremities  of  the  branches
of  trees.  It  seldom  visits  the  interior  of  the  forests,  in  any  portion  of
our  country,  but  prefers  the  skirts  of  woods  along  damp  or  swampy
places,  and  the  borders  of  creeks,  pools,  or  rivers.  It  seizes  insects  on
wing  with  great  agility,  snapping  its  bill  like  a true  Fly-catcher,  now
and  then  niaking  little  sallies  after  a group  of  those  diminutive  flies  that
seem  as  if  dancing  in  the  air,  and  cross  each  other  in  their  lines  of  flight,
in  a thousand  various  ways.

When  it  has  alighted,  its  tail  is  constantly  erected,  its  wings  droop,
and  it  utters  at  intervals  its  low  and  uninteresting  notes,  which  resemble
the  sounds  Tsee,  Tsee.  It  seldom  if  ever  alights  on  the  ground,  and
when  thirsty  prefers  procuring  water  from  the  extremities  of  branches,
or  sips  the  rain  or  dewdrops  from  the  ends  of  the  leaves.

Its  nest  is  composed  of  the  frailest  materials,  and  is  light  and  small  in
proportion  to  the  size  of  the  bird.  It  is  formed  of  portions  of  dried
leaves,  the  husks  of  buds,  the  silky  fibres  of  various  plants  and  flowers,
and  light  grey  lichens,  and  is  lined  with  fibres  of  Spanish  Moss  or  horse-


432


BLUE-GREY  FLY-CATCHER.


hair.  I have  found  these  nests  always  attached  to  two  slender  twigs  of
Willow.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  pure  white,  with  a few  reddish  dots
at  the  larger  end.  Two  broods  are  reared  in  a season.  The  young  and
old  hunt  and  migrate  together,  passing  amongst  the  tops  of  the  highest
trees,  from  one  to  another.  They  leave  the  State  of  Louisiana  in  the  be-
ginning of  October,  the  Middle  States  about  the  middle  of  September.
I have  seen  some  of  these  birds  on  the  border  line  of  Upper  Canada,
along  the  shores  of  Lake  Erie.  I have  also  observed  them  in  Kentucky,
Indiana,  and  along  the  Arkansas  River.

In  the  plate  is  represented,  along  with  a pair  of  these  delicate  birds,  a
twig  of  one  of  our  most  valuable  trees,  with  its  pendulous  blossoms.
This  tree,  the  Black  Walnut,  grows  in  almost  every  part  of  the  United
States,  in  the  richest  soils,  and  attains  a great  height  and  diameter.  The
wood  is  used  for  furniture  of  all  sorts,  receives  a fine  polish,  and  is  ex-
tremely durable.  The  stocks  of  muskets  are  generally  made  of  it.  The
Black  Walnut  is  plentiful  in  all  the  alluvial  grounds  in  the  vicinity  of
our  rivers.  The  fruit  is  contained  in  a very  hard  shell,  and  is  thought
good  by  many  people.

Sylvia  ccerulea,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  540 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds
of  the  United  States,  p.  85.

Motacilla  ccerulea,  Linn.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  337*

CcERULEAN-  Warbler,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  490.

Blue-grey  Fly-catcher,  Muscicapa  ccerulea,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith,  vol.  ii.
p.  164.  PI.  18.  fig.  5.


Adult  Male.  Plate  I.XXXIV.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  straight,  subulato-conical,  depressed  at  the  base,
acute;  upper  mandible  with  the  edges  acute  and  overlapping,  notched  close
to  the  end,  the  tip  slightly  declinate.  Head  rather  large.  Neck  short,  body
ovate.  I.egs  of  ordinary  length ; tarsus  slender,  compressed,  scutellate  be-
fore, acute  behind  ; toes  free,  scutellate ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Basirostral  bristles  distinct.  Wings
short,  much  curved,  the  third  quill  longest.  Tail  longish,  rounded,  of
twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  bluish-black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  greyish-blue.  The  general  co-
lour of  the  upper  parts  is  bright  blue,  approaching  to  ultramarine,  deeper
on  the  head,  and  fading  on  the  tail-coverts.  Quills  and  primary  coverts


BLUE-GREY  FLY-CATCHER.


438


brownish-black,  margined  externally  with  blue  ; secondary  coverts  slight-
ly tipped  with  greyish.  Tail  blackish,  the  lateral  feathers  nearly  all
white,  the  two  next  tipped  with  the  same  colour.  A narrow  band  of
black  on  the  forehead,  extending  over  the  eyes.  Under  parts  greyish-
white,  the  sides  of  the  neck  bright  blue,  the  sides  greyish-blue.

Length  4A  inches,  extent  of  wings  6i  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  a little  more  than  ^ ; tarsus


Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXIV.  Fig.  %

The  female  is  much  duller  in  colouring,  the  bright  blue  of  the  male
being  in  her  light  greyish-blue.  The  black  band  on  the  forehead  is  also
wanting.


The  Black  Walnut.

JuGLANs  NIGRA,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  456.  Purshj  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  636.
Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  i.  p.  157.  PI.  1. — Moncecia  Polyan-
DRiA,  Linn.  Terebinthace^,  Juss.

This  species  belongs  to  the  division  with  simple,  polyandrous  male
catkins,  and  is  distinguished  by  its  numerous  ovato-lanceolate,  subcor-
date,  serrated  leaflets,  narrowed  towards  the  end,  somewhat  downy  be-
neath, as  are  the  petioles ; its  globular  scabrous  fruits,  and  wrinkled  nuts.
The  leaves  have  seven  or  eight  nearly  opposite  pairs  of  leaflets.  The
male  catkins  are  pendent.  The  fruits  are  sometimes  from  six  to  eight
inches  in  circumference,  the  kernel  brown  and  corrugated,  and,  although
eaten,  inferior  to  the  Common  Walnut.  The  bark  of  the  trunk  is  thick,
blackish,  and  cracked  ; the 'wood  of  a very  dark  colour.


E e


( )


THE  YELLOW-THROATED  WARBLER.

Sylvia  pensilis,  Lath.

PLATE  LXXXV.  Male.

This  beautiful  bird  absents  itself  from  the  State  of  Louisiana  only
for  two  months  in  the  year,  December  and  January.  When  they  return
in  the  beginning  of  February,  they  throw  themselves  by  thousands  into
all  the  cypress  woods  and  cane-brakes,  where  they  are  heard  singing
from  the  first  of  March  until  late  in  autumn,  sometimes  in  November.

Their  habits  are  very  different  from  those  of  the  Warblers,  and  are
more  in  general  accordance  with  those  of  the  Certhise.  They  move  up
and  down,  sidewise  and  spirally,  along  the  trunks,  branches,  and  even
twigs  of  the  tallest  and  largest  Cypresses,  or  such  other  trees  as  are  found
intermingled  with  them.  They  are  extremely  active,  in  fact,  fully  as
much  so  as  the  little  Brown  Creeper  itself.  I^ike  it,  they  suddenly  leave
the  uppermost  branches  or  higher  parts  of  the  trunks,  and  diving  down-
wards alight  on  the  roots,  and  renew  their  search  after  small  insects  and
larvae.  I never  saw  any  of  them  pursue  insects  on  wing.

The  nest  of  this  species  is  prettily  constructed.  Its  outer  parts  are
composed  of  grey  lichens  and  soft  mosses,  the  interior  of  silky  substances
and  a few  fibres  of  the  Spanish  moss.  The  female  lays  four  pure  white
eggs,  having  two  or  three  purple  dots  near  the  larger  end.  I think  they
raise  two  broods  during  their  stay  in  Louisiana,  but  cannot  speak  of  this
as  certain.  The  nest  is  placed  on  a horizontal  branch  of  a Cypress,
twenty,  thirty,  or  even  fifty  feet  above  the  ground,  and  is  with  difficulty
discovered  from  below,  as  it  resembles  a knot  or  a tuft  of  moss

The  song  of  the  Yellow-throated  Warbler  would  please  you,  kind
reader.  Of  this  I have  not  a doubt,  as  it  is  soft  and  loud,  and  is
continued  for  two  -or  three  minutes  at  a time,  not  unlike  that  of  the
Painted  Finch,  or  Indigo  Bird.  As  it  is  heard  in  all  parts  of  our  most
dismal  Cypress  Swamps,  it  contributes  to  soothe  the  mind  of  a person
whose  occupation  may  lead  him  to  such  places.  I never  saw  this  species
on  the  ground.  The  male  and  the  female  are  nearly  alike  in  plumage,
but  the  young  birds,  which  hunt  for  insects  in  company,  in  the  manner


YELLOW-THROATED  WARBLER.


435


of  Creepers  or  Titmice,  do  not  acquire  the  yellow  on  the  throat,  nor  the
full  brilliancy  of  their  plumage,  until  the  first  spring.

These  birds  confine  themselves  to  the  Southern  States,  seldom  moving
farther  towards  the  Middle  Districts  than  North  Carolina.  They  do  not
even  ascend  the  Mississippi  farther  than  the  Walnut  Hills.  They  are
abundant  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Red  River,  and  probably  do  not
go  farther  south  than  Mexico,  during  their  short  absence  from  the  United
States.

Happening  to  shoot  several  of  these  birds  on  a large  Chinquapin  tree,
growing  on  the  edge  of  a hill  close  to  a swamp,  I have  put  a male  on
one  of  its  twigs,  which  is  furnished  with  a few  fruits  quite  ripe  and
ready  to  leave  their  husks.  In  the  Southern  States  this  tree  is  rare.  It
generally  prefers  elevated  places,  and  rocky  declivities,  with  an  arid
soil.  The  wood  resembles  that  of  the  Chestnut,  but  the  trees  being  ge-
nerally small,  little  use  is  made  of  it  as  timber.  The  fruit  is  eaten  by
children.  This  tree  is  abundant  along  the  greater  part  of  the  range  of
the  Alleghanies  and  its  branches.


Sylvia  pensilis,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  520. — Ch.  Bonaparte^Byno^B.  of  Birds
of  the  United  States,  p.  79>

Pensile  Warbler,  Lath.  Svnops.  vol.  iv.  p.  441.

Yellow  THROATED  Warbler,  Sylvia  flavicollis,  FFife.  Amer.  Omith.  vol.  ii.
p.  64.  PL  4.  fig.  6.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXV.

Bill  shortish,  nearly  straight,  subulato-conical,  acute,  as  deep  as  broad
at  the  base,  the  edges  acute,  the  gap  line  a little  deflected  at  the  base.
Nostrils  basal,  elliptical,  lateral,  half-closed  by  a membrane.  Head  rather
small.  Neck  short.  Body  slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender;
tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  by  a few  scutella,
the  uppermost  long ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of
moderate  size ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute,  the
second  quill  longest.  Tail  longish,  slightly  emarginate.

Bill  brownish-black.  Iris  dark-brown.  Feet  yellowish-brown.  The
general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  greyish-blue,  the  head  darker.
A white  line  from  the  base  of  the  upper  mandible  over  the  eye.  Fore-
head, loral  space,  a line  behind  the  eye,  and  a patch  including  the

E e 2


ear-


48G


YELLOW-THROATED  WARBLER.


coverts,  descending  along  the  neck,  and  terminating  acutely,  black.  Un-
der eyelid  white.  Wing-coverts  dusky,  tipped  with  white.  Quills
blackish,  externally  margined  with  light  greyish-green.  Tail-feathers
black,  the  middle  ones  edged  with  greenish-blue,  the  outer  white  along
the  outer  margin,  and  with  the  next  two  having  a white  patch  on  the
inner  web  towards  the  end.  Throat  and  fore-neck  bright  yellow,  as  is  a
spot  before  the  eye.  The  rest  of  the  under  parts  white,  the  sides  mottled
with  dusky.

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  ridge  nearly  J,
along  the  gap  yL  ; tarsus  f,  middle  toe  |.

The  female  is  similar  to  the  male,  but  has  the  colours  somewhat  duller.


The  Chinquapin.

Castanea  pumila,  Willd.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  iv.  p.  461.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  625.
MicJi.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  166.  PI.  7— Moncecia  Poly-
ANDRiA,  Linn.  Amentace^e,  Juss.

This  species  of  Chestnut  is  characterized  by  its  oblong,  acute,  sharp-
ly-serrated  leaves,  which  are  whitish  and  downy  beneath.  The  fruit  is
very  agreeable,  and  is  a favourite  food  of  Squirrels,  and  birds  of  different
species,  such  as  Pigeons,  Jays,  Turkevs,  and  Woodpeckers.


( 437  )


LOUISVILLE  IN  KENTUCKY.

Louisville  in  Kentucky  has  always  been  a favourite  place  of  mine.
The  beauty  of  its  situation,  on  the  banks  of  La  Belle  Riviere,  just  at  the
commencement  of  the  famed  rapids,  commonly  called  the  Falls  of  the
Ohio,  had  attracted  my  notice,  and  when  I removed  to  it,  immediately
after  my  marriage,  I found  it  more  agreeable  than  ever.  The  prospect
from  the  town  is  such  that  it  would  please  even  the  eye  of  a Swiss.  It
extends  along  the  river  for  seven  or  eight  miles,  and  i«  bounded  on  the
opposite  side  by  a fine  range  of  low  mountains,  known  by  the  name  of
the  Silver  Hills.  The  rumbling  sound  of  the  waters,  as  they  tumble  over
the  rock-paved  bed  of  the  rapids,  is  at  all  times  soothing  to  the  ear,  Fisli
and  game  are  abundant.  Rut,  above  all,  the  generous  hospitality  of  the
inhabitants,  and  the  urbanity  of  their  manners,  had  induced  me  to  fix
upon  it  as  a place  of  residence ; and  I did  so  with  the  more  pleasure  when
I found  that  my  wife  was  as  much  gratified  as  myself,  by  the  kind  at-
tentions which  were  shewn  to  us,  utter  strangers  as  we  were,  on  our  ar-
rival.

No  sooner  had  we  landed,  and  made  known  our  intention  of  remain-
ing, than  we  were  introduced  to  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  place
and  its  vicinity,  although  we  had  not  brought  a single  letter  of  introduc-
tion, and  could  not  but  see,  from  their  unremitting  kindness,  that  the
Virginian  spirit  of  hospitality  displayed  itself  in  all  the  words  and  actions
of  our  newly-formed  friends.  I wish  here  to  name  those  persons  who  so
unexpectedly  came  forward  to  render  our  stay  among  them  agreeable,
but  feel  at  a loss  with  whom  to  begin,  so  equally  deserving  are  they  of
our  gratitude.  The  Croghaxs,  the  Clarks  (our  great  traveller  in-
cluded), the  Berthouds,  the  Galts,  the  Maupins,  the  Tarascons,
the  Beals,  and  the  Booths,  form  but  a small  portion  of  the  long  list
which  I could  give.  The  matrons  acted  like  mothers  towards  my  wife,
the  daughters  proved  agreeable  associates,  and  the  husbands  and  sons
were  friends  and  companions  to  me.  If  I absented  myself  on  business  or
otherwise,  for  any  length  of  time,  my  wife  was  removed  to  the  hospitable
abode  of  some  friend  in  the  neighbourhood  until  my  return,  and  then,
kind  reader,  I was  several  times  obliged  to  spend  a week  or  more  with


438


LOUISVILLE.


these  good  people,  before  they  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  let  us  return  to
our  own  residence.  We  lived  for  two  years  at  Louisville,  where  we  en-
joyed many  of  the  best  pleasures  which  this  life  can  afford  ; and  whenever
we  have  since  chanced  to  pass  that  way,  we  have  found  the  kindness  of
our  former  friends  unimpaired.

During  my  residence  at  Louisville,  much  of  my  time  was  employed
in  my  ever  favourite  pursuits.  I drew  and  noted  the  habits  of  every
thing  which  I procured,  and  my  collection  was  daily  augmenting,  as
every  individual  who  carried  a gun,  always  sent  me  such  birds  or  quad-
rupeds as  he  thought  might  prove  useful  to  me.  My  portfolios  already
contained  upwards  of  two  hundred  drawings.  Dr  W.  C.  Galt,  being
a botanist,  was  often  consulted  by  me,  as  well  as  his  friend  Dr  Fergu-
son. M.  Gilly  drew  beautifully,  and  was  fond  of  my  pursuits.  So  was
my  friend,  and  now  relative,  N.  Berthoud.  As  I have  already  said,  our
time  was  spent  in  the  most  agreeable  manner,  through  the  hospitable
friendship  of  our  acquaintance.

One  fair  morning,  I was  surprised  by  the  sudden  entrance  into  our
counting-room  of  Mr  Alexander  Wilson,  the  celebrated  author  of  the
American  Ornithology,”  of  whose  existence  I had  never  until  that  mo-
ment been  apprised.  This  happened  in  March  1810.  How  well  do  I re-
member him,  as  he  then  walked  up  to  me  ! His  long,  rather  hooked
nose,  the  keenness  of  his  eyes,  and  his  prominent  cheek-bones,  stamped
his  countenance  with  a peculiar  character.  His  dress,  too,  was  of  a kind
not  usually  seen  in  that  part  of  the  country  ; a short  coat,  trowsers,  and
a waistcoat  of  grey  cloth.  His  stature  was  not  above  the  middle  size.
He  had  two  volumes  under  his  arm,  and  as  he  approached  the  table  at
which  I was  working,  I thought  I discovered  something  like  astonish-
ment in  his  countenance.  He,  however,  immediately  proceeded  to  dis-
close the  object  of  his  visit,  which  was  to  procure  subscriptions  for  his
work.  He  opened  his  books,  explained  the  nature  of  his  occupations,  and
requested  my  patronage.

I felt  surprised  and  gratified  at  the  sight  of  his  volumes,  turned  over
a few  of  the  plates,  and  had  already  taken  a pen  to  write  my  name  in  his
favour,  when  my  partner  rather  abruptly  said  to  me  in  French,  “ My
dear  Audubon,  what  induces  you  to  subscribe  to  this  work  Your
drawings  are  certainly  far  better,  and  again  you  must  know  as  much  of
the  habits  of  American  birds  as  this  gentleman.”  Whether  Mr  Wilson
\mderstood  French  or  not,  or  if  the  suddenness  with  which  I paused,  dis-


LOUISVILLE.


4SS

appointed  him,  I cannot  tell ; but  I clearly  perceived  that  he  was  not
pleased.  Vanity  and  the  encomiums  of  my  friend  prevented  me  from
subscribing.  Mr  Wilson  asked  me  if  I had  many  drawings  of  birds.

I rose,  took  down  a large  portfolio,  laid  it  on  the  table,  and  shewed  him,
as  I would  shew  you,  kind  reader,  or  any  other  person  fond  of  such  sub-
jects, the  whole  of  the  contents,  with  the  same  patience  with  which  he  had
shewn  me  his  own  engravings.

His  surprise  appeared  great,  as  he  told  me  he  never  had  the  most  dis-
tant idea  that  any  other  individual  than  himself  had  been  engaged  in
forming  such  a collection.  He  asked  me  if  it  was  my  intention  to  pub-
lish, and  when  I answered  in  the  negative,  his  surprise  seemed  to  increase.
And,  truly,  such  was  not  my  intention ; for,  until  long  after,  when  I met
the  Prince  of  Musignano  in  Philadelphia,  I had  not  the  least  idea  of  pre-
senting the  fruits  of  my  labours  to  the  world.  Mr  W ilson  now  examin-
ed my  drawings  with  care,  asked  if  I should  have  any  objections  to  lend-
ing him  a few  durii^  his  stay,  to  which  I replied  that  I had  none : he
then  bade  me  good  morning,  not,  however,  until  I had  made  an  arrange-
ment to  explore  the  woods  in  the  vicinity  along  with  him,  and  had  pro-
mised to  procure  for  him  some  birds,  of  which  I had  drawings  in  my  col-
lection, but  which  he  had  never  seen.

It  happened  that  he  lodged  in  the  same  house  with  us,  but  his  re-
tired habits,  I thought,  exhibited  either  a strong  feeling  of  discontent,  or
a decided  melancholy.  The  Scotch  airs  which  he  played  sweetly  on  his
flute  made  me  melancholy  too,  and  I felt  for  him.  I presented  him  to
my  wife  and  friends,  and  seeing  that  he  was  all  enthusiasm,  exerted  my-
self as  much  as  was  in  my  power,  to  procure  for  him  the  specimens  which
he  wanted.  We  hunted  together,  and  obtained  birds  which  he  had  ne-
ver before  seen  ; but,  reader,  I did  not  subscribe  to  his  work,  for,  even
at  that  time,  my  collection  was  greater  than  his.  Thinking  that  perhaps
he  might  be  pleased  to  publish  the  results  of  my  researches,  I offered
them  to  him,  merely  on  condition  that  what  I had  drawn,  or  might  after-
wards draw  and  send  to  him,  should  be  mentioned  in  his  work,  as  coming
from  my  pencil.  I at  the  same  time  offered  to  open  a correspondence
with  him,  which  I thought  might  prove  beneficial  to  us  both.  He  made
no  reply  to  either  proposal,  and  before  many  days  had  elapsed,  left
Louisville,  on  his  way  to  New  Orleans,  little  knowing  how  much  his  ta-
lents were  appreciated  in  our  little  town,  at  least  by  myself  and  my
friends.


440


LOUISVILLE.


Some  time  elapsed,  during  which  I never  heard  of  him,  or  of  his  work.
At  length,  having  occasion  to  go  to  Philadelphia,  I,  immediately  after
my  arrival  there,  inquired  for  him,  and  paid  him  a visit.  He  was  then
drawing  a White-headed  Eagle.  He  received  me  with  civility,  and  took
me  to  the  Exhibition  Rooms  of  Rembrandt  Peale,  the  artist,  who  had
then  portrayed  Napoleon  crossing  the  Alps.  Mr  Wilson  spoke  not  of
birds  or  drawings.  Feeling,  as  I was  forced  to  do,  that  my  company
was  not  agreeable,  I parted  from  him  ; and  after  that  I never  saw  him
again.  But  judge  of  my  astonishment  some  time  after,  when  on  reading
the  thirty-ninth  page  of  the  ninth  volume  of  American  Ornithology,  I
found  in  it  the  following  paragraph  : —

“ March  2Sd,  1810. — I bade  adieu  to  Louisville,  to  which  place  I had
four  letters  of  recommendation,  and  was  taught  to  expect  much  of  every
thing  there  ; but  neither  received  one  act  of  civility  from  those  to  whom
I was  recommended,  one  subscriber,  nor  one  new  bird ; though  I de-
livered my  letters,  ransacked  the  woods  repeatedly,  and  visited  all  the
characters  likely  to  subscribe.  Science  or  literature  has  not  one  friend
in  this  place.”


( 441  -)


THE  BLACK  WARRIOB.

Falco  Harlan  I.

PLATE  LXXXVI.  Male  and  Female.

Long  before  I discovered  this  fine  Hawk,  I was  anxious  to  have  an
opportunity  of  honouring  some  new  species  of  the  feathered  tribe  with  the
name  of  my  excellent  friend  Dr  Richard  Harlan  of  Philadelphia.  This
I might  have  done  sooner,  had  I not  waited  until  a species  should  occur,
which  in  its  size  and  importance  should  bear  some  proportion  to  my  gra-
titude toward  that  learned  and  accomplished  friend.

The  Hawks  now  before  you  were  discovered  near  St  Francisville,
in  Louisiana,  during  my  late  sojourn  in  that  State,  and  had  bred  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  place  where  I procured  them,  for  two  seasons,  al-
though they  had  always  eluded  my  search,  until,  at  last,  as  I was  crossing
a large  cotton  field,  one  afternoon,  I saw  the  female  represented  in  the  Plate
standing  perched  on  the  top  of  a high  belted  tree  in  an  erect  and  com-
manding attitude.  It  looked  so  like  the  Black  Hawk  (^Falco  mger)  of
Wilson,  that  I apprehended  what  I had  heard  respecting  it  might  prove
incorrect.  I approached  it,  however,  when,  as  if  it  suspected  my  evil  in-
tentions, it  flew  off,  but  after  at  first  sailing  as  if  with  the  view  of  escaping
from  me,  passed  over  my  head,  when  I shot  at  it,  and  brought  it  winged
to  the  ground.  No  sooner  had  I inspected  its  eye,  its  bill,  and  particu-
larly its  naked  legs,  than  I felt  assured  that  it  was,  as  had  been  repre-
sented by  those  persons  who  had  spoken  to  me  of  its  exploits,  a new  spe-
cies. I drew  it  whilst  alive  ; but  my  intentions  of  preserving  it  and  car-
rying it  to  England  as  a present  to  the  Zoological  Society  were  frustrated
by  its  refusing  food.  -It  died  in  a few  days,  when  I preserved  its  skin,
which,  along  with  those  of  other  rare  birds,  I have  since  given  to  the
British  Museum,  through  my  friend  J.  G.  Children,  Esq.  of  that  In-
stitution.

A few  days  afterwards  I saw  the  male  bird  perched  on  the  same  tree,
but  was  unable  to  approach  him  so  long  as  I had  a gun,  although  he  fre-
quently allowed  me  and  my  wife  to  pass  close  to  the  foot  of  the  tree  when
we  were  on  horseback  and  unarmed.  I followed  it  in  vain  for  nearly  a
fortnight,  from  one  field  to  another,  and  from  tree  to  tree,  until  our  phy-


442


BLACK  WARRIOR.


sician,  Dr  John  B.  Hereford,  knowing  my  great  desire  to  obtain  it,
shot  it  in  the  wing  with  a rifle  ball,  and  sent  it  alive  to  me.  It  was  still
wilder  than  the  female,  erected  the  whole  of  the  feathers  of  its  head,  opened
its  bill,  and  was  ever  ready  to  strike  with  its  talons  at  any  object  brought
near  it.  I made  my  drawing  of  the  male  also  while  still  alive.

This  species,  although  considerably  smaller  than  the  Red-tailed  Hawk,
to  which  it  is  allied,  is  superior  to  it  in  flight  and  daring.  Its  flight  is
rapid,  greatly  protracted,  and  so  powerful  as  to  enable  it  to  seize  its  prey
with  apparent  ease,  or  effect  its  escape  from  its  stronger  antagonist,  the
Red-tail,  which  pursues  it  on  all  occasions.

The  Black  Warrior  has  been  seen  to  pounce  on  a fowl,  kill  it  almost
instantly,  and  afterwards,  drag  it  along  the  ground  for  several  hundred
yards,  when  it  would  conceal  it,  and  return  to  feed  upon  it  in  security.
It  was  not  observed  to  fall  on  Hares  or  Squirrels,  but  at  all  times  evinced
a marked  preference  for  common  Poultry,  Partridges,  and  the  smaller
species  of  Wild  Duck.

I was  told  that  the  young  birds  appeared  to  be  of  a leaden-grey  co-
lour at  a distance,  but  at  the  approach  of  winter  became  as  dark  as  the
parents.  None  of  them  were  to  be^seen  at  the  time  when  I procured  the
latter.  Of  its  nest  or  eggs  nothing  is  yet  known.  My  friends  Messrs
Johnson  and  Carpenter  frequently  spoke  of  this  Hawk  to  me  imme-
diately after  my  return’  to  Louisiana  from  Europe,  which  took  place  in
November  1829-  I have  a skin  of  this  bird  in  my  possession.  Should
its  nest  be  discovered,  and  should  I have  an  opportunity  of  becoming
more  acquainted  with  its  habits,  I shall  not  fail  to  give  you  an  account  of
my  observations.

Falco  Harlani.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXVI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  robust,  as  broad  as  deep  at  the  base,  compressed  to>vards  the
end ; upper  mandible  nearly  straight,  and  sloping  in  its  dorsal  outline,,
curved  towards  the  tip,  which  is  declinate,  trigonal,  acute,  the  sides  convex,
the  edges  acute,  overlapping,  with  a rounded  process  on  each  side ; lower
mandible  convex  in  its  dorsal  outline  and  on  the  sides,  the  tip  rounded.
Nostrils  oval,  oblique,  in  the  fore  part  of  the  cere.  Head  very  large,
neck  short,  body  robust.  Feet  of  ordinary  length;  tarsus  a little  com-


BLACK  WARRIOR.


443


pressed,  scuteilate  before  and  behind,  reticularly  scaly  on  the  sides  ; toes
scutellate  above,  scaly  on  the  sides,  tubercular  and  scabrous  beneath ;
claws  curved,  roundish,  very  acute.

Plumage  compact,  feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  short  and  rounded,
tibial  feathers  elongated 'and  loose  at  the  tips.  Wings  long  ; first  quill
short,  fourth  longest,  third  and  fifth  equal,  the  first  primaries  cut  out  on
the  inner  web  towards  the  end.  Tail  longish,  ample,  of  twelve  broad,
rounded  feathers.

Bill  light  blue,  black  towards  the  end ; cere  and  angles  of  the  mouth
yellowish-green.  Iris  light  yellowish-brown.  Feet  dull  greenish-yellow,
claws  black.

The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is  deep  chocolate-brown,  the  un-
der parts  lighter,  the  feathers  there  being  margined  with  light  brown.
Tail  lighter  than  the  back,  and  rather  narrowly  barred  with  brownish-
black,  the  tips  brownish-red.  Under  wing-coverts  whitish,  spotted  with
deep  brown.

Length  21  inches,  extent  of  wings  45  ; bill  along  the  back  1^,  along
the  gap,  from  the  tip  of  the  lower  mandible,  1^;  tarsus  1|.  . J

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXVI.  Fig.  2.

The  female  resembles  the  male  in  external  appearance.

Length  22  inches  ; bill  along  the  back  1^.

This  species  bears  a strong  resemblance  to  the  Common  Buzzard
{Falco  Buted)  of  Europe,  from  which,  however,  it  differs  in  having  the
head  broader,  the  legs  stouter,  and  the  general  colour  of  the  plumage
darker.  It  is  also  considerably  larger.


( 444  )


THE  FLORIDA  JAY.

CORVUS  FLORIDANUS,  BaRTRAM.

PJLATE  LXXXVII.  Male  and  Female.

This  beautiful  and  lively  bird  is  a constant  resident  in  the  south-
western parts  of  Florida,  from  which  country  it  seldom  if  ever  removes
to  any  great  distance.  It  is  never  seen  in  the  State  of  Louisiana,  far
less  in  that  of  Kentucky,  and  when  Charles  Bonaparte  asserts  that
it  occurs  in  these  districts,  we  must  believe  that  he  has  been  misinformed.
It  is  so  confined  to  the  particular  portions  of  Florida  which  it  inhabits,
that  even  on  the  eastern  shores  of  that  peninsula  few  are  to  be  seen.  I
have  never  observed  it  in  any  part  of  Georgia,  or  farther  to  the  eastward.

The  flight  of  the  Florida  Jay  is  generally  performed  at  a short  dis-
tance from  the  ground,  and  consists  either  of  a single  sailing  sweep,  as  it
shifts  from  one  tree  or  bush  to  another,  or  of  continuous  flappings,  with
a slightly  undulated  motion,  in  the  manner  of  the  Magpie  {Corvus  Pica)
or  of  the  Canada  Jay  {Corvus  canadensis).  Its  notes  are  softer  than  those
of  its  relative  the  Blue  Jay  {^Corvus  cristatus).,  and  are  more  frequently
uttered.  Its  motions  are  also  more  abrupt  and  quicker.  It  is  seen  pass-
ing from  one  tree  to  another  with  expanded  tail,  stopping  for  a moment
to  peep  at  the  intruder,  and  hopping  off  to  another  place  the  next  minute.
It  fre(|uently  descends  to  the  ground,  along  the  edges  of  oozy  or  marshy
places,  to  search  for  snails,  of  which,  together  with  berries  of  various
kinds,  fruits  and  insects,  its  food  consists.  It  is  easily  approached
during  the  breeding  season,  but  is  more  shy  at  other  times.  It  is  a
great  destroyer  of  the  eggs  of  small  birds,  as  well  as  of  young  birds,
which  it  chases  and  kills  by  repeated  blows  of  its  bill  on  their  heads,
after  which  it  tears  their  flesh  with  avidity.

The  Florida  Jay  is  easily  kept  in  a cage,  where  it  will  feed  on  recent
or  dried  fruits,  such  as  figs,  raisins,  and  the  kernels  of  various  nuts,  and
exhibits  as  much  gaiety  as  the  Blue  Jay  does  in  a similar  state.  Like
the  latter,  it  secures  its  food  between  its  feet,  and  breaks  it  into  pieces
before  swallowing  it,  particularly  the  acorns  of  the  Live  Oak,  and  the
snails  which  it  picks  up  among  the  Sword  Palmetto.  No  sooner  have
the  seeds  of  that  plant  become  black,  or  fully  ripe,  than  the  Florida  Jay


FLORIDA  JAY.


445


makes  them  almost  its  sole  food  for  a time,  and  wherever  a patch  of
these  troublesome  plants  are  to  be  seen,  there  also  is  the  Jay  to  be  met
with.  I have  called  the  Palmetto  a troublesome  plant,  because  its  long,
narrow,  and  serrated  leaves  are  so  stiff,  and  grow  so  close  together,  that
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  walk  among  them,  the  more  so  that  it  usually
grows  in  places  where  the  foot  is  seldom  put  without  immediately  sink-
ing in  the  mire  to  a depth  of  several  inches.

The  nest  of  the  Florida  J ay  is  sparingly  formed  of  dry  sticks,  placed
across  each  other,  and,  although  of  a rounded  shape,  is  so  light  that  the
bird  is  easily  seen  through  it.  It  is  lined  with  fibrous  roots,  placed  in  a
circular  manner.  The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six,  of  a light  olive  colour,
marked  with  irregular  blackish  dashes.  Only  one  brood  is  raised  in  the
season.

I had  a fine  opportunity  of  observing  a pair  of  these  birds  in  con-
finement, in  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  They  had  been  raised  out  of  a
family  of  five,  taken  from  the  nest,  and  when  I saw  them  had  been  two
years  in  confinement.  They  were  in  full  plumage,  and  extremely  beau-
tiful. The  male  was  often  observed  to  pay  very  particular  attentions  to
the  female,  at  the  approach  of  spring.  They  were  fed  upon  rice,  and  all
kinds  of  dried  fruit.  Their  cage  was  usually  opened  after  dinner,  when
both  immediately  flew  upon  the  table,  fed  on  the  almonds  which  were
given  them,  and  drank  claret  diluted  with  water.  Both  affected  to  imi-
tate particular  sounds,  but  in  a very  imperfect  manner.  These  attempts
at  mimicry  probably  resulted  from  their  having  been  in  company  with  par-
rots and  other  birds.  They  suflPered  greatly  when  moulting,  becoming
almost  entirely  bare,  and  requiring  to  be  kept  near  the  fire.  The  female
dropped  two  eggs  in  the  cage,  but  never  attempted  to  make  a nest,  al-
though the  requisite  materials  were  placed  at  her  disposal.

I have  represented  a pair  of  Florida  Jays  on  a branch  of  the  Persimon
tree,  ornamented  with  its  richly  coloured  fruits.  This  tree  grows  to  a
moderate  height  as  well  as  girth.  The  wood  is  hard  and  compact.  The
leaves  drop  off  at  an  early  period.  The  fruit,  when  fully  ripe,  is  grate-
ful to  the  palate.  The  Persimon  occurs  in  all  parts  of  the  United
States,  but  abounds  in  the  low  lands  of  Florida  and  Louisiana,  probably
more  than  in  any  other  portion  of  the  Union.

Coftvus  FLORiDANUs,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  58.

Florida  Jay,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii  PI.  13.  fig.  1.


Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXVII.  Fig,  1.


446


FLORIDA  JAY.


Bill  short,  strong,  straight,  compressed,  acute ; upper  mandible  with
the  dorsal  outline  nearly  straight,  the  sides  sloping,  the  edges  sharp  and
overlapping,  the  tip  slightly  declinate ; lower  mandible  with  the  back
narrow,  the  sides  sloping.  Nostrils  basal,  open,  covered  by  the  reversed
bristly  feathers.  Head  rather  large,  neck  short,  body  robust.  Feet  of
ordinary  length ; tarsus  about  the  same  length  as  the  middle  toe,  ante-
riorly scutellate,  compressed,  acute  behind  ; toes  free,  scutellate,  the  inner
shorter  than  the  outer ; claws  arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  glossy.  A tuft  of  reflected  bristly  feathers  over
the  nostril  on  each  side,  and  several  bristle-pointed  feathers  at  the  base
of  the  upper  mandible.  Wings  short,  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,
first  short.  Tail  long,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  and  feet  brownish-black.  Iris  hazel.  Upper  part  of  the  head,
the  cheeks,  side,  and  back  part  of  the  neck,  the  wings  and  tail,  of  a
bright  purplish-azure.  Back  light  yellowish-brown.  A band  of  white
on  the  forehead,  extending  over  the  eyes.  The  under  parts  brownish-
white.  The  upper  tail-coverts  are  blue,  and  the  tail-feathers  are  indistinct-
ly barred  with  deeper  lines.

Length  11^  inches ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  gap  nearly  ;
tarsus  ly2^,  middle  toe  nearly  the  same.

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXVII.  Fig.  2.

The  female  presents  the  same  colours  as  the  male,  the  difference  in
tint  being  hardly  perceptible.


The  Persimon  Tree.

■ ■ :>

Diospyros  VIRGINIAN  a,  WUld.  Sp.  PI.  vol,  iv.  p.  1107.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  i.
p.  265.  Mich.  Abr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  195.  PI.  12. — Pol  yg  ami  a
Dkeoia,  Linn.  Guaiacanaj,  Juss.

Leaves  ovato-oblong,  acuminate,  smooth,  venous ; petioles  downy ;
buds  smooth.  The  flowers  are  pale  yellow,  and  the  fruits,  which  are  of
the  size  of  a plum,  are  of  a globular  form,  and  when  mature,  of  a dull
yellowish  colour.  The  bark  of  old  trees  is  cracked,  and  of  a dark  colour.
The  wood  is  employed  for  various  purposes,  being  fine-grained,  ard
and  durable.


( 447  )


THE  AUTUMNAL  WARBLER.

Sylvia  autumnalis,  Wils.

PLATE  LXXXVIII.  Male  and  Female.

The  Autumnal  Warbler  was  so  named  by  Mr  Wilson,  on  account
of  its  appearing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Philadelphia,  where  only  it  was
seen  by  that  writer,  during  its  migration  from  the  Northern  States,  where
it  breeds,  to  the  confines  of  Mexico,  its  winter  residence.

This  species  makes  its  appearance  in  great  numbers,  in  the  lower  parts
of  Louisiana,  early  in  March,  and  remains  there  for  a few  days  along  with
many  others.  At  this  season,  it  passes  from  the  high  top  of  one  tree  to
that  of  another,  with  great  activity.  In  about  a week  after  its  first  ap-
pearance, none  are  to  be  seen.  It  moves  towards  the  northernmost  of  our
Eastern  Districts,  as  the  season  advances,  and  does  not  stop  until  it
reaches  the  remote  parts  of  the  State  of  New  York,  many  individuals,
however,  forcing  their  way  still  farther.

I have  found  it  breeding'  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Cayuga
Lakes,  and  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Champlain,  in  retired  parts  of  the
woods,  which  it  seems  to  prefer  during  the  summer  months.  I have  also
found  it  in  the  lofty  forests  of  that  portion  of  Pennsylvania  usually  called
the  Great  Pine  Swamp.  The  nest,  like  that  of  many  other  Sylvia,  is
partially  conical  and  pensile,  and  is  formed  of  the  soft  bark  of  vines,
lined  with  the  down  of  various  plants.  The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six,
of  a white  colour,  tinged  with  red,  and  sprinkled  with  brownish  dots  at
the  larger  end.  The  nest  is  usually  placed  in  the  slender  fork  of  a low
bush.  I have  found  the  female  kitting  as  late  as  the  SOth  of  August,  and
therefore  conclude  that  this  species  raises  two  broods  in  the  season,  al-
though I have  had  no  opportunity  of  finding  the  nest  and  eggs  at  an
earlier  period.  '

The'  food  of  the  Autumnal  Warbler  consists  of  small  insects,  ^many  of
which  it  procures  whilst  on  wing.  It  also  searches  with  great  industry
among  the  leaves  and  along  the  twigs.  Its  habits  are' precisely  similar
to  those  of  other  Warblers.  Its  flight  is  short,  unequal^  and  yet  quick.
It  rises  in  the  air  to  some  distance,  and  returns  towards  the  spot  which  it


3 i '


448


AUTUMNAL  WARBLER.


has  left,  in  zigzag  lines,  as  if  it  were  afraid  to  venture  out  of  the  thickets
which  it  inhabits.

No  sooner  have  these  birds  reared  their  young  than  they  assemble  in
large  loose  parties  of  fifty  or  more,  and  return  towards  the  south,  throw-
ing themselves  amongst  the  Willows  and  Birch-trees  that  margin  the
streams,  as  well  as  into  orchards  and  the  scattered  trees  in  cultivated
fields.  Its  common  note  is  a “simple  tweet ^ but  the  male,  in  spring  and
during  the  period  of  incubation,  repeats  at  short  intervals  a soft  and
pleasing  variety  of  notes,  scarcely,  however,  deserving  the  name  of  song.

These  birds  are  so  plentiful,  and  so  easily  found,  from  the  middle  of
September  to  that  of  October,  that  while  in  the  Great  Pine  Forest  I
sometimes  shot  more  than  a dozen  in  a day.  I have  never  observed  them
in  the  Southern  States  at  that  season.

I have  represented  a pair  of  these  plain-looking  Warblers  on  a twig
of  the  Canoe  Birch,  a tree  too  well  known,  from  the  use  to  which  its  bark
is  applied  by  the  Indians  in  the  construction  of  their  light  and  beautifid
boats,  to  require  any  particular  description  here.

Sylvia  autumnalis,  Ch.  Bonaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  74.

Autumnal  Warbler,  Sylvia  autumnalis,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  65.

PI.  23.  fig.  4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  nearly  straight,  slender,  tapering,  acute.
Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  above  by  a membrane.
Head  and  neck  of  ordinary  size.  Body  slender.  Feet  longish,  slender ;
tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  scutella,
the  uppermost  long ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of
moderate  size ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  loose,  blended.  Short  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the  bill.
Wings  rather  short,  the  first  quill  longest.  Tail  even.

Bill  brown,  the  lower  mandible  yellowish  towards  the  base.  Iris
hazel.  Feet  dusky.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  olive-
green.  The  tail-coverts  greyish.  A pale  line  over  the  eye,  which  is  en-
circled by  a narrow  line  of  whitish.  Fore  neck  dull  yellow  ; under  parts
generally  yellowish-white.  Quills  and  larger  coverts  dusky  on  their  in-
ner webs,  the  former  margined,  the  latter  tipped  with  white,  so  as  to  pre-
sent two  bands  of  that  colour  across  the  wing.  Tail  dusky,  margined


AUTUMNAL  WARBLER.


449


with  dull  white,  the  three  outer  feathers  white  on  the  greater  part  of  their
inner  web.

Length  4J,  extent  of  wings  8 ; bill  along  the  ridge  along  the  gap
yL ; tarsus  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXVIII.  Fig.  2,

The  female  resembles  the  male  in  external  appearance.


Canoe  Birch  or  Paper  Birch.

Betula  papyracea,  Wi/ld.  Sp.  PL  vol.  iv.  p.  464.  Purshy  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.
p.  621,  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  ii.  p.  133.  PL  1.— Moncecia
PoLYANDRiA,  Linn.  Ament  ACE^,  Juss.

Leaves  ovate,  acuminate,  doubly  serrated,  the  veins  hairy  beneath,
the  petiole  smooth.  The  female  catkins  pedunculate,  pendent.  This  tree
is  most  abundant  in  the  Northern  States,  where  it  sometimes  attains  a
height  of  from  seventy  to  eighty  feet,  and  a diameter  of  three  feet.


( 450  )


THE  NASHVILLE  WARBLER.

Sylvia  rubricapilla,  Wils.

PLATE  LXXXIX.  Male  and  Female.

I HAVE  shot  only  three  or  four  birds  of  this  species,  and  tiiese  were
all  that  I ever  met  with.  I found  them  in  Louisiana  and  Kentucky.  A
few  specimens  belonging  to  Mr  Titian  Peale  of  Philadelphia,  and
which  he,  with  his  usual  kindness,  lent  me  for  a few  days,  to  compare
their  colouring  with  my  drawings  and  notes,  were  the  only  others  that  I
have  seen.  It  is  probable  he  had  procured  them  in  Pennsylvania,  al-
though I cannot  now  recollect  if  this  was  really  the  case.

The  flight  of  this  little  bird  is  short,  light,  and  entirely  similar  to
that  of  the  numerous  species  of  Sylvia  already  described.  Its  food  con-
sists of  insects  and  larvae,  which  it  procures  by  searching  diligently  and
actively  amongst  the  leaves  and  buds  of  low  trees.  It  does  not  pursue
insects  on  wing.  With  the  exception  of  a few  low,  eagerly  repeated,
creaking  notes,  I have  not  heard  any  sounds  from  them.  While  uttering
these  notes,  which  are  all  the  species  seem  to  have  in  lieu  of  song,  the
male  stands  erect  and  still.  I am  not  aware  of  its  nest  having  been  dis-
covered or  described  by  any  naturalist.

The  plant  on  a twig  of  which  two  Nashville  Warblers  are  repre-
sented, is  usually  called  the  Swamp  Spice.  It  is  a low  bush,  grows  in
the  water,  in  swampy  and  muddy  ground,  and  occurs  from  Georgia  to
New  York.  The  berries,  which  are  seldom  eaten  by  birds,  have  little
pulp,  and  consequently  a large  seed.


Sylvia  rubricapilla,  Ch.  Bonaparte  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  87.

Sylvia  rubricapilla,  Nashville  Warbler,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  120.

PI.  27,  fig.  3.

Bill  rather  short,  slender,  tapering,  nearly  straight,  as  deep  as  broad
at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half-closed  by  a membrane.
Plead  of  ordinary  size,  neck  short,  body  full.  P'eet  of  ordinary  length,
slender ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  anteriorly  scuteUate ; toes
free,  scutellate  above ; claws  slender,  compressed,  acute,  arched.


NASHVILLE  WARBLER.


451


Adult  Male.  Plate  LXXXIX.  Fig.  1.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty.  Wings  short,  curved,  the  first  and
second  quills  longest.  Tail  short,  forked,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  greenish-brown.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  yellowish-green.  Head
and  cheeks  brownish-grey,  the  upper  part  of  the  head  dark  red.  A cir-
cle of  white  round  the  eye.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is
brownish-green,  of  the  under  greenish-yellow,  brighter  on  the  throat  and
breast.  Inner  webs  of  the  wing  and  tail-feathers  dusky,  the  outer
brownish-green,  and  of  the  primaries  bright  yellow.

Length  4^  inches,  extent  of  wings  T ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  I ; tarsus  f .

Adult  Female.  Plate  LXXXIX.  Fig.  2.

The  female  is  much  duller  ; the  head  and  hind-neck  dark  brownish-
grey,  tinged  with  green,  the  former  without  the  red  patch,  the  under
parts  more  mixed  with  grey,  the  sides  olivaceous,  and  the  yellow  of  the
wings  less  pure.


The  Swamp  Spice.

Ilex  prinoides,  TFild.  Sp.  PI.  vol.  i.  p.  709.  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  1.  p.
Tetrandria  Tetragynia,  Linn.  Rhamni,  Juss.

Leaves  lanceolate,  attenuated  at  the  base,  slightly  serrated ; pedun-
cles one-flowered.  The  leaves  of  this  species  are  deciduous,  the  berries
bright  red.  .


F f 2


( 452  )


THE  BLACK-AND-WHITE  CREEPER

Cert  HI  A varia,  Wils.

PLATE  XC.  Male.

A MORE  appropriate  name  has  seldom  been  given  to  a bird  than  that
by  which  the  present  species  is  designated.  Notwithstanding  the  ap-
proximation of  the  bill  in  form  to  that  of  the  Sylv'uB,  I am  decidedly  in-
clined to  place  this  species  among  the  Creepers  or  Certhia.  To  convince
you  of  the  propriety  of  such  an  arrangement,  I shall  now  lay  before  you
an  account  of  its  habits.

. ' 'The  Black-and-white  Creeper  appears  in  the  State  of  Lrouisiana  as
soon  as  the  buds  on  the  trees  begin  to  expand,  which  happens  about  the
middle  of  February.  It  throws  itself  into  the  forests,  where  it  breeds,
and  remains  until  the  beginning  of  November.  It  is  usually  seen  on  the
largest  trees  of  our  woods.  It  has  a few  notes,  consisting  of  a series  of
rapidly  enunciated  tweets^  the  last  greatly  prolonged.  It  climbs  and
creeps  along  the  trunks,  the  branches,  and  even  the  twigs  of  the  trees,
without  intermission,  and  so  seldom  perches,  that  I do  not  remember  ever
having  seen  it  in  such  a position.  It  lives  principally  on  small  ants  and
their  larvae,  which  it  secures  as  it  ascends  or  descends  in  a spiral  direction,
sidewise,  with  the  head  either  uppermost  or  beneath.  It  keeps  its  feet
close  together,  and  moves  by  successive  short  hops  with  a rapidity  equal-
bng  even  that  of  the  Brown  Creeper.  It  dives  from  the  tops  of  the  trees
to  their  roots,  and  again  ascends.  At  other  times,  it  alights  on  a decayed
fallen  tree,  and  searches  the  bark  for  food,  peeping  into  the  crevices.  It
has  only  a very  short  flight,  and  moves  directly  from  one  tree  to  the  nearest.

In  this  manner  the  Black-and-white  Creeper  reaches  the  Northern
Districts.  It  always  prefers  the  most  uncultivated  tracts,  and  is  espe-
cially fond  of  the  pines  and  hemlock-trees  of  the  mountain-glens.  I have
met  with  it  on  the  borders  of  Canada,  round  Lake  Champlain,  in  the
country  far  to  the  north-west,  on  the  banks  of  the  Illinois,  in  Ohio,  Ken-
tucky, and  all  the  wooded  districts  of  the  Arkansas  and  Red  River.

In  Louisiana,  its  nest  is  usually  placed  in  some  small  hole  in  a tree,
and  is  composed  of  mosses  in  a dry  state,  lined  with  cottony  substances.
The  eggs  are  from  five  to  seven,  of  a short  oval  form,  white,  with  a few
brownish-red  spots  chiefly  at  the  large  end.


BLACK-AND.WHITE  CREEPER.


453


Two  broods  are  raised  in  the  season.  The  young  go  about  in  com-
pany, following  the  parents,  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  see  nine  or  ten  of
these  birds  scrambling  with  great  activity  along  the  trunk  of  a tree.  I
have  not  found  its  nest  in  the  Middle  States,  where,  however,  I am  con-
vinced many  breed.

The  young  are  similar  in  colouring  to  the  females.  The  young
males  do  not  acquire  their  full  plumage  until  the  following  spring.  T

A male  of  this  species  is  represented  on  a twig  of  the  tree  commonly
called  the  Black  Larch.

Sylvia  varta,  Lath,  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  539.— C^.  Bonaparte^  Synopsis  of  Birds  of
the  United  States,  p.  81.

White-poll  Warbler,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iv.  p.  488.

Black-and-white  Ceeeper,  Certhia  varia,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p.  23.
PI.  xix.  fig.  3.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XC.

Bill  rather  long,  slightly  arched,  compressed,  extremely  slender,
acute ; nostrils  basal,  narrow,  half-closed  by  a membrane.  General  form
slender.  Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer  than  the  mid-
dle toe,  scutellate  before ; toes  free,  scutellate,  the  hind  one  proportionally
larger  ; claws  compressed,  very  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft  and  blended.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  third  quill
longest,  secondaries  short.  Tail  nearly  even,  of  twelve  narrow,  rounded
feathers.

Bill  black.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  dusky  yellow.  Middle  of  the  head
longitudinally  white,  bordered  on  each  side  by  a broad  stripe  of  black,
beneath  which,  on  each  side,  over  the  eye,  is  a line  of  white.  Ear-coverts
and  chin  black.  Back  and  breast  streaked  with  white  and  black.  Wings
black,  the  outer  margins  of  the  quills  greyish-white,  the  tips  of  the  larger
coverts,  excepting  the  primary  ones,  white,  forming  two  broad  bands  of
that  colour  across  the  wing.  Tail  black,  tinged  with  bluish-grey  ex-
ternally, the  ends  of  the  inner  webs  of  the  three  outer  feathers  on  each
side  white.  Abdomen  white ; sides  and  under  tail-coverts  white,  spotted
with  black.

I.ength  54  inches,  extent  of  wings  74 ; bill  along  the  ridge  4-


1


454


BLACK-AND-WHITE  CREEPER.


The  Black  Larch.

PiNus  PENDULA,  Purshy  Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  645. — Moncecia  Polyandria,  Linn,
Conifers,  Juss.

Leaves  fasciculate,  deciduous ; cones  oblong,  the  margins  of  the  scales
inflected ; bracteoles  panduriform,  with  an  attenuated  tip.  This  species,
which  grows  in  cedar  swamps,  in  the  Northern  States,  attains  a great
size,  and  resembles  the  European  Larch  in  appearance.


( 453  )


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.

“ What  an  odd  looking  fellow !”  said  I to  myself,  as  while  walking
by  the  river,  I observed  a man  landing  from  a boat,  with  what  I thought
a bundle  of  dried  clover  on  his  back;  how  the  boatmen  stare  at  him  !
sure  he  must  be  an  original  I”  He  ascended  with  a rapid  step,  and  ap-
proaching me  asked  if  I could  point  out  the  house  in  which  Mr  Audu-
jiON  resided.  “ Why,  I am  the  man,”  said  I,  “ and  will  gladly  lead  you
to  my  dwelling.”

The  traveller  rubbed  his  hands  together  with  delight,  and  drawing
a letter  from  his  pocket,  handed  it  to  me  without  any  remark.  I broke
the  seal  and  read  as  follows : “ My  dear  Audubon,  I send  you  an  odd
fish,  which  you  may  prove  to  be  undescribed,  and  hope  you  will  do  so
in  your  next  letter.  Believe  me  always  your  friend  B,”  With  all  the
simplicity  of  a woodsman  I asked  the  bearer  where  the  odd  fish  was,
when  M.  de  T.  (for,  kind  reader,  the  individual  in  my  presence  was
none  else  than  that  reiiowned  naturalist)  smiled,  rubbed  his  hands,  and
with  the  greatest  good  humour  said,  I am  that  odd  fish  I presume,  Mr
Audubon.”  I felt  confounded  and  blushed,  but  contrived  to  stammer
an  apology.

W e soon  reached  the  house,  when  I presented  my  learned  guest  to  my
family,  and  was  ordering  a servant  to  go  to  the  boat  for  M.  de  T.’s  lug-
gage, when  he  told  me  he  had  none  but  what  he  brought  on  his  back.
He  then  loosened  the  pack  of  weeds  which  had  first  drawn  my  attention.
The  ladies  were  a little  surprised,  but  I checked  their  critical  glances  for
the  moment.  The  naturalist  pulled  off  his  shoes,  and  while  engaged  in
drawing  his  stockings,  not  up,  but  down,  in  order  to  cover  the  holes
about  the  heels,  told  us  in  the  gayest  mood  imaginable  that  he  had  walked
a great  distance,  and  had  only  taken  a passage  on  board  the  ark^  to  be
put  on  this  shore,  and  that  he  was  sorry  his  apparel  had  suffered  so  much
from  his  late  journey.  Clean  clothes  were  offered,  but  he  would  not  ac-
cept them,  and  it  was  with  evident  reluctance  that  he  performed  the  la-
vations  usual  on  such  occasions  before  he  sat  down  to  dinner.

At  table,  however,  his  agreeable  conversation  made  us  all  forget  his
singular  appearance ; and,  indeed,  it  was  only  as  we  strolled  together
in  the  garden  that  his  attire  struck  me  as  exceedingly  remarkable.  A


456


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.


long  loose  coat  of  yellow  nankeen,  much  the  worse  of  the  many  rubs  it  had
got  in  its  time,  and  stained  all  over  with  the  juice  of  plants,  hung  loosely
about  him  like  a sac.  A waistcoat  of  the  same,  with  enormous  pockets,
and  buttoned  up  to  the  chin,  reached  below  over  a pair  of  tight  pantar-
loons,  the  lower  parts  of  which  were  buttoned  down  to  the  ankles.  His
beard  was  as  long  as  I have  known  my  own  to  be  during  some  of  my
peregrinations,  and  his  lank  black  hair  hung  loosely  over  his  shoulders.
His  forehead  was  so  broad  and  prominent  that  any  tyro  in  phrenology
would  instantly  have  pronounced  it  the  residence  of  a mind  of  strong
powers.  His  words  impressed  an  assurance  of  rigid  truth,  and  as  he  di-
rected the  conversation  to  the  study  of  the  natural  sciences,  I listened  to
him  with  as  much  delight  as  Telemachus  could  have  listened  to  Mentor.
He  had  come  to  visit  me,  he  said,  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  my
drawings,  having  been  told  that  my  representations  of  birds  were  accom-
panied with  those  of  shrubs  and  plants,  and  he  was  desirous  of  knowing
whether  I might  chance  to  have  in  my  collection  any  with  which  he  was
unacquainted.  I observed  some  degree  of  impatience  in  his  request  to  be
allowed  at  once  to  see  what  I had.  W e returned  to  the  house,  when  I
opened  my  portfolios  and  laid  them  before  him.

He  chanced  to  turn  over  the  drawing  of  a plant  quite  new  to  him.
After  inspecting  it  closely,  he  shook  his  head,  and  told  me  no  such  plant
existed  in  nature  ; — for,  kind  reader,  M.  de  T.  although  a highly  scienti-
fic man,  was  suspicious  to  a fault,  and  believed  such  plants  only  to  exist
as  he  had  himself  seen,  or  such  as,  having  been  discovered  of  old,  had,  ac-
cording to  Father  Malebranche’s  expression,  acquired  a “ venerable
beard.”  I told  my  guest  that  the  plant  was  common  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood,  and  that  I should  shew  it  him  on  the  morrow.  “ And
why  tomorrow,  Mr  Audubon?  let  us  go  now.”  We  did  so,  and  on
reaching  the  bank  of  the  river,  I pointed  to  the  plant.  M.  de  T.  I thought
had  gone  mad.  He  plucked  the  plants  one  after  another,  danced,  hug-
ged me  in  his  arms,  and  exultingly  told  me  that  he  had  got  not  merely  a
new  species,  but  a new  genus.  When  we  returned  home,  the  naturalist
opened  the  bundle  which  he  had  brought  on  his  back,  and  took  out  a
journal  rendered  water-proof  by  means  of  a leather  case,  together  with  a
small  parcel  of  linen,  examined  the  new  plant,  and  wrote  its  description.
The  examination  of  my  drawings  then  went  on.  You  would  be  pleased,
kind  reader,  to  hear  his  criticisms,  which  were  of  the  greatest  advantage


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.


457


to  me,  for,  being  well  acquainted  with  books  as  well  as  with  nature,  he
was  well  fitted  to  give  me  advice.

It  was  summer,  and  the  heat  was  so  great  that  the  windows  were  all
open.  The  light  of  the  candles  attracted  many  insects,  among  which  was
observed  a large  species  of  Scarabaeus.  I caught  one,  and,  aware  of  his
inclination  to  believe  only  what  he  should  himself  see,  I shewed  hint  the
insect,  and  assured  him  it  was  so  strong  that  it  would  crawl  on  the  table
with  the  candlestick  on  its  back.  “ I should  like  to  see  the  experiment
made,  Mr  Audubon,”  he  replied.  It  was  accordingly  made^  and  the
insect  moved  about,  dragging  its  burden  so  as  to  make  the  candlestick
change  its  position  as  if  by  magic,  until  coming  upon  the  edge  of  the
table,  it  dropped  on  the  floor,  took  to  wing,  and  made  its  escape.

When  it  waxed  late,  I shewed  him  to  the  apartment  intended  for  him
during  his  stay,  and  endeavoured  to  render  him  comfortable,  leaving  him
writing  materials  in  abundance.  I was  indeed  heartily  glad  to  have  a
naturalist  under  my  roof.  We  had  all  retired  to  rest.  Every  person  I
imagined  was  in  deep  slumber  save  myself,  when  of  a sudden  I heard  a
great  uproar  in  the  naturalist’s  room.  I got  up,  reached  the  place  in  a few
moments,  and  opened  the  door,  when,  to  my  astonishment,  I saw  my
guest  running  about  the  room  naked,  holding  the  handle  of  my  favourite
violin,  the  body  of  which  he  had  battered  to  pieces  against  the  walls  in
attempting  to  kill  the  bats  which  had  entered  by  the  open  window,
probably  attracted  by  the  insects  flying  around  his  candle.  I stood
amazed,  but  he  continued  jumping  and  running  round  and  round,  until
he  was  fairly  exhausted,  when  he  begged  me  to  procure  one  of  the  ani-
mals for  him,  as  he  felt  convinced  they  belonged  to  “ a new  species.”  Al-
though I was  convinced  of  the  contrary,  I took  up  the  bow  of  my  de-
molished Cremona,  and  administering  a smart  tap  to  each  of  the  bats  as
it  came  up,  soon  got  specimens  enough.  The  war  ended,  I again  bade  him
good  night,  but  could  not  help  observing  the  state  of  the  room.  It  was
strewed  with  plants,  which  it  would  seem  he  had  arranged  into  groups,
but  which  were  now  scattered  about  in  confusion.  “ Never  mind,  Mr
Audubon,”  quoth  the  eccentric  naturalist,  “ never  mind,  111  soon  arrange
them  again,  I have  the  bats,  and  that’s  enough.”

Several  days  passed,  during  which  we  followed  our  several  occupa-
tions, M.  de  T,  searched  the  woods  for  plants,  and  I for  birds.  He  al-
so followed  the  margins  of  the  Ohio,  and  picked  up  many  shells,  which
he  greatly  extolled.  With  us,  I told  him,  they  were  gathered  into


458


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.


heaps  to  be  converted  into  lime.  “ Lime  ! Mr  Audubon  ; why,  they  are
worth  a guinea  a piece  in  any  part  of  Europe.”  One  day,  as  I was  re-
turning from  a hunt  in  a cane-brake,  he  observed  that  I was  wet  and
spattered  with  mud,  and  desired  me  to  shew  him  the  interior  of  one  of
these  places,  which  he  said  he  had  never  visited.

The  Cane,  kind  reader,  formerly  grew  spontaneously  over  the  greater
portions  of  the  State  of  Kentucky  and  other  Western  Districts  of  our
Union,  as  well  as  in  many  farther  south.  Now,  however,  cultivation,  the
introduction  of  cattle  and  horses,  and  other  circumstances  connected  with
the  progress  of  civilization,  have  greatly  altered  the  face  of  the  country,
and  reduced  the  cane  within  comparatively  small  limits.  It  attains  a
height  of  from  twelve  to  thirty  feet,  and  a diameter  of  from  one  to  two,
and  grows  in  great  patches  resembling  osier-holts,  in  which  occur  plants  of
all  sizes.  The  plants  frequently  grow  so  close  together,  and  in  course  of
time  become  so  tangled,  as  to  present  an  almost  impenetrable  thicket.  A
portion  of  ground  thus  covered  with  canes  is  called  a Cane-brake.

If  you  picture  to  yourself  one  of  these  cane-brakes  growing  beneath
the  gigantic  trees  that  form  our  western  forests,  interspersed  with  vines
of  many  species,  and  numberless  plants  of  every  description,  you  may
conceive  how  difficult  it  is  for  one  to  make  his  way  through  it,  especially
after  a heavy  shower  of  rain  or  a fall  of  sleet,  when  the  traveller,  in  for-
cing his  way  through,  shakes  down  upon  himself  such  quantities  of  water,
as  soon  reduce  him  to  a state  of  the  utmost  discomfort.  The  hunters
often  cut  little  paths  through  the  thickets  with  their  knives,  but  the  usual
mode  of  passing  through  them  is  by  pushing  one’s  self  backward,  and
wedging  a way  between  the  stems.  To  follow  a bear  or  a cougar  pursued
by  dogs  through  these  brakes,  is  a task,  the  accomplishment  of  which
may  be  imagined,  but  of  the  difficulties  and  dangers  accompanying  which
I cannot  easily  give  an  adequate  representation.

The  canes  generally  grow  on  the  richest  soil,  and  are  particularly
plentiful  along  the  margins  of  the  great  western  rivers.  Many  of  our
new  settlers  are  fond  of  forming  farms  in  their  immediate  vicinity,  as  the
plant  is  much  relished  by  all  kinds  of  cattle  and  horses,  which  feed  upon
it  at  all  seasons,  and  again  because  these  brakes  are  plentifully  stocked
with  game  of  various  kinds.  It  sometimes  happens  that  the  farmer
clears  a portion  of  the  brake.  This  is  done  by  cutting  the  stems,  which
are  fistular  and  knotted,  like  those  of  other  grasses,  with  a large  knife  or
cutlass.  They  are  afterwards  placed  in  heaps,  and  when  partially  dried


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.


439


set  fire  to.  The  moisture  contained  between  the  joints  is  converted  into
steam,  which  causes  the  cane  to  burst  with  a smart  report,  and  when  a
whole  mass  is  crackling,  the  sounds  resemble  discharges  of  musquetry.
Indeed,  I have  been  told  that  travellers  floating  down  the  rivers,  and
unacquainted  with  these  circumstances,  have  been  induced  to  pull  their
oars  with  redoubled  rigour,  apprehending  the  attack  of  a host  of  savages,
ready  to  scalp  every  one  of  the  party.

A day  being  fixed,  we  left  home  after  an  early  breakfast,  crossed  the
Ohio,  and  entered  the  woods.  I had  determined  that  my  compauion
should  view  a cane-brake  in  all  its  perfection,  and  after  leading  him  seve-
ral miles  in  a direct  course,  came  upon  as  fine  a sample  as  existed  in  that
part  of  the  country.  We  entered,  and  for  some  time  proceeded  without
much  difficulty,  as  I led  the  way,  and  cut  down  the  canes  which  were
most  likely  to  incommode  him.  The  difficulties  gradually  increased,  so
that  we  were  presently  obliged  to  turn  our  backs  to  the  foe,  and  push
ourselves  on  the  best  way  we  could.  My  companion  stopped  here  and
there  to  pick  up  a plant  and  examine  it.  After  a while,  we  chanced  to
ccme  upon  the  top  of  a fallen  tree,  which  so  obstructed  our  passage  that
we  were  on  the  eve  of  going  round,  instead  of  thrusting  ourselves  through
amongst  the  branches,  when,  from  its  bed  in  the  centre  of  the  tangled
mass,  forth  rushed  a bear,  with  such  force,  and  snuffing  the  air  in  so
frightful  a manner,  that  M.  de  T.  became  suddenly  terror-struck,  and,
in  his  haste  to  escape,  made  a desperate  attempt  to  run,  but  fell  amongst
the  canes  in  such  a way,  that  he  looked  as  if  pinioned.  Perceiving  him
jammed  in  between  the  stalks,  and  thoroughly  frightened,  I could  not
refrain  from  laughing  at  the  ridiculous  exhibition  which  he  made.  My
gaiety,  however,  was  not  very  pleasing  to  the  savant,  who  called  out  for
aid,  which  was  at  once  administered.  Gladly  would  he  have  retraced
his  steps,  but  I was  desirous  that  he  should  be  able  to  describe  a cane-
brake,  and  enticed  him  to  follow  me,  by  telling  him  that  our  worst  diffi-
culties were  nearly  over.  We  proceeded,  for  by  this  time  the  bear  was
out  of  hearing.

The  way  became  more  and  more  tangled.  I saw  with  delight  that  a
heavy  cloud,  portentous  of  a thunder  gust,  was  approaching.  In  the
mean  time,  I kept  my  companion  in  such  constant  difficulties,  that  he
now  panted,  perspired,  and  seemed  almost  overcome  by  fatigue.  The
thunder  began  to  rumble,  and  soon  after  a dash  of  heavy  rain  drenched
us  in  a few  minutes.  The  withered  particles  of  leaves  and  bark  attached


460


THE  ECCENTRIC  NATURALIST.


to  the  canes  stuck  to  our  clothes.  We  received  many  scratches  from
briars,  and  now  and  then  a twitch  from  a nettle.  M.  de  T.  seriously  in-
quired if  we  should  ever  get  alive  out  of  the  horrible  situation  in  which
we  were.  I spoke  of  courage  and  patience,  and  told  him  I hoped  we
should  soon  get  to  the  margin  of  the  brake,  which,  however,  I knew  to
be  two  miles  distant.  I made  him  rest,  and  gave  him  a mouthful  of
brandy  from  my  flask ; after  which,  we  proceeded  on  our  slow  and  pain-
ful march.  He  threw  away  all  his  plants,  emptied  his  pockets  of  the
fungi,  lichens,  and  mosses  which  he  had  thrust  into  them,  and  finding
himself  much  lightened,  went  on  for  thirty  or  forty  yards  with  a better
grace.  But,  kind  reader,  enough — I led  the  naturalist  first  one  way,
then  another,  until  I had  nearly  lost  myself  in  the  brake,  although  I was
well  acquainted  with  it,  kept  him  tumbling  and  crawling  on  his  hands
and  knees,  until  long  after  mid-day,  when  we  at  length  reached  the  edge
of  the  river.  I blew  my  horn,  and  soon  shewed  my  companion  a boat
coming  to  our  rescue.  We  were  ferried  over,  and,  on  reaching  the  house,
found  more  agreeable  occupation  in  replenishing  our  empty  coffers.

M.  de  T.  remained  with  us  for  three  weeks,  and  collected  multitudes
of  plants,  shells,  bats,  and  fishes,  but  never  again  expressed  a desire  of
visiting  a cane-brake.  We  were  perfectly  reconciled  to  his  oddities,  and,
finding  him  a most  agreeable  and  intelligent  companion,  hoped  that  his
sojourn  might  be  of  long  duration.  But,  one  evening  when  tea  was
prepared,  and  we  expected  him  to  join  the  family,  he  was  nowhere  to  be
found.  His  grasses  and  other  valuables  were  all  removed  from  his  room.
-The  night  was  spent  in  searching  for  him  in  the  neighbourhood.  Nq
eccentric  naturalist  could  be  discovered.  Whether  he  had  perished  in  a
swamp,  or  had  been  devoured  by  a bear  or  a gar-fish,  or  had  taken  to
his  heels,  were  matters  of  conjecture  ; nor  was  it  until  some  weeks  after j
that  a letter  from  him,  thanking  us  for  our  attention,  assured  me  of  his


( 461  )

THE  BROAD-WINGED  HAWK.

FaLCO  PENNSYLVANICUS,

PLATE  XGI.  Male  and  Female.

One  fine  May  morning,  when  nature  seemed  to  be  enchanted  at  the
sight  of  her  own  great  works,  when  the  pearly  dew-drops  were  yet  hang-
ing at  the  point  of  each  leaf,  or  lay  nursed  in  the  blossoms,  gently  rock-
ed, as  it  were,  by  the  soft  breeze  of  early  summer,  I took  my  gun,  and,
accompanied  by  my  excellent  brother-in-law,  William  G.  Bakewell,
Esq.  at  that  time  a youth,  walked  towards  some  lovely  groves,  where
many  songsters  attracted  our  attention  by  their  joyous  melodies.  The
woods  were  all  alive  with  the  richest  variety,  and,  divided  in  choice,  we
kept  going  on  without  shooting  at  any  thing,  so  great  was  our  admira-
tion of  every  bird  that  presented  itself  to  our  view.  As  we  crossed  a nar-
row skirt  of  wood,  my  young  companion  spied  a nest  on  a tree  of  mode-
rate height,  and,  as  my  eye  reached  it,  we  both  perceived  that  the  parent
bird  was  sitting  in  it.  Some  little  consultation  took  place,  as  neither  of
us  could  determine  whether  it  was  a Crow’s  or  a Hawk’s  nest,  and  it  was
resolved  that  my  young  friend  should  climb  the  tree,  and  bring  down
one  of  the  eggs.  On  reaching  the  nest,  he  said  the  bird,  which  still  re-
mained quiet,  was  a Hawk  and  unable  to  fly.  I desired  him  to  cover  it
with  his  handkerchief,  try  to  secure  it,  and  bring  it  down,  together  with
the  eggs.  All  this  was  accomplished  without  the  least  difficulty.  I
looked  at  it  with  indescribable  pleasure,  as  I saw  it  was  new  to  me,  and
then  felt  vexed  that  it  was  not  of  a more  spirited  nature,  as  it  had  neither
defended  its  eggs  nor  itself.  It  lay  quietly  in  the  handkerchief,  and  I
carried  it  home  to  my  father-in-law’s,  shewed  it  to  the  family,  and  went
to  my  room,  where  I instantly  began  drawing  it.  The  drawing  which  I
then  made  is  at  this  moment  before  me,  and  is  dated  “ Fatland  Ford,
Pennsylvania,  May  27,  1812.”

I put  the  bird  on  a stick  made  fast  to  my  table.  It  merely  moved
its  feet  to  grasp  the  stick,  and  stood  erect,  but  raised  its  feathers,  and
drew  in  its  neck  on  its  shoulders.  I passed  my  hand  over  it,  to  smooth
the  feathers  by  gentle  pressure.  It  moved  not.  The  plumage  remained


462


BROAD-WINGED  HAWK.


as  I wished  it.  Its  eye,  directed  towards  mine,  appeared  truly  sorrow-
ful, with  a degree  of  pensiveness,  which  rendered  me  at  that  moment
quite  uneasy.  I measured  the  length  of  its  bill  with  the  compass,  began
my  outlines,  continued  measuring  part  after  part  as  I went  on,  and
finished  the  drawing,  without  the  bird  ever  moving  once.  My  wife  sat
at  my  side,  reading  to  me  at  intervals,  but  our  conversation  had  frequent
reference  to  the  singularity  of  the  incident.  The  drawing  being  finished,
I raised  the  window,  laid  hold  of  the  poor  bird,  and  launched  it  into  the
air,  where  it  sailed  off  until  out  of  my  sight,  without  uttering  a single
cry,  or  deviating  from  its  course.  The  drawing  from  which  the  plate  is
taken,  was  subsequently  made,  as  I had  to  wait  until  I should  procure  a
male,  to  render  it  complete.

The  above  incident  you  will  doubtless  consider  as  extraordinary  as  I
myself  did,  and  perhaps  some  may  feel  disposed  to  look  upon  it  as  a spe-
cimen of  travellers’  tales  ; but  as  I have  resolved  to  present  you  with  the
incidents  as  they  occurred,  I have  felt  no  hesitation  in  relating  this.

The  Broad-winged  Hawk  is  seldom  seen  in  Louisiana,  and  I believe
never  except  during  the  severe  winters  that  occasionally  occur  in  our
Middle  and  Eastern  Districts.  I have  observed  that  its  usual  range  sel-
dom extends  far  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains;  but  in  Virginia,
Maryland,  and  all  the  States  to  the  eastward  of  these,  it  is  by  no  means
a rare  species.  I have  shot  several  in  the  Jerseys,  the  State  of  New
York,  near  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  and  also  in  the  Great  Pine  Forest.

Its  flight,  which  is  easy  and  light,  is  performed  in  circles.  When
elevated  in  the  air,  it  is  fond  of  partially  closing  its  wings  for  a moment,
and  thus  gliding  to  a short  distance,  as  if  for  amusement.  It  seldom
chases  other  birds  of  prey,  but  is  itself  frequently  teased  by  the  Little
Sparrow-hawk,  the  King-bird,  or  the  Martin.  It  generally  attacks  birds
of  weak  nature,  particularly  very  young  chickens  and  ducklings,  and
during  winter  feeds  on  insects  and  other  small  animals.  It  flies  singly,
unless  during  the  breeding  season,  and  after  feeding  retires  to  the  top  of
some  small  tree,  within  the  woods,  where  it  rests  for  hours  together.  It
is  easily  approached.  When  wounded  by  a shot  so  as  to  be  unable  to  fly,
it,  like  most  birds  of  its  tribe,  throws  itself  on  its  back,  opens  its  bill,
protrudes  its  tongue,  utters  a hissing  sound,  erects  the  top-feathers  of  its
head,  and  defends  itself  by  reiterated  attempts  to  lay  hold  with  its  talons.
If  a stick  is  presented  to  it  in  this  state,  it  will  clench  it  at  once,  and  al-
low itself  to  be  carried  hanging  to  it  for  some  distance,  indeed  until


BROAD- WINGED  HAWK.


463


the  muscles  become  paralyzed,  when  it  drops,  and  again  employs  the
same  means  of  defence.

When  feeding,  it  generally  holds  its  prey  with  both  feet,  and  tears
and  swallows  the  parts  without  much  plucking.  I must  here  remark,
that  birds  of  prey  never  cover  their  victims  by  extending  the  wings  over
them,  unless  when  about  to  be  attacked  by  other  birds  or  animals,  that
evince  a desire  to  share  with  them  or  carry  off  the  fruit  of  their  exer-
tions. In  the  stomach  of  this  bird  I have  found  wood-frogs,  portions  of
small  snakes,  together  with  feathers,  and  the  hair  of  several  small  species
of  quadrupeds.  I do  not  think  it  ever  secures  birds  on  the  wing,  at  least
I never  saw  it  do  so.

The  nest,  which  is  about  the  size  of  that  of  the  Common  Crow,  is
usually  placed  on  pretty  large  branches,  and  near  the  stem  or  trunk
of  the  tree.  It  is  composed  externally  of  dry  sticks  and  briars,  inter-
nally of  numerous  small  roots,  and  is  lined  with  the  large  feathers  of
the  Common  Fowl  and  other  birds.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a
dull  greyish- white,  blotched  with  dark  brown.  They  are  deposited  as
early  as  the  beginning  of  March,  in  low  places,  but  not  until  a fortnight
later  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  the  districts  in  which  the  bird  more
frequently  breeds.

The  tree  on  which  I have  placed  a pair  of  these  birds  is  known  near-
ly throughout  the  Union  by  the  name  of  Pig-nut  Hickory.  I have  re-
presented it  along  with  them,  not  because  the  birds  themselves  feed  on
the  nuts,  as  some  people  have  supposed  on  seeing  the  drawing,  but  be-
cause it  occurs  abundantly  in  those  States  where  the  Broad- winged  Hawk
resides,  and,  again,  because  I have  found  the  nest  of  that  bird  more  fre-
quently placed  on  its  branches  than  on  those  of  any  other  tree.  The
nuts  have  an  excessively  hard  shell.  The  kernel  is  sweet,  but  as  it  is  of
small  size,  the  nuts  are  seldom  gathered  for  any  other  purpose  than  that
of  feeding  tame  squirrels.  The  hogs  which  run  at  large  in  our  woods
feed  on  them,  as  do  all  our  different  species  of  squirrels,  and  some-
times the  raccoon.  The  wood  of  this  tree  is  perhaps  tougher  than  that
of  most  of  its  genus ; but  as  the  trunk  is  seldom  either  very  straight
or  very  high,  it  is  not  used  so  much  as  some  other  hickories,  for  the
purposes  of  husbandry.  Its  average  height  may  be  estimated  at  about
fifty  feet,  and  its  diameter  at  from  eighteen  inches  to  two  feet.


464


BROAD-WINGED  HAWK.


Falco  rENNSYLVANicus,  Ch.  Bmaparte^  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  29.
Broad-winged  Hawk,  Falco  pennsylvanicus,  Wils.  Amer.  Om.  voL  vi.  p.  92.
PI.  54.  fig.  1.  Male.


Adult  Male.  Plate  XCI.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shortish,  as  broad  as  long,  the  sides  convex,  the  dorsal  outline
convex  from  the  base ; upper  mandible  with  the  edges  slightly  inflected,
waved  with  a broad  rounded  lobe,  the  tip  trigonal,  descending  obliquely,
acute  ; lower  mandible  inflected  at  the  edges,  rounded  at  the  tip.  Nos-
trils oval,  oblique.  Head  rather  large,  flattened  above.  Neck  shortish.
Body  ovate,  broad  anteriorly.  Wings  rather  long.  Legs  longish,  rather
robust,  roundish ; tarsi  covered  before  and  behind  with  scuta  ; toes  cover-
ed above  with  scuta,  scabrous  and  tuberculate  beneath  ; middle  toe  much
the  longest,  outer  connected  at  the  base  by  a membrane,  and  shorter  than
the  inner ; claws  long,  curved,  roundish,  very  acute.

Plumage  ordinary,  compact.  Feathers  of  the  head  narrow,  of  the
back  broad  and  rounded,  of  the  neck  oblong.  Space  between  the  bill
and  eye  covered  with  bristly  feathers.  Wing  very  broad,  the  primary
quills  broad,  slightly  narrowed  toward  the  end,  rounded,  the  fourth  long-
est, the  secondary  quills  curved  inwards,  broadly  obtuse.  Tail  longish,
nearly  even,  the  feathers  rather  broad,  truncated  and  rounded.

Bill  bluish-black  at  the  tip,  blue  towards  the  base ; cere  and  margin
yellow.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  gamboge-yellow ; claws  brownish-black.  The
general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  umber ; the  forehead  with  a
slight  margin  of  whitish,  the  quills  blackish-brown,  the  tail  with  three
bands  of  dark  brown,  alternating  with  two  whitish  bands,  and  a narrower
terminal  band  of  greyish,  the  tips  white.  Throat  whitish ; cheeks  red-
dish-brown, with  a dark  brown  mustachial  band  ; the  under  parts  gene-
rally light  reddish,  marked  with  guttiform,  umber  spots  along  the  neck,
and  sagittiform  larger  spots  of  the  same  colour  on  the  breast  and  sides.
Tibial  feathers  of  the  same  colour,  with  numerous  smaller  spots.

Length  14  inches,  extent  of  wings  32;  bill  along  the  ridge,
along  the  gap.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XCI.  Fig.  2.

Colouring  generally  similar  to  that  of  the  male,  lighter  above,  more
tinged  with  red  beneath,  where  the  spots  are  larger  and  more  irregular.


BROAD-WINGED  HAWK.


465


Length  16  inches,  extent  of  wings  35;  bill  1 along  the  ridge,
along  the  gap.

This  species  is  referred  to  the  division  Astures  of  the  genus  Falco.


The  Pig-nut  Hickory.

JuGLANs  PORCINA,  Mich.  Arbr.  Forest,  de  I’Amer.  Sept,  t.  i.  p.  206.  PI.  9.  Pursh,
Flor.  Amer.  vol.  ii.  p.  638. — Moncecia  Polyandria,  Linn.  Terebinthace^e,
Juss.

Leaves  pinnate,  with  seven,  five,  or  three  ovato-lanceolate,  smooth
leaflets,  attenuated  at  both  ends ; male  catkins  filiform  ; fruit  globose ;
nut  small,  smoothish,  very  hard.  The  leaves  on  the  twig  represented  in
the  plate  are  not  serrated  on  the  edges,  although  they  are  generally  so  in
this  species.  This,  however,  is  merely  an  occasional  variety.


( 466  )


THE  PIGEON  HAWK.

Falco  columbarius,  Linn.

PLA'rE  XCIL  Male  and  Female.

It  is  when  the  whole  of  the  shores  of  our  eastern  rivers  are  swarm-
ing with  myriads  of  Rice  Buntings,  Red-wings,  Soras,  and  other  mi-
gratory birds, — when  all  the  sportsmen  of  those  parts  of  our  country
are  induced  to  turn  out  in  the  expectation  of  fidl  bags  of  game,  that  the
daring  feats  of  the  little  spirited  Falcon  now  before  you  are  displayed.

Imagine  yourself,  good-natured  reader,  with  a gun  on  your  shoulder,
following  the  windings  of  one  of  those  noble  streams  which  embellish  our
country  and  facilitate  its  commerce,  having  constantly  within  your  view
millions  of  birds  on  their  way  to  the  south,  and  which  in  the  evenings
fall  thick  as  the  drops  of  a hail-shower  on  the  bordering  marshes,  to  spend
the  night  there  in  security,  and  by  rest  to  restore  the  vigour  necessary
for  their  gaining  the  distant  regions,  whence  half  of  them  had  emerged
the  preceding  spring.  W ell,  as  you  are  proceeding,  full  of  anxiety,  and
gazing  in  astonishment  at  the  multitudes  of  feathered  travellers,  all  of  a
sudden  a larger  bird  attracts  your  eye.  It  sweeps  along  in  the  stillness
of  the  autumnal  evening  with  a rapidity  seldom  equalled,  creating  confu-
sion, terror,  and  dismay  along  the  whole  shores.  The  flocks  rise  en  masse
with  a fluttering  sound  which  comes  strangely  on  your  ear,  double  and
double  again,  turn  and  wind  over  the  marsh,  agitated  and  fearful  of  im-
minent danger.  And  now,  closely  crowded,  they  would  fain  escape,  but
alas  ! one  has  been  singled  out,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  Pigeon
Hawk,  darting  into  the  middle  of  the  flock,  seizes  and  carries  him  oflP.
Now  is  your  time.  Hundreds  of  sportsmen  are  dispersed  over  the  marsh,
paddling  their  canoes,  or  splashing  among  the  reeds.  Pull  your  trigger,
and  let  fly,  for  it  is  impossible,  should  you  be  ever  so  inexpert,  not  to
bring  down  several  birds  at  a shot.

But,  leaving  you  to  your  sport,  I must  follow  the  little  marauder,  as
he  makes  toward  the  nearest  shore,  where  he  alights  and  devours  his  prey,
and  then,  with  unsatiated  appetite,  and  bent  on  foul  deeds,  returns  to  the
scene  of  action.

^^d^en  the  Reed-I>irds,  the  Redwings,  and  Soras,  shall  have  become


PIGEON  HAWK.


467


so  scarce  as  to  be  searched  for  with  the  same  interest  as  our  little  Par-
tridges already  are ; when  the  margins  of  our  rivers  shall  have  been
drained  and  ploughed  to  the  very  tide-mark ; v>  hen  the  Grouse  shall  have
to  be  protected  by  game-laws  ; when  Turkeys  shall  no  longer  be  met  with
in  the  wild  state  ; — how  strange  will  the  tale  which  I now  tell  sound  in
the  ears  of  those  who  may  walk  along  the  banks  of  these  rivers,  and  over
the  fields  which  have  occupied  the  place  of  these  marshes  !

The  Pigeon  Hawk  does  not,  I believe,  raise  its  young  within  the
United  States,  but  somewhere  farther  to  the  north.  At  least,  I am  in-
clined to  think  so,  for  in  all  my  wanderings  I never  found  its  nest,  nor
saw  the  bird  at  any  other  season  than  late  in  summer,  during  the  autum-
nal months,  or  in  the  winter.  Its  migration,  or  rather  its  pursuit  of  mi-
grating birds,  extends  to  the  southernmost  parts  of  our  country  *,  for  I
have  killed  it  not  only  in  Louisiana,  but  high  up  the  Arkansas  River,  in
regions  bordering  upon  the  Mexican  territory.

The  daring  spirit  which  it  displays  exceeds  that  of  any  other  Hawk
of  its  size.  It  seizes  the  Red-breasted  Thrush,  the  Wild  Pigeon,  and
even  the  Golden- winged  Woodpecker,  on  land;  whilst  along  the  shores
it  chases  several  species  of  Snipes,  as  well  as  the  Green- winged  Teal.  The
latter  bird,  however,  dives  at  the  approach  of  the  Hawk,  and  thus  eludes
his  gripe ; while  the  little  plunderer,  having  descended  to  the  surface  of
the  water  with  the  velocity  of  an  arrow,  passes  onwards,  ascending  again,
without  seeming  to  move  its  wings,  the  impulse  which  it  acquired  in  the
descent  carrying  it  onwards,  as  a carriage,  after  being  whirled  down  a
steep  declivity,  surmounts  the  next  eminence,  without  additional  propul-
sion. Even  the  presence  of  the  tyrant  man  he  little  heeds,  and  in  Penn-
sylvania one  of  this  species  came  almost  right  upon  me  while  in  pursuit
of  a dove,  which  found  safety  in  my  bosom  from  its  persecutor.

When  not  in  full  chase,  the  Pigeon  Hawk  flies  with  an  unsteady  and
undetermined  notion,  flapping  its  wings  frequently,  while  it  rises  in  spiral
curves.  This  parade  is  of  short  duration,  for,  as  if  it  remembered  that
it  was  losing  time,  it  again  approaches  the  ground,  and  skims  swiftly  over
the  streams,  across  the  fields,  along  the  fences,  or  by  the  skirts  of  the
‘woods,  as  if  intending  to  frighten  all  the  little  birds  in  its  way.  Should
it  unexpectedly  meet  a man,  it  darts  upwards,  and  quickly  passes  over  to
continue  its  search.  I have  known  these  Hawks  attack  birds  in  cages,
hanging  against  the  walls  of  houses,  in  the  very  streets  of  our  eastern
ities.  g-  ^


468


PIGEON  HAWK.


When  wounded  in  the  wing,  it  shakes  the  other  as  it  falls,  describing
the  spiral  curves  of  a screw ; and,  if  no  person  is  near  to  secure  k,  makes
its  way  by  long  leaps  to  the  thickets,  where  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  it.
But  if  the  gunner  is  at  hand,  and  attempts  to  lay  hold  of  it,  the  little
ruffian  erects  his  feathers,  screams  shrilly  and  piercingly,  and,  like  the
rest  of  his  tribe,  throws  himself  on  his  back,  to  be  ready  to  clutch  his
enemy.


Falco  columbarius,  Linn  Syst.  Nat.  p.  128. — Lalh.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  44. — Ch.
Bonaparte.)  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  28.

Pigeon  Hawk,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  101. — Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  107-
PI.  25.  fig.  3.

Adult  Male,  Plate  XCII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shortish,  as  broad  as  long,  the  sides  convex,  the  dorsal  outline
convex  from  the  base;  upper  mandible  with  the  edges  slightly  inflected,  and
forming  a projecting  process,  the  tip  trigonal,  acute,  descending  obliquely  ;
lower  mandible  inflected  at  the  edges,  with  a notch  near  the  end,  abrupt
at  the  tip.  Nostrils  roundish,  with  a central  tubercle,  perforated  in  the
short  cere.  Head  rather  large,  flattened  above.  Neck  shortish.  Body
ovate.  Legs  short,  roundish ; tarsi  covered  before  with  transverse  scuta,
on  the  sides  with  scales ; toes  scutellate  above,  scabrous  and  tuberculate
beneath  ; middle  toe  much  longer  than  the  outer,  which  is  connected  with
it  at  the  base  by  a membrane;  claw's  long,  curved,  roundish,  very  acute.

Plumage  ordinary,  compact  on  the  upper  and  fore  parts,  lax  beneath.
Feathers  of  the  head  and  neck  narrow,  of  the  back  rather  short,  broad
and  rounded,  of  the  breast  oblong.  Space  between  the  beak  and  eye
covered  with  bristly  feathers.  Orbital  spaces  bare.  Wings  nearly  as
long  as  the  tail ; the  primary  quills  narrow,  tapering,  cut  out  on  the  in-
ner web  towards  the  end,  rounded,  the  second  longest ; the  secondary
quills  short,  obtuse.  Tail  longish,  nearly  even.  Tibial  feathers  long,
forming  a large  tuft  externally.

Bill  bluish-black  at  the  tip,  blue  towards  the  base  ; cere,  margin,  and
bare  orbital  space  greenish-yellow.  Iris  dark  brown.  Feet  greenish-
yellow  ; claws  brownish-black.  The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts
is  deep  chocolate  ; a line  above  the  eyes,  the  tips  of  the  first  row  of  wing-
coverts,  the  outer  margins  and  tips  of  the  secondaries,  and  the  inner  mar-
gins and  tips  of  the  ])rimaries,  whitish.  The  inner  webs  of  the  quills


PIGEON  HAWK.


469


marked  with  pale  brown  spots.  Tail  banded  with  brownish- white  trans-
verse spots,  which  do  not  reach  the  outer  margin  of  the  feathers,  and
tipped  with  the  same.  Throat  white,  cheeks  whitish,  patched  and  streak-
ed with  brown.  A broad  mystachial  band  of  the  same  colour.  Under
parts  generally  light  reddish-brown,  marked  with  guttiform  spots.  Tibial
feathers  marked  with  more  elongated  spots.  Under  tail-coverts  nearly
spotless.

Length  13  inches,  extent  of  wings  ^ ; bill  along  the  ridge,
along  the  gap.

Adult  Female.  Plate  XCII.  Fig.  %

The  colouring  of  the  female  is  generally  similar  to  that  of  the  male,
somewhat  lighter  above,  with  the  spots  of  the  lower  parts  broader.

Length  14^  inches,  extent  of  wings  30 ; bill  f along  the  ridge,  {
along  the  gap,  measured  from  the  tip  of  the  lower  mandibla


( 470  )


THE  SEASIDE  FINCH.

FrINGILLA  MARITIUA,  WiLS.

PLATE  XCIII.  Male  and  Female.

The  monotonous  chirpings  which  one  hears  in  almost  every  part  of  our
maritime  salt-marshes,  are  produced  by  this  bird  and  another  nearly  al-
lied to  it.  The  Sea-side  Finch  may  be  seen  at  any  hour  of  the  day,  du-
ring the  months  of  May  and  June,  mounted  on  the  tops  of  the  rankest
weeds  which  grow  by  the  margins  of  tide-waters  along  the  greater  por-
tion of  our  Atlantic  coast,  whence  it  pours  forth  with  much  emphasis  the
few  notes  of  which  its  song  is  composed.  When  one  approaches  it,  it
either  seeks  refuge  amongst  the  grass,  by  descending  along  the  stalks  and
blades  of  the  weeds,  or  flies  off  to  a short  distance,  with  a continued
flirting  of  its  wings,  then  alights  with  a rapid  descent,  and  runs  off  with
great  nimbleness.  I am  inclined  to  believe  that  it  rears  two  broods  in
the  season,  as  I have  found  birds  of  this  species  sitting  on  their  eggs  early
in  May,  and  again  in  the  beginning  of  July.  The  nest  is  placed  so  close
to  the  ground  that  one  might  suppose  it  partly  sunk  in  it,  although  this  \
is  not  actually  the  case.  It  is  composed  of  coarse  grasses  externally,  and
is  lined  with  finer  kinds,  but  exhibits  little  regularity  in  its  structure.

The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six,  of  an  elongated  oval  form,  greyish-white,
freckled  with  brown  all  over.  The  male  and  the  female  sit  alternately,
and  will  not  fly  off  at  the  sight  of  man,  unless  he  attempts  to  catch  them
on  the  nest,  when  they  skulk  off  as  if  badly  wounded.  Many  nests  may
be  found  in  the  space  of  a few  acres  of  these  marshes,  where  the  land  is
most  elevated,  and  where  small  shrubs  are  seen.  They  select  these  spots,
because  they  are  not  liable  to  be  overflowed  by  high  floods,  and  because
there  are  accumulated  about  them  drifted  sand,  masses  of  sea-weed,  and
other  castings  of  the  sea,  among  which  they  find  much  food  of  the  kind
which  they  seem  to  prefer.  This  consists  of  marine  insects,  small  crabs
and  snails,  as  well  as  the  green  sand  beetle,  portions  of  all  of  which  I
have  found  in  their  stomach.

It  is  very  difficult  to  shoot  them  unless  when  they  are  on  wing,  as
their  movements  while  they  run  up  and  down  the  weeds  are  extremely
rapid  ; but  their  flight  is  so  direct  and  level,  that  a good  marksman  can


SEA-SIDE  FINCH.


471


easily  kill  them  before  they  alight  amongst  the  grass  again.  After  the
young  are  well  grown,  the  whole  of  these  birds  betake  themselves  to  the
ditches  or  sluices  by  which  the  salt-marslies  are  intersected,  fly  along
them,  and  there  find  abundant  food.  They  enter  the  larger  holes  of  crabs^
go  into  every  crack  and  crevice  of  the  drying  mud,  and  are  then  more
difficult  to  be  approached,  as  the  edges  of  these  ditches  are  usually  over-
grown with  taller  and  ranker  sedges.  Having  one  day  shot  a number  of
these  birds,  merely  for  the  sake  of  practice,  I had  them  made  into  a pie,
which,  however,  could  not  be  eaten,  on  account  of  its  fishy  savour.

The  Hose  on  which  I have  drawn  these  birds  is  found  so  near  the  sea,
on  rather  higher  lands  than  the  marshes,  that  I thought  it  as  fit  as  any
other  plant  for  the  purpose,  more  especially  as  the  Finches,  when  very
high  tides  overflow  the  marshes,  take  refuge  in  these  higher  grounds.  It
is  sweetly  scented,  and  blooms  from  May  to  August.  I have  never  met
with  it  elsewhere  than  on  the  small  sea  islands  and  along  the  coasts,  where
it  grows  in  loose  sandy  sail.

Fringilla  maritima,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  110.

Sea-side  Finch,  Fringilla  maritima,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  68,  PI.  34.

Fig.  2,

Adult  Male.  Plate  XCIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  shortish,  robust,  conical,  acute ; upper  mandible  broader  than  the
lower,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip  ; the  edges  of  both  mandibles  slightly
arched,  and  a little  deflected  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,  open,
partially  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck  shortish.
Body  rather  robust.  Legs  of  moderate  length,  slender  ; tarsus  longer
than  the  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a longitudinal  plate  above,
and  a few  large  scuta  below ; toes  scutellate  above,  free,  the  lateral  ones
nearly  equal;  claws  slender,  slightly  arched, ' compressed,  acute,  that  of
the  hind  toe  larger.

Plumage  ordinary,  compact  above,  soft  and  blended  beneath.  Wings
short,  and  much  curved,  third  and  fourth  quills  longest,  first  much  shorter.
Tail  of  ordinary  length,  much  rounded,  the  feathers  narrow  and  rather
pointed.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  light  blue  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  and
claws  greyish-blue.  Crown  of  the  head  deep  brown,  surrounded  by  a line
of  greyish-blue.  Upper  part  of  the  back,  wings,  and  tail,  olive-brown


472


SEA-SIDE  FINCH.


mixed  with  pale  blue.  Lesser  wing-coverts  reddish-brown,  larger  coverts
edged  and  tipped  with  brownish- white,  the  edge  of  the  wing-joint  yellow.
Outer  margins  of  the  tail-feathers  paler.  A broad  yellow  streak  from  the
base  of  the  bill  over  the  eye.  Throat  and  fore-neck  greyish-white,  with
a streak  of  greyish-blue  on  each  side.  Breast  and  sides  dull  greyish-blue,
the  abdomen  paler.

There  is  very  little  difference  between  the  sexes  as  to  colour  or  size.

Length  8 inches,  extent  of  wings  11  ; bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  1.


The  Carolina  Rose.

Rosa  Carolina,  Pursh,  Flor.  Amer.  p.  345. — Icosandria  Polygynia,  Linn.  Ro-
sace Juss,

This  beautiful  species,  which  attains  a height  of  five  or  six  feet,  is
generally  characterized  by  its  globose  germens,  which,  with  the  pedun-
cles, are  more  or  less  hispid ; its  hairy  petioles,  slightly  curved  prickles,
and  oblongo-lanceolate,  acute,  serrated  leaflets,  which  are  glaucous  be-
neath. It  varies  greatly,  however,  like  many  other  species  of  the  same
genus.


( 473  )


THE  GRASS  FINCH,  OR  BAY-WINGED  BUNTING.

Fringilla  graminea,  Gmel.

PLATE  XCIV.  Male.

I HAVE  never  seen  the  Bay-winged  Bunting  in  any  portion  of  Loui-
siana, Missouri,  Kentucky,  or  Ohio,  and  am  therefore  inclined  to  look
upon  it  as  a resident  of  the  country  lying  to  the  eastward  of  the  range  of
the  Alleghanies.  It  there  occurs  from  Georgia  to  Massachusets,  both
along  the  shores  and  inland,  as  far  as  the  base  of  the  mountains,  and  here
and  there  on  the  mountains  themselves,  but  seldom  in  places  to  which
cultivation  has  not  extended.  I have  thought  it  prepossessed  in  favour
of  sandy  ground,  and  dry  barren  soils.  It  sings  sweetly,  and  at  times
for  half-an-hour,  without  changing  its  place,  either  from  the  tops  of  the
Sassafras  or  Sumach  bushes  which  grow  along  the  fences,  or  from  the
upper  bar  or  stake  of  a fence  itself.  During  this  little  serenade,  it  is
easily  approached,  but  when  on  the  ground,  where  it  runs  nimbly  and
with  grace,  it  is  rather  shy.  It  is  fond  of  scratching  in  the  warm  and
dry  sand,  and  of  wallowing  in  it,  to  cleanse  its  body.  Its  flight,  which
is  easy,  consists  of  a succession  of  gentle  undulations,  and,  when  it  is
chased,  sometimes  extends  over  the  whole  of  a field.  It  is  a solitary  bird,
and  is  rather  pugnacious,  for  when  two  males  or  two  females  happen  to
meet,  little  skirmishes  frequently  ensue.  The  nest,  which  is  placed  among
the  grass,  and  partly  sunk  in  the  ground,  little  attention  being  paid  to
its  concealment,  is  prettily  constructed.  It  is  formed  externally  of  leaves
and  fine  grass,  and  is  well  lined  with  horse  hair,  so  as  to  look  neat  and
comfortable.  The  female  lays  from  four  to  six  eggs,  about  the  middle
of  April,  in  favourable  seasons,  and  generally  rears  two  broods  each  year.
I have  shot  these  birds  during  winter^  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lancaster
in  Pennsylvania,  where  but  few  are  seen.  At  the  same  period  of  the  year
they  were  found  numerous  along  the  sea-coast  of  Virginia  and  Carolina.
Their  food  consists  principally  of  the  seeds  of  grasses  and  other  plants,
although  they  sometimes  run  after  insects  and  eat  them  also.  Their  flesh
is  juicy,  tender  and  savoury.

Having  drawn  the  figure  which  you  will  see  on  referring  to  the
plate,  near  the  sea-shores  of  New  Jersey,  where  the  bird  which  it  repre-


474


GRASS  FINCH.


sents  was  shot  while  walking  among  little  groups  of  the  plant  there  vul-
garly called  the  Prickly  Pear,  I have  represented  it  also.  It  shoots  up
its  fleshy  stems  from  among  the  driest  sand,  and  there  flourishes  in  the
greatest  perfection  and  abundance.  The  flower  is  destitute  of  scent,  but
the  fruit  is  agreeably  acid,  and  is  often  eaten  by  children.  I have  ob-
served a plant  of  the  same  genus  about  the  sterile  cliffs  of  the  Kentucky
River,  and  in  particular  near  the  town  of  Frankfort,  as  well  as  in  Loui-
siana on  Alexander’s  Creek,  at  which  place  it  grows  to  a great  size.  This
is  probably  a distinct  species.  I have  not  observed  Cactuses  growing  in
a wild  state  in  any  other  part  of  the  Union.


Fringilla  graminea,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  Q%2.’—Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.
p.  445 — Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  108.

Grass  Finch,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  iii.  p.  273.

Emberiza  graminea,  Bay-winged  Bunting,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  iv.  p.  51.
PI.  31.  fig.  5.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XCIV.

Bill  shortish,  robust,  conical,  acute ; upper  mandible  broader  than
the  lower,  slightly  declinate  at  the  tip,  the  edges  of  both  mandibles  straight
to  near  the  base,  where  they  are  a little  deflected.  Nostrils  basal,  roundish,
open,  partially  concealed  by  the  feathers.  Head  rather  large.  Neck
short.  Body  robust.  Legs  of  moderate  length,  slender ; tarsus  of  the
same  length  as  the^  middle  toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a longitudinal
plate  above,  and  a few  transverse  scuta  below ; toes  scutate  above,  free,
the  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws  slender,  arched,  compressed,  acute,
that  of  the  hind  toe  largest.

Plumage  ordinary,  compact.  Wings  of  ordinary  length,  third  and
fourth  quills  longest,  first  and  second  little  shorter.  Tail  longish,  nearly
equal,  or  slightly  forked.

BiU  dark  brown  on  the  back  of  the  upper  mandible,  pale  on  the  sides
and  below.  Iris  hazel.  Tarsi,  toes,  and  claws,  flesh-colour.  The  general
colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  brown,  streaked  and  mottled  with
darker.  Lesser  wing-coverts  bright  reddish-brown  or  bay,  the  larger
deep  brown,  edged  with  pale  brown  ; quills  also  deep  brown,  the  first
margined  externally  with  white.  Tail-feathers  dark  brown,  the  outer
marked  with  an  oblique  band  of  white,  including  the  outer  web  and  part
of  the  inner  towards  the  tip,  the  next  three  margined  externally  with
white,  changing  into  pale  brown  on  the  other.  A narrow  circle  of  white


GRASS  FINCH.


475


around  the  eye.  Throat  and  breast  yellowish-white,  the  latter  and  the
fore  part  of  the  cheeks  streaked  with  dark  brown.  Sides  and  abdomen
very  pale  yellowish-brown,  the  former  sparsely  streaked  with  dark  Jbrown  ;
the  posterior  abdominal  region  and  under  tail-coverts  white.

There  is  no  perceptible  diflPerence  as  to  colour  or  size  between  the
male  and  the  female.

Length  5f  inches,  extent  of  wings  10  ; bill  ^ along  the  ridge,  ^ along
the  gap.

This  species  has  been  variously  classed,  some  considering  it  as  a Frin-
gilla,  others  as  an  Emberiza.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  more  in  its  true
place  in  the  former  genus,  while  in  its  habits,  colouring  and  form,  it  also
approaches  closely  to  some  species  of  Alauda.


The  Prickly  Pear,  or  Indian  Fig.

Cactus  Opuntia,  Wtlld.  Sp.  PL  vol.  ii.  p.  943.  Pursh^  FI.  Amer.  p.  323 Icosan-

DRiA  Monogynia,  Linn.  Cacti,  Juss.

This  species  has  an  articulated  fleshy  stem,  with  ovate,  compressed
joints,  sparsely  covered  with  setaceous  prickles’;  large  yellow  flowers,  and
red,  acidulous,  eatable  berries.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July,  and  grows
in  sandy  fields  and  dry  barren  soil.


( 476  )


THE  YELLOW-POLL  WARBLER.

Sylvia  asstiva,  Gmel.

PLATE  XCV.  Male.

As  soon  as  the  welcome  note  of  the  Purple  Martin  is  heard  in  spring,
on  its  return  to  the  United  States,  which,  in  Louisiana,  sometimes  takes
place  early  in  March,  the  little  Warbler  here  presented  to  your  inspection
follows,  and  is  seen  gaily  moving  from  tree  to  tree,  feeding  on  the  smaller
insects,  and  tuning  its  pipe,  which,  however,  is  not  the  most  melodious.
It  approaches  the  gardens  and  orange-groves,  and  again  flies  off*  to  the
willows,  along  the  margins  of  the  pools  and  lagoons.  Its  sojourn  is  of
short  duration  in  Louisiana,  for  it  moves  gradually  eastward  as  the  sea-
son advances,  leaving  nothing  but  the  recollection  of  its  passage  through
the  land.  Its  migration,  in  as  far  as  I have  been  able  to  ascertain,  is
principally  performed  during  the  night.  I have  observed  many  in  the
course  of  one  day  in  a place,  which,  next  day,  if  the  weather  had  become
'warm,  scarcely  contained  a single  individual.  It  never  breeds  in  the
district  mentioned  above,  nor  even  in  the  State  of  Mississippi.  A few
breed  in  Kentucky,  more  in  Ohio,  and  their  nests  in  this  manner  increase
the  farther  you  proceed  eastward.  I have  seen  many  of  these  birds,  as
well  as  their  nests,  on  the  Genessee  River ; but  in  the  States  of  New
York,  Connecticut,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,  they  may  be
found  in  every  orchard  and  garden,  and  even  in  the  streets,  among  the
foliage  of  our  trees.

The  males  chase  each  other  with  great  courage,  and  fight  for  a few
moments,  to  establish  their  claim  to  any  particular  spot  or  tree,  after
which  they  are  seen  climbing  up  and  down  among  the  twigs  and  smaller
branches,  looking  keenly  "among  the  leaves  and  blossoms  for  insects.
Careless  of  the  presence  of  man,  the  Blue-eyed  Warbler  is  easily  ap-
proached. The  same  carelessness  makes  it  build  its  little  nest  almost
always  within  reach  of  the  latter.  The  parents  are  very  ^assiduous
in  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  They  construct  a nest  about  the
middle  of  May,  in  the  forked  branches  of  a small  tree,  often  within  a
few  paces  of  a house.  The  nest  is  strongly  fastened  to  the  twigs,  is  for-


YELLOW-POLL  WARBLER.


477


med  externally  of  hemp,  flax,  or  woolly  substances,  and  is  well  lined  with
different  kinds  of  hair,  intermixed  with  softer  materials.  It  breeds  twice
during  the  summer,  and  returns  southward  in  the  beginning  of  autumn,
in  small  parties,  shifting  chiefly  by  night.  During  the  breeding-season,
this  little  bird,  when  approached,  shews  great  anxiety  for  the  preserva-
tion of  its  eggs  or  young,  and  tries,  with  all  the  artifices  employed  by
many  other  species,  to  entice  the  aggressor  away  from  its  nest.  They
are  seen,  on  their  return  to  the  south,  passing  through  Louisiana  in  Oc-
tober.

I made  my  drawing  of  this  species  near  Natchez,  and  having  killed
the  specimen  while  it  was  searching  for  insects  among  the  flowers  of  a
large  climbing  plant,  I have  figured  part  of  the  latter  also.  This  plant
I have  never  seen,  excepting  in  low,  damp  or  marshy  places.  It  there
runs  over  decayed  trees,  spreading  in  the  form  of  a bower,  and  hanging
in  graceful  festoons.  The  long  pendulous  clusters  of  pale  purple  flowers
are  destitute  of  odour.

Sylvia  jestiva,  Gmel.  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  QQQ.-^Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  551. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  83.

Yellow-poll  Warbler,  Lath.  Syn.  vol.  iv.  p.  515.

Blue-eyed  Warbler,  Sylvia  citrinella,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  111.
PI.  15.  fig.  6.

Bill  about  as  long  as  the  head,  slender,  straight,  subulate,  as  deep  as
broad  at  the  base.  Nostrils  basal,  lateral,  elliptical,  half  closed  by  a
membrane.  Head  rather  small.  Neck  short.  Body  ovate,  rather  slen-
der. Feet  of  ordinary  length,  slender ; tarsus  longer  than  the  middle
toe,  covered  anteriorly  with  a few  scutella,  the  uppermost  long ; toes  scu-
tellate  above,  the  inner  free,  the  hind  toe  of  moderate  size ; claws  slender,
compressed,  acute,  arched.

Plumage  soft,  blended,  tufty,  a few  bristles  at  the  base  of  the  bill.
Wings  of  ordinary  length,  acute.  Tail  longish,  slightly  forked.

Bill  dark  blue,  the  lower  mandible  edged  with  yellow.  Iris  brown.
Feet  and  claws  pale  brown.  Hind  head  and  upper  parts  generally  pale
yellowish-green,  the  tail-coverts  more  yellow.  The  fore  part  of  the  head,
the  cheeks,  the  throat,  and  the  sides  of  the  neck,  pure  golden-yellow ; the
rest  of  the  lower  parts  yellow,  the  breast  and  sides  streaked  with  brown-
ish-red. Quills  and  alula  deep  brown,  their  outer  webs  yellowish,  as  are


478


YELLOW-POLL  WARBLER.


the  margins  of  the  large  coverts.  Tail-feathers  deep  brown,  with  yellow
margins.

Length  inches,  extent  of  wings  10;  bill  yg  along  the  ridge,
along  the  gap.

The  female  differs  from  the  male  only  in  having  the  colours  less
bright,  and  the  streaks  on  the  breast  somewhat  broader  and  fewer.


•f*lco


( 479  )


SCIPIO  AND  THE  BEAR.

The  Black  Bear  {Ursus  americanus),  however  clumsy  in  appearance,
is  active,  vigilant,  and  persevering  ; possesses  great  strength,  courage,  and
address ; and  undergoes  with  little  injury  the  greatest  fatigues  and  hard-
ships in  avoiding  the  pursuit  of  the  hunter.  Like  the  Deer,  it  changes
its  haunts  with  the  seasons,  and  for  the  same  reason,  namely,  the  desire
of  obtaining  suitable  food,  or  of  retiring  to  the  more  inaccessible  parts,
where  it  can  pass  the  time  in  security,  unobserved  by  man,  the  most  dan-
gerous of  its  enemies.  During  the  spring  months,  it  searches  for  food  in
the  low  rich  alluvial  lands  that  border  the  rivers,  or  by  the  margins  of
such  inland  lakes  as,  on  account  of  their  small  size,  are  called  by  us  ponds.
There  it  procures  abundance  of  succulent  roots,  and  of  the  tender  juicy
stems  of  plants,  upon  which  it  chiefly  feeds  at  that  season.  During  the
summer  heat,  it  enters  the  gloomy  swamps,  passes  much  of  its  time  in
wallowing  in  the  mud,  like  a hog,  and  contents  itself  with  crayfish,  roots,
and  nettles,  now  and  then,  when  hard  pressed  by  hunger,  seizing  on  a
young  pig,  or  perhaps  a sow,  or  even  a calf.  As  soon  as  the  different
kinds  of  berries  which  grow  on  the  mountains  begin  to  ripen,  the  Bears
betake  themselves  to  the  high  grounds,  followed  by  their  cubs.  In  such
retired  parts  of  the  country  where  there  are  no  hilly  grounds,  it  pays  visits
to  the  maize  fields,  which  it  ravages  for  a while.  After  this,  the  various
species  of  nuts,  acorns,  grapes,  and  other  forest  fruits,  that  form  what  in
the  Western  Country  is  called  masty  attract  its  attention.  The  Bear  is
then  seen  rambling  singly  through  the  woods  to  gather  this  harvest,  not
forgetting  meanwhile  to  rob  every  Bee-tree  it  meets  with,  Bears  being,  as
you  well  know,  expert  at  this  operation.  You  also  know  that  they  are
good  climbers,  and  may  have  been  told,  or  at  least  may  now  be  told,  that
the  Black  Bear  now  and  then  houses  itself  in  the  hollow  trunks  of  the  lar-
ger trees  for  weeks  together,  when  it  is  said  to  suck  its  paws.  You  are
probably  not  aware  of  a habit  in  which  it  indulges,  and  which,  being  cu-
rious, must  be  interesting  to  you.

At  one  season,  the  Black  Bear  may  be  seen  examining  the  lower  part
of  the  trunk  of  a tree  for  several  minutes  with  much  attention,  at  the  same
time  looking  around,  and  snuffing  the  air,  to  assure  itself  that  no  enemy
is  near.  It  then  raises  itself  on  its  hind  legs,  approaches  the  trunk,  em-


480


SCIPIO  AND  THE  BEAR.


braces  it  with  its  fore  legs,  and  scratches  the  bark  with  its  teeth  and  claws
for  several  minutes  in  continuance.  Its  jaws  clash  against  each  other,
until  a mass  of  foam  runs  down  on  both  sides  of  the  mouth.  After  this
it  continues  its  rambles.

In  various  portions  of  our  country,  many  of  our  woodsmen  and  hunt-
ers who  have  seen  the  Bear  performing  the  singular  operation  just  de-
scribed, imagine  that  it  does  so  for  the  purpose  of  leaving  behind  it  an
indication  of  its  size  and  power.  They  measure  the  height  at  which  the
scratches  are  made,  and  in  this  manner  can,  in  fact,  form  an  estimate  of
the  magnitude  of  the  individual.  My  own  opinion,  however,  is  different.
It  seems  to  me  that  the  Bear  scratches  the  trees,  not  for  the  purpose  of
shewing  its  size  or  its  strength,  but  merely  for  that  of  sharpening  its  teeth
and  claws,  to  enable  it  better  to  encounter  a rival  of  its  own  species  du-
ring the  amatory  season.  The  Wild  Boar  of  Europe  clashes  its  tusks
and  scrapes  the  earth  with  its  feet,  and  the  Deer  rubs  its  antlers  against
the  lower  part  of  the  stems  of  young  trees  or  bushes,  for  the  same  purpose.

Being  one  night  sleeping  in  the  house  of  a friend,  I was  wakened  by
a Negro  servant  bearing  a light,  who  gave  me  a note,  which  he  said  his
master  had  just  received.  I ran  my  eye  over  the  paper,  and  found  it  to
be  a communication  from  a neighbour,  requesting  my  friend  and  myself
to  join  him  as  soon  as  possible,  and  assist  in  killing  some  Bears  at  that
moment  engaged  in  destroying  his  corn.  I was  not  long  in  dressing,  you
may  be  assured,  and,  on  entering  the  parlour,  found  my  friend  equipt
and  only  waiting  for  some  bullets,  which  a Negro  was  employed  in  cast-
ing. The  overseer’s  horn  was  heard  calling  up  the  Negroes  from  their
different  cabins.  Some  were  already  engaged  in  saddling  our  horses,
whilst  others  were  gathering  all  the  cur-dogs  of  the  plantation.  All  was
bustle.  Before  half  an  hour  had  elapsed,  four  stout  Negro  men,  armed
with  axes  and  knives,  and  mounted  on  strong  nags  of  their  own  (for  you
must  know,  kind  reader,  that  many  of  our  slaves  rear  horses,  cattle,  pigs
and  poultry,  which  are  exclusively  their  own  property),  were  following  us
at  a round  gallop  through  the  woods,  as  we  made  directly  for  the  neigh-
bour’s plantation,  a little  more  than  five  miles  off.

The  night  was  none  of  the  most  favourable,  a drizzling  rain  rendering
the  atmosphere  thick  and  rather  sultry  ; but  as  we  were  well  acquainted
with  the  course,  we  soon  reached  the  house,  where  the  owner  was  wait-
ing our  arrival.  There  were  now  three  of  us  armed  with  guns,  half  a
dozen  servants,  and  a good  pack  of  dogs  of  all  kinds.  We  jogged  on  to-


SCIPIO  AND  THE  BEAR.


481


wards  the  detached  field  in  which  the  Bears  were  at  work.  The  owner
told  us  that  for  some  days  several  of  these  animals  had  visited  his  corn,
and  that  a Negro  who  was  sent  every  afternoon  to  see  at  what  part  of  the
enclosure  they  entered,  had  assured  him  there  were  at  least  five  in  the  field
that  night.  A plan  of  attack  was  formed  : the  bars  at  the  usual  gap  of
the  fence  were  to  be  put  down  without  noise  ; the  men  and  dogs  were  to
divide,  and  afterwards  proceed  so  as  to  surround  the  Bears,  when,  at  the
sounding  of  our  horns,  every  one  was  to  charge  towards  the  centre  of  the
field,  and  shout  as  loudly  as  possible,  which  it  was  judged  would  so  inti-
midate the  animals,  as.  to  induce  them  to  seek  refuge  upon  the  dead  trees
with  which  the  field  was  still  partially  covered.

The  plan  succeeded.  The  horns  sounded,  the  horses  galloped  for-
ward, the  men  shouted,  the  dogs  barked  and  howled.  The  shrieks  of
the  Negroes  were  enough  to  frighten  a legion  of  Bears,  and  those  in  the
field  took  to  flight,  so  that  by  the  time  we -reached  the  centre  they  were
heard  hurrying  towards  the  tops  of  the  trees.  Fires  were  immediately
lighted  by  the  Negroes.  The  drizzling  rain  had  ceased,  the  sky  cleared,
and  the  glare  of  the  crackling  fires  proved  of  great  assistance  to  us.  The
Bears  had  been  so  terrified,  that  we  now  saw  several  of  them  crouched
at  the  junction  of  the  larger  boughs  with  the  trunks.  Two  were  imme-
diately shot  down.  They  were  cubs  of  no  great  size,  and  being  already
half  dead,  we  left  theni  to  the  dogs,  which  quickly  dispatched  them.

We  were  anxious  to  procure  as  much  sport  as  possible,  and  having
observed  one  of  the  Bears,  which  from  its  size  we  conjectured  to  be  the
mother,  ordered  the  Negroes  to  cut  down  the  tree  on  which  it  was  perched,
when  it  was  intended  the  dogs  should  have  a tug  with  it,  while  we  should
support  them,  and  assist  in  preventing  the  bear  from  escaping  by  wound-
ing it  in  one  of  the  hind  legs.  The  surrounding  woods  now  echoed  to
the  blows  of  the  axemen.  ' The  tree  was  large  and  tough,  having  been
girded  more  than  two  years,  and  the  operation  of  felling  it  seemed  ex-
tremely tedious.  However,  it  began  to  vibrate  at  each  stroke ; a few
inches  alone  now  supported  it ; and  in  a short  time  it  came  crashing  to
the  ground,  in  so  awful  a manner  that  Bruin  must  doubtless  have  felt
the  shock  as  severe  as  we  should  feel  a shake  of  the  globe  produced  by
the  sudden  collision  of  a comet.

The  dogs  rushed  to  the  charge,  and  harassed  the  Bear  on  all  sides.
We  had  remounted,  and  now  surrounded  the  poor  animal.  As  its  life
depended  upon  its  courage  and  strength,  it  exercised  both  in  the  most

H h


482


SCIPIO  AND  THE  BEAR.


energetic  manner.  Now  and  then  it  seized  a dog,  and  killed  him  by  a
single  stroke.  At  another  time,  a well  administered  blow  of  one  of  its
fore-legs  sent  an  assailant  off  yelping  so  piteously,  that  he  might  be  looked
upon  as  hors  de  combat.  A cur  had  daringly  ventured  to  seize  the  Bear
by  the  snout,  and  was  seen  hanging  to  it,  covered  with  blood,  whilst  a
dozen  or  more  scrambled  over  its  back.  Now  and  then,  the  infuriated
animal  was  seen  to  cast  a revengeful  glance  at  some  of  the  party,  and  we
liad  already  determined  to  dispatch  it,  when,  to  our  astonishment,  it  sud-
denly shook  off  all  the  dogs,  and  before  we  could  fire,  charged  upon  one
of  the  Negroes,  who  was  mounted  on  a pied  horse.  The  Bear  seized  the
steed  with  teeth  and  claws,  and  clung  to  its  breast.  The  terrified  horse
snorted  and  plunged.  The  rider,  an  athletic  young  man,  and  a capital
horseman,  kept  his  seat,  although  only  saddled  on  a sheep’s  skin  tightly
girthed,  and  requested  his  master  not  to  fire  at  the  Bear.  Notwithstand-
ing his  coolness  and  courage,  our  anxiety  for  his  safety  was  raised  to  the
highest  pitch,  especially  when  in  a moment  we  saw  rider  and  horse  come
to  the  ground  together  ; but  we  were  instantly  relieved  on  witnessing  the
masterly  manner  in  which  Scipio  dispatched  his  adversary,  by  laying
open  his  skull  with  a single  well-directed  blow  of  his  axe,  when  a deep
growl  announced  the  death  of  the  Bear,  and  the  valorous  Negro  sprung
to  his  feet  unhurt.

Day  dawned,  and  we  renewed  our  search.  Two  of  the  remaining
Bears  were  soon  discovered,  lodged  in  a tree  about  a hundred  yards  from
the  spot  where  the  last  one  had  been  overpowered.  On  approaching  them
in  a circle,  we  found  that  they  manifested  no  desire  to  come  down,  and
we  resolved  to  try  smoking.  We  surrounded  the  tree  with  a pile  of
brushwood  and  large  branches.  The  flames  ascended  and  caught  hold
of  the  dry  bark.  At  length  the  tree  assumed  the  appearance  of  a pillar
of  flame.  The  Bears  mounted  to  the  top  branches.  When  they  had
reached  the  uppermost,  they  were  seen  to  totter,  and  soon  after,  the
branch  cracking  and  snapping  across,  they  came  to  the  ground,  bringing
with  them  a mass  of  broken  twigs.  They  were  cubs,  and  the  dogs  soon
worried  them  to  death.

The  party  returned  to  the  house  in  triumph.  Scipio’s  horse,  being
severely  wounded,  was  let  loose  in  the  field,  to  repair  his  strength  by
eating  the  corn.  A cart  was  afterwards  sent  for  the  game.  But  before
we  had  left  the  field,  the  horses,  dogs,  and  bears,  together  with  the  fires,
had  destroyed  more  corn  within  a few  hours,  than  the  poor  Bear  and  her
cubs  had  during  the  whole  of  their  visits.


( 483  ) ■'

THE  COLUMBIA  JAY.

CORVUS  Bullockii.

PLATE  XCVI.  Adult.

The  genus  Corvus  consists  of  birds  which  differ  considerably  in
their  appearance  and  manners.  This  circumstMce  has  given  rise  to
various  separations  and  groupings.  It  may,  in  fact,  be  considered
analogous  to  the  great  genera  Falco,  Psittacus  and  Columba^  which,
although  the  species  composing  them  exhibit  great  diversity,  may  be  al-
lowed to  retain  their  integrity,  because  the  gradations  between  the  spe-
cies are  so  minute  that  each  group  presents  an  uninterrupted  series.
Were  one  to  compare  the  Golden  Eagle  with  the  Swallow-tailed  Hawk,
the  Red  Macaw  with  the  Ground  Parrot  of  New  Holland,  or  the  Great
Crested  Pigeon  with  the  Turtle  Dove,  he  might  doubtless  find  reasons
for  separating  these  birds  into  genera,  could  he  but  forget  that  the  inter-
mediate gradations  are  to  be  seen.  It  is  so  with  the  Crows  and  Jays.
The  former  are  characterized  by  a certain  gravity  of  aspect ; their  flight
is  regular,  protracted,  and  performed  by  easy  flappings  and  sailings ;
they  frequent  open  places,  and  feed  on  almost  all  kinds  of  food  indiscri-
minately ; their  cry  is  a dull  croak  or  scream.  The  latter  are  much
smarter  in  their  appearance,  more  lively  in  their  motions  ; their  flight  i^
less  protracted,  and  performed  by  short  flappings  ; they  frequent  woods
and  thickets,  and  live  chiefly  on  fruits;  and  their  notes  are  emitted  in
noisy  chatterings.  The  bill  of  the  Crows  is  large,  robust,  cultriform,
covered  at  the  base  with  long,  stiff,  closely  adpressed,  reversed,  bristly
feathers  ; that  of  some  of  the  Jays'is  much  smaller,  not  robust;  and  ap-
proaching to  the  form  of  that  of  Thrushes  and  Nutcrackers,  and  the
basirostral  feathers  are  diminished  in  size  and  rigidity.  The  Crows  have
shortish,  even  or  rounded  tails,  with  long  and  sometimes  rather  sharp
wings.  The  Jays  have  the  tail  often  greatly  elongated  and  cuneiform  or
graduated,  with  short,  much  rounded,  concave  wings.  Numerous  other
contrasts  are  afforded,  the  Crows,  for  example,  being  generally  dull  and
uniform  in  their  colours,  the  Jays  variegated  and  often  brilliant.  All
these  circumstances  I intend  to  discuss  in  another  work,  and  in  the  mean

H h 2


484


COLUMBIA  JAY.


time  retain  the  usual  generic  name  for  the  present  splendid  species,  which
has  the  bill  of  nearly  the  same  form  as  the  true  Crows,  combined  with  the
elongated  tail,  and  lively  colouring  of  the  Jays.

Were  I to  relate  to  you,  good  reader,  the  various  accounts  which  I
have  heard  respecting  this  splendid  bird,  I should  have  enough  to  say ;
but  as  I have  resolved  to  confine  myself  entirely  to  the  results  of  my  own
observation,  I must  for  the  present  remain  silent  on  the  subject.

The  specimen  from  which  the  drawings  were  taken  was  presented  to
me  by  a friend  who  had  received  it  from  the  Columbia  River,  and  is  the
only  individual  represented  in  the  volume  which  I did  not  myself  pro-
cure on  the  spot.  However,  as  I expect  to  ramble  again  through  our
vast  forests  and  extensive  territories,  I may  yet  be  enabled  to  give  you  a
full  account  of  this  beautiful  bird,  which,  from  the  splendour  of  its  plu-
mage, deserves  all  the  attention  of  the  naturalist.  In  the  mean  time  I
adjoin  a notice  respecting  it,  with  which  I have  lately  been  favoured  by
my  friend,  the  Prince  of  Musignano.  “ Le  superbe  geai,  dont  vous  me
parlez,  est  sans  doute  Foiseau  que  Wagler  a fait  connMtre  le  premier,
sous  le  nom  de  Pica  Bvllockii^  et  que  Temminck  a figure  dans  ses  planches
coloriees,  sous  cellui  de  Garrula  Gubernatrix.  Son  nom  legitime,  suivant
mes  principes,  sera  Garrulus  BullocTdi^  mais  vous  avez  raison  de  dire
qu’il  ne  se  trouve  pas  dans  mon  Synopsis  : ce  n’est  que  par  votre  lettre  que
j’ai  appris  qu’il  se  trouvait  dans  le  territoire  des  Etats-unis.  Jusqu”a  pre-
sent on  ne  Favait  trouve  qu’au  Mexique  et  a la  Californie.  II  n’est  pas
etonnant  qu’il  se  retrouve  sur  la  riviere  Columbia.  Mais  comment  Favez-
vous  obtena  et  avez-vous  pu  le  dessiner  vivant?  Trois  autres  especes
de  geais,  qui  ne  sont  pas  dans  mon  Synopsis,  habitent  I’extremite  nord  de
FAmerique,  et  il  est  probable,  qu’  outre  votre  superbe  geai  commandeur^
plusieurs  autres  des  especes  Mexicaines  se  retro uvent  dans  sa  partie  oc-
cidentale.”


CoRVUs  Bullockii,  Wagler.

Bill  of  ordinary  length,  straight,  robust,  compressed  ; upper  mandi-
ble with  the  dorsal  outline  straightish  at  the  base,  declinate  and  convex
towards  the  tip,  which  is  deflected,  the  sides  convex,  the  edges  rather
sharp  ; lower  mandible  with  the  dorsal  outline  slightly  concave  towards
the  base,  convex  and  ascending  towards  the  tip.  Nostrils  basal,  oval,


COLUMBIA  JAY.


48a


partly  concealed  by  short  bristly  feathers.  Proportions  of  parts  ordinary.
Feet  of  ordinary  length,  rather  strong;  tarsus  compressed,  about  the
length  of  the  middle  toe,  anteriorly  scutellate,  covered  behind  with  two
longitudinal  plates,  meeting  at  an  acute  angle ; toes  free,  scutellate  above  ;
claws  of  ordinary  size,  arched,  convex  above,  canaliculate  beneath.

Plumage  compact,  glossy.  Feathers  of  the  head  elongated  into  a
crest,  the  posterior  ones  recurvate.  Wings  longish,  the  third  and  fourth
quills  longest,  the  first  short.  Tail  very  long,  graduated,  of  twelve  fea-
thers, of  which  the  two  central  are  slightly  curved,  and  greatly  exceed
the  rest  in  length.

Bill  and  feet  brownish-black.  Iris  hazel.  The  general  colour  of
the  plumage  is  bright  blue,  with  purple  reflections.  The  fore  neck  and
anterior  part  of  the  breast  black ; the  rest  of  the  under  parts  white.
The  inner  webs  of  the  quills  dusky,  the  four  outer  feathers  of  the  tail
white  towards  the  tip.  ^

Length  31  inches,  extent  of  wings  26;  bill  along  the  ridge  1|,  tarsuf
2,  middle  toe  2.


( 486  )


THE  LITTLE  SCREECH  OWL.

Strix  Asio,  Linn.  .

PLATE  XCVII.  Adult  axd  Young.

This  Owl,  although  found  in  the  Southern  States,  is  there  very
rare.  During  a long  residence  in  Louisiana,  I have  not  met  with  more
than  two  individuals.  On  advancing  towards  the  confluence  of  the
Ohio  and  Mississippi,  we  find  them  becoming  rather  more  numerous;
above  the  Falls  of  the  former,  they  increase  in  number  ; and  as  the  tra^
veller  advances  towards  the  sources  of  that  noble  river,  their  mournful
notes  are  heard  in  every  quarter  during  mild  and  serene  nights.  In  Vir-
ginia, Maryland,  and  all  the  Eastern  Districts,  the  bird  is  plentiful,  par-
ticularly during  the  autumnal  and  winter  months,  and  is  there  well
known  under  the  name  of  the  Screech  Owl,

You  are  presented,  kind  reader,  with  three  figures  of  this  species,
the  better  to  shew  you  the  differences  which  exist  between  the  young
and  the  full-grown  bird.  The  contrast  of  colouring  in  these  different
stages  I have  thought  it  necessary  to  exhibit,  as  the  Red  Owl  of  Wilson  \
and  other  naturalists  is'  merely  the  young  of  the  bird  called  by  the  same
authors  the  Mottled  Owl^  and  which,  in  fact,  is  the  adult  of  the  species
under  consideration.  The  error  committed  by  the  author  of  the  Ame-
rican Ornithology,”  for  many  years  misled  all  subsequent  students  of
nature  ; and  the  specific  identity  of  the  two  birds  which  he  had  described
as  distinct  under  the  above  names,  was  first  publicly  maintained  by  my
friend  Chahles  Lucian  Bonaparte,  although  the  fact  was  long  before
known  to  many  individuals  with  whom  I am  acquainted,  as  well  as  to
myself.

The  flight  of  the  Mottled  Owl  is  smooth,  rapid,  protracted  and  noise-
less. It  rises  at  times  above  the  top  branches  of  the  highest  of  our  forest
trees,  whilst  in  pursuit  of  large  beetles,  and  at  other  times  sails  low  and
swiftly  over  the  fields,  or  through  the  woods,  in  search  of  small  birds,
field-mice,  moles  or  wood-rats,  from  which  it  chiefly  derives  its  subsist-
ence. On  alighting,  which  it  does  plumply,  the  Mottled  Owl  imme-
diately bends  its  body,  turns  its  head  to  look  behind  it,  performs  a curious
nod,  utters  its  notes,  then  shakes  and  plumes  itself,  and  resumes  its  flight.


LITTLE  SCREECH  OWL.


487


in  search  of  prey.  It  now  and  then,  while  on  wing,  produces  a clicking
sound  with  its  mandibles,  but  more  frequently  when  perched  near  its
mate  or  young.  This  I have  thought  is  done  by  the  bird  to  manifest
its  courage,  and  let  the  hearer  know  that  it  is  not  to  be  meddled  with,
although  few  birds  of  prey  are  more  gentle  when  seized,  as  it  will  suffer  a
person  to  touch  its  feathers  and  caress  it,  without  attempting  to  bite  or
strike  with  its  talons,  unless  at  rare  intervals,  I carried  one  of  the  young
birds  represented  in  the  Plate,  in  my  coat  pocket,  from  Philadelphia  to
New  York,  travelling  alternately  by  water  and  by  land.  It  remained
generally  quiet,  fed  from  the  hand,  and  never  attempted  to  escape.  It
was  given  me  by  my  good  friend  Dr  Richard  Harlan,  of  Philadelphia,
and  was  lost  at  sea,  in  the  course  of  my  last  voyage  to  England.

The  notes  of  this  Owl  are  uttered  in  a tremulous,  doleful  manner,
and  somewhat  resemble  the  chattering  of  the  teeth  of  a person  under  the
influence  of  extreme  cold,  although  much  louder.  They  are  heard  at  a
distance  of  several  hundred  yards,  and  by  some  people  are  thought  to  be
of  ominous  import.

The  little  fellow  is  generally  found  about  farm-houses,  orchards,  and
gardens.  It  alights  on  the  roof,  the  fence  or  the  garden  gate,  and  ut-
ters its  mournful  ditty  at  intervals  for  hours  at  a time,  as  if  it  were  in  a
state  of  great  suffering,  although  this  is  far  from  being  the  case,  the  song
of  all  birds  being  an  indication  of  content  and  happiness.  In  a state  of
confinement,  it  continues  to  utter  its  notes  with  as  much  satisfaction  as  if
at  liberty.  They  are  chiefly  heard  during  the  latter  part  of  winter,  that
being  the  season  of  love,  when  the  male  bird  is  particularly  attentive  to
the  fair  one  which  excites  his  tender  emotions,  and  around  which  he  flies
and  struts  much  in  the  manner  of  the  Common  Pigeon,  adding  numerous
nods  and  bows,  the  sight  of  which  is  very  amusing.

The  nest  is  placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  hollow  trunk  of  a tree,  often  not
at  a greater  height  than  six  or  seven  feet  froih  the  ground,  at  other  times
so  high  as  from  thirty  to  forty  feet.  It  is  composed  of  a few  grasses  and
feathers.  The  eggs  are  four  or  five,  of  a nearly  globular  form,  and  pure
white  colour.  If  not  disturbed,  this  species  lays  only  one  set  of  eggs  in  the
season.  The  young  remain  in  the  nest  until  they  are  able  to  fly.  At  first
they  are  covered  with  a downy  substance  of  a dull  yellowish-white.  By
the  middle  of  August,  they  are  fully  feathered,  and  are  then  generally  of
the  colour  exhibited  in  the  plate,  although  considerable  difierences  exist
between  individuals,  as  I have  seen  some  of  a deep  chocolate  colour,  and


488


LITTLE  SCREECH  OWL.


others  nearly  black.  The  feathers  change  their  colours  as  the  pairing
-season  advances,  and  in  the  first  spring  the  bird  is  in  its  perfect  dress.

After  nearly  thirty  years  of  observation,  I may  say,  hardly  interrupted,
I may  be  allowed  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  following  fact  as  highly
curious.  I have  observed  that  every  species  of  Owl  which  breeds  in  the
Northern  and  Middle  States  is  considerably  more  deficient  in  its  powers
of  vision  during  the  day  or  on  moonlight  nights,  when  the  ground  is
covered  with  snow,  than  the  species  that  breed  in,  and  consequently  may
be  considered  as  residents  of,  more  northern  countries;  such  as  the  Snow
Owl,  the  Forked-tailed  Owl,  and  the  Hawk  Owl,  all  of  which  shew  no
material  difference  in  their  power  of  vision,  be  the  sun  or  moon  shining
ever  so  brightly  on  the  snow.  I have  frequently  approached  the  Great
Horned  Owl,  as  well  as  every  other  species  that  breeds  in  the  ITnited
States,  during  what  I call  glaring  snows,  whilst,  on  the  same  day,  my
attempts  to  approach  the  Snow  Owl  or  the  Hawk  Owl  were  ineffectual.
Yet  on  examining  the  structure  of  the  eyes  of  all  these  species,  I have
found  little  or  no  difference  in  them.  I wish  some  competent  anatomist
would  investigate  this  singular  fact,  and  communicate  the  result  of  his
inquiries,  for  the  benefit  of  the  scientific  world,  and  that  of  the  author  of
the  Biography  of  the  Birds  of  the  United  States.

The  Mottled  Owl  rests  or  spends  the  day  either  in  a hole  of  some  de-
cayed tree,  or  in  the  thickest  part  of  the  evergreens  which  are  found  so
abundantly  in  the  country,  to  which  it  usually  resorts  during  the  breed-
ing season  as  v/ell  as  in  the  depth  of  winter.

The  branch  on  which  you  see  three  individuals  of  this  species,  an
adult  bird  and  two  young  ones,  is  that  of  the  Jersey  Pine  {Pinus  inops) ^
a tree  of  moderate  height  and  diameter,  and  of  a scrubby  appearance.
The  stem  is  generally  crooked,  and  the  wood  is  not  considered  of  great
utility.  It  grows  in  large  groves  in  the  state  from  which  it  has  derived
its  name,  and  is  now  mostly  used  for  fuel  on  board  our  steam- vessels.
The  Mottled  Owl  is  often  observed  perched  on  its  branches.

Strix  Asio,  Linn,  Syst.  Nat.  vol.  i.  p.  132. — Laih.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  54. —
Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synopsis  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  36.

IIed  Eared  Owe,  Lath.  Synops.  vol.  i.  p.  123.

Mottled  Owl,  Strix  n^via,  Wils,  Anier.  Ornith.  vol.  iii.  p-  16.  Pl.  19.  fig.  !•
Adult.

Bed  Owl,  Strix  Asio,  Wils.  Aineric.  Ornith.  vol.  V.  p.  83.  PI.  42.  fig.  1.  Young.

Adult.  Plate  XCVH.  Fig.  1.


LITTLE  SCREECH  OWL.


489


Bill  very  short,  compressed,  curved,  acute,  with  a small  cere  at  the
base;  upper  mandible  with  its  dorsal  outline  curved  from  the  base,  the
edges  acute,  the  point  trigonal,  very  acute,  deflected;  lower  mandible
with  the  edges  acute  and  inflected,  obtuse  at  the  tip.  Nostrils  roundish,
in  the  fore  part  of  the  cere,  concealed  by  the  recumbent  bristles.  Head
disproportionally  large,  as  are  the  eyes  and  external  ears.  Body  short.
Legs  of  ordinary  length,  tarsus  feathered ; toes  scutellate  and  sparsely
covered  with  bristles,  papillar  and  tubercular  beneath ; claws  curved,
slender,  rounded,  extremely  sharp.  '

Plumage  very  soft  and  downy,  somewhat  distinct  on  the  head  and
back,  tufty  and  loose  beneath.  Long  bristly  feathers  at  the  base  of  the
bill,  stretching  forwards  and  outwards ; auricular  feathers  forming  a rufi*.
Two  tufts  of  erectile  feathers  on  the  head,  one  over  each  eye.  Wings
ample,  the  fourth  quill  longest,  the  first  short.  Tail  short,  even,  of
twelve  broad,  rounded  feathers.

Bill  yellowish-green.  Iris  gold-yellow.  Feet  greenish-yellow.  The
general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  pale  brown,  spotted  and  sprinkled
with  brownish-black.  A pale  grey  line  from  the  base  of  the  upper  mandi-
ble over  each  eye.  Primaries  light  brownish-grey,  barred  with  brownish-
black.  Primary  coverts  dark  brown,  secondary  coverts  white  at  the  tip.
Throat  yellowish-grey,  under  parts  light  grey,  patched  and  sprinkled
with  brownish-black.  Tarsal  feathers  tinged  with  red.

Length  10  inches,  extent  of  wings  22.

Young  birds  fully  pledged.  Plate  XCVII.  Fig.  2,  S.

Bill  and  feet  pale  greenish-yellow.  Iris  light  yellow.  The  general
colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  light  brownish-red,  each  feather  with  a
blackish-brown  line  in  the  centre,  the  tail  and  quills  barred  with  dull'
brown.  A reddish- white  line  over  each  eye,  the  tips  of  the  secondary
coverts  of  the  same  colour.  Breast  and  sides  light  yellowish  grey,
spotted  and  lined  with  brownish-black  and  bright  reddish-brown,  the  rest
of  the  under  parts  very  uniform  yellowish-grey,  the  tarsal  feathers  pale
yellowish-red.


490


LITTLE  SCREECH  OWL.


The  Jersey  Pine.

PiNUS  INOPS,  Fursh,  FI.  Amer.  vol.  iL  p.  C4l.  Arbr.  de  I’Amer.  Sept.  vol.  i.

p.  58.  pi.  iv. — Mon(ecia  Monad  el  phi  a,  Linn.  Conifers,  Juss.

Leaves  short,  in  pairs  ; cones  recurved,  oblongo-conical,  of  the  length
of  the  leaves  ; prickles  of  the  scales  subulate,  straight.  It  is  also  named
the  Pitcif,  Pine  and  Scrub  Pine.  It  grows  in  dry  sterile  ground,  from
New  Jersey  to  Carolina.


( 491  )


THE  WHITE-BELLIED  SWALLOW.

HiRUNDO  BlCOLO^yNlEllA.,

PLATE  XCVIII.  Male  and  Female.

This  Swallow  often  spends  the  winter  months  in  the  State  of  Loui-
siana, resorting  principally  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  marshes  that  bor^
der  the  lakes  of  Pont  Chartrain  and  those  of  Bayou  St  John,  near  the
city  of  New  Orleans,  an  account  of  which  I have  already  given  when
speaking  of  the  Republican  Swallow.  At  the  beginning  of  spring,  it
spreads  widely  over  the  country,  and  may  be  observed  skimming  over
the  streets  of  our  cities,  as  well  as  along  the  meadows  in  their  neighbour-
hood.

Its  flight  is  easy,  continued,  and  capable  of  being  greatly  protracted.
It  is  seen  sailing,  circling,  turning,  and  winding  in  all  directions,  during
the  greater  part  of  the  day.  Like  all  other  Swallows,  it  feeds  on  the
wing,  unceasingly  pursuing  insects  of  various  kinds,  and  in  seizing  them
producing  a snapping  noise  which  may  be  heard  at  some  distance.  So
quarrelsome  is  this  Swallow,  that  it  is  almost  continually  fighting  with  its
own  species.  Yet  they  remain  in  flocks  at  all  seasons,  and  many  pairs
are  often  seen  to  breed  within  a short  distance  of  each  other.  It  also
attacks  the  House  Swallow,  and  frequently  takes  possession  of  its  nCst.

It  generally  prefers  the  hollow  of  a tree  for  its  nest,  which  is  of  a
globular  form,  composed  of  slender  grasses,  and  abundantly  lined  with
feathers  of  various  kinds.  The  eggs  are  from  four  to  six,  of  a pure  white
colour,  strongly  tinged  with  blush,  occasioned  by  the  transparency  of  the
shell,  and  are  deposited  about  the  end  of  May.  It  breeds  twice  during
the  season.

No  sooner  have  the  young  of  the  second  brood  acquired  their  full
power  of  flight,  than  parents  and  offspring  assemble  in  large  flocks,  and
resort  to  the  roofs  of  houses,  the  tops  of  decayed  trees,  or  the  sandy
beaches  of  our  rivers,  from  whence  they  take  their  departure  for  the
south.  They  fly  in  a close  body,  and  thus  continue  their  journey,  until
they  reach  the  places  adapted  for  their  winter  residence,  when  they  again
resume  by  day  the  habits  which  they  exhibit  during  their  summer  so-


492


WHITE-BELLIED  SWALLOW.


journ  in  the  Middle  and  Northern  States,  but  collect  at  night  and  resort
to  the  sedges  and  tall  plants  of  the  marshes.

Hirundo  bicolor,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Sjnops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  65.

Green-blue  or  White-bellied  Swallow,  Hirundo  viridis,  Wils.  Amer.  Or-
nith.  vol.  iii.  p.  44.  PL  38.  fig.  3.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XCVIII.  Fig.  1.

Bill  short,  feeble,  much  depressed  and  very  broad  at  the  base,  com-
pressed at  the  tip  ; upper  mandible  slightly  arched  in  its  dorsal  outline ;
gap  as  wide  as  the  head,  and  extending  to  beneath  the  eye.  Nostrils  ba-
sal, lateral,  roundish.  Head  large,  flattened  above.  Neck  short.  Body
rather  slender.  Feet  very  short  and  feeble ; tarsus,  and  toes  scutellate
anteriorly  ; lateral  toes  nearly  equal,  the  outer  united  to  the  second
joint ; claws  short,  weak,  arched.  „

Plumage  silky,  shining,  and  blended.  Wings  very  long,  acute,  the
first  quill  longest.  Tail  of  ordinary  length,  deeply  emarginate,  of  twelve
rounded  feathers.

The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  steel-blue  with  green  re-
flections. Quills  and  tail-feathers  brownish-black.  The  under  parts  are
white.  .

Length  5^  inches,  extent  of  wings  10 ; bill  along  the  back  along
the  gap  ^ ; tarsus  f , middle  toe  f •

Adult  Female.  Plate  XCVIII.  Fig.  %

The  female  resembles  the  male  in  size  and  colour.


( 493  )

THE  COW-PEN  BIRD.

Icterus  PECORis,  . , .

PLATE  XCIX.  Male  axd  Female.

The  works  of  Nature  are  evidently  perfect  in  all  their  parts.  From
the  manifestations  of  consummate  skill  everywhere  displayed,  we  must
infer  that  the  intellect  which  planned  the  grand  scheme,  is  infinite  in
power ; and  even  wheii  we  observe  parts  or  objects  which  to  us  seem  un-
necessary, superfluous,  or  useless,  it  would  be  more  consistent  with  the
ideas  which  we  ought  to  have  of  our  own  feeble  apprehension,  to  consider
tliem  as  still  perfect,  to  have  been  formed  for  a purpose,  and  to  execute
their  intended  function,  than  to  view  them  as  abortive  and  futile  attempts.

The  seed  is  dropped  on  the  ground.  It  imbibes  moisture,  swells,  and
its  latent  principle  of  life  receiving  an  impulse,  sloVly  unfolds.  Its  ra-
dicle shoots  down  into  the  earth,  its  plumule  rises  toward  the  sky.  ’ The
first  leaflets  appear,  and  as  we  watch  its  progress,  we  see  it  assuming  size
and  strength.  Years  pass  on,  and  it  still  enlarges.  It  produces  flowers
and  fruits,  and  gives  shelter  to  multitudes  of  animated  beings.  "At  length
it  stands  the  glory  of  the  forest,  spreading  abroad  its  huge  arms,  covering
with  its  dense  foliage  the  wild  animals  that  retreat  to’  it  for  protection
from  the  sun  and  the  rain.  Centuries  after  its  birth,  the  stately  tree
rears  its  green  head  to  the  sky.  At  length  symptoms  of  decay  begin  to
manifest  themselves.  The  branches  wither,  the  core’  dies  and  putrefies.
Grey  and  shaggy  lichens  cover  its  trunk  and  limbs.  The  Woodpecker
resorts  to  it  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  the  insects  which  find  shelter
beneath  its  decayed  bark.  Blackness  spreads  over  the  heavens,  the  mut^
tering  of  the  thunder  is  heard.  Suddenly  there  comes  oh  the  ear  the
bickering  noise  of  the  whirlwind,  which  scatters  the  twigs  and  the  foliage
around,  and  meeting  in  its  path  the  patriarch  of  the  forest,  lays  him  prost
trate  on  the  ground.  For  years  the  massy  trunk  lies  extended  on  the
earth  ; but  it  is  seen  gradually  giving  way.  The  summer’s  sun  and  the
winter’s  frost  crumble  it  into  dust,  which  goes  to  augment  the  soil.  And
thus  has  it  finished  its  course.

Look  again  at  the  egg  of  the  bird,  dropped  on  its  curious  bed,  the
construction  of  which  has  cost  the  parent  bird  many  labours  and  anxieties.


494


COW-PEN  BIRD.


It  also  is  a seed,  but  it  gives  rise  to  a very  different  object.  Fostered  by
the  warmth  imparted  by  the  parent  bird,  the  germ  which  it  contains
swells  into  life,  and  at  length  bursting  its  fragile  enclosure,  comes  totter-
ing into  existence.  To  sustain  the  life  and  contribute  to  the  development
of  this  helpless  being,  the  mother  issues  in  quest  of  food,  which  she  care-
fully places  in  its  open  throat.  Day  after  day  it  acquires  new  develop-
ment under  the  fostering  care  of  its  nurse,  until  at  length,  invested  witli
all  the  powers  which  Nature  intended  to  bestow  upon  it,  it  spreads  its
pinions  to  the  breeze,  and  sallies  forth  to  perform  the  many  offices  for
which  it  is  destined.

How  often  have  I watched  over  the  little  bird  in  its  nest,  and  marked
the  changes  which  day  after  day  it  exhibited  : the  unfolding  of  its  first
scanty  covering  of  down,  the  sprouting  of  its  plumelets,  the  general  en-
largement of  all  its  parts  ! With  what  pleasure  have  I viewed  the  de-
velopment of  its  colouring  and  the  early  manifestations  of  its  future
habits  !

Amid  these  wonderful  operations  of  Nature,  there  is  one  which  has
occasionally  engaged  my  attention,  and  occupied  my  thoughts,  ever  since
I first  became  acquainted  with  the  bird  of  which  I now  proceed  to  speak.

The  Cow  Bird,  which  in  form  and  character  is  allied  to  the  Crow
Blackbird,  the  Redwing,  the  Orchard  Oriole,  and  other  species,  together
with  some  of  which  it  forms  the  genus  Icterus^  differs  from  these  birds  in
one  important  circumstance,  which  approximates  it  to  the  Cuckoo  of
Europe,  a bird  entirely  different  in  habits  and  appearance.  Like  that
bird,  it  makes  no  nest  of  its  own,  but  deposits  its  eggs,  one  at  a time,  in
the  nests  of  other  birds,  leaving  them  to  the  care  of  a foster-parent.

In  the  State  of  Louisiana,  the  Cow-pen  Bird,  or  as  it  is  also  called,
the  Cow  Blackbird,  or  Cow  Bunting,  is  seen  only  at  long  intervals.
Some  years  pass  without  the  appearance  of  a single  individual  there.  At
other  times  immense  flocks  are  observed  mixing  with  the  Redwings,
Crow  Blackbirds  and  Robins,  searching  about  the  farm-yards,  the  fields,
and  the  meadows  with  great  diligence  for  food.  At  such  times  they  are
easily  approached,  and  are  shot  in  great  numbers,  being  considered  more
delicate  and  better  flavoured  than  the  species  with  which  they  associate,  ex-
cepting the  Robin.  Like  the  Redwings,  they  seek  the  swamps  and  the
margins  of  lakes  and  rivers,  where  they  roost  among  the  tall  sedges,  flags,
and  other  aquatic  plants.  When  disturbed  in  these  retreats,  they  rise
in  a dense  mass,  perform  various  evolutions  in  t]ie  air,  and  alight  again


COW-PEN  BIRD.


495


to  resume  their  repose.  At  daybreak,  they  return  to  the  cultivated'parts
of  the  country  to  search  for  food.  In  Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  they
occur  in  great  abundance  every  winter.  Some  also  spend  the  winter  in
Virginia  and  Maryland,  as  well  as  in  the  States  of  Kentucky  and  Indiana,
where  I have  observed  them  lingering  about  farm-houses  and  cow-pens
during  severe  weather.  Great  flocks,  however,  retire  much  farther  south.
I have  seen  many  of  these  birds  passing  high  in  the  air,  at  mid-day,  in
the  month  of  October,  pursuing  their  course  steadily,  as  if  bent  upon  a
long  journey.

The  Cow-pen  Bird,  after  passing  the  winter  in  the  Southern  States,
or  in  regions  nearer  the  equator,  makes  its  appearance  in  the  Middle
States  about  the  end  of  March  or  beginning  of  April,  arriving  in  small  par-
ties. Their  flight  is  performed  chiefly  under  night ; and  during  the  day
they  are  seen  resting  on  the  trees,  or  frequenting  the  banks  of  streams  in
quest  of  food.  They  continue  to  be  seen  in  small  flocks  until  the  begin-
ning of  June,  when  they  disappear,  the  various  flocks  having  successive-
ly passed  northward.

Its  flight  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Redwing,  with  which  it  frequently
associates  in  its  rambles.  During  spring  and  summer  it  feeds  on  insects,
larvae  and  worms,  frequenting  the  cornfields,  meadows  and  open  places.

The  males  and  females  arrive  together ; but  contrary  to  the  general
practice  among  the  feathered  tribes,  these  birds  do  not  pair.  The  males
seem  to  regard  the  females  with  little  interest.  The  numberless  acts  of
endearment,  the  many  carrollings,  joyous  flights,  and  bursts  of  ecstatic
feeling,  which  other  birds  display  at  the  commencement  of  the  breeding
season,  are  entirely  dispensed  with.  When  a particular  intimacy  takes
place  between  two  individuals  of  different  sexes,  it  soon  ceases,  and  the
same  individuals  mate  with  others.  The  sexual  attachment  intended  for
the  benefit  of  the  young  brood  does  not  take  place,  because  in  this  species
the  young  are  not  to  be  reared  by  their  parents,  but  to  be  left  to  the  care
of  birds  of  other  kinds.  The  Cow-pen  Buntings,  in  fact,  like  some  un-
natural parents  of  our  own  race,  send  out  their  progeny  to  be  nursed.

When  the  female  is  about  to  deposit  her  eggs,  she  is  observed  to  leave
her  companions,  and  perch  upon  a tree  or  fence,  assuming  an  appearance
of  uneasiness.  Her  object  is  to  observe  other  birds  while  engaged  in  con-
structing their  nests.  Should  she  not  from  this  position  discover  a nest,
she  moves  off  and  flies  from  tree  to  tree,  until  at  length,  having  found  a


1


49G


COW-PEN  BIRD.


suitable  repository  for  her  egg,  she  waits  for  a proper  opportunity,  drops
it,  flies  off,  and  returns  in  exultation  to  her  companions.

The  birds  in  whose  nests  the  eggs  of  the  Cow  Bunting  are  thus  de-
posited, are  all  smaller  than  itself  That  which  is  most  frequently  fa^
voured  with  the  unwelcome  gift  is  the  Maryland  Y ellow-throat.  The

other  species  in  which  I have  found  the  egg  of  the  Cow  Bird  are  the
Chipping  Sparrow,  the  Blue  Bird,  the  Y ellow  Bird,  several  Fly-catchers,
especially  the  Blue-grey  and  the  White-eyed,  and  the  Golden-crowned
Thrush.  The  nests  of  these  birds  are  very  different  in  form,  size  and
materials,  as  well  as  in  position,  some  being  placed  high  on  trees,  others
in  low  bushes,  and  that  of  the  Thrush  on  the  ground.

It  is  also  a very  remarkable  circumstance,  that  although  the  Cow-
Bird  is  larger  than  the  species  in  the  nests  of  which  it  deposits  its  eggs,
the  eggs  themselves  are  not  much  superior  in  size  to  those  of  their
intended  foster-parents.  This  is  equally  the  case  with  the  European
Cuckoo,  which  selects,  for  the  purpose  of  depositing  its  egg,  the  nest  of
the  Titlark,  Hedge-Sparrow,  or  some  other  small  bird.  And  here,  as  in
so  many  other  cases,  may  we  observe  the  adaptation  of  means  to  ends
which  nature  has  so  admirably  made.  The  egg  of  the  Cuckoo,  in  fact,
is  not  so  large  as  that  of  the  Skylark,  a bird  which,  to  the  other,  hardly
bears  the  proportion  of  one  to  six.  The  intention  here  has  not  been  by
a similarity  in  size  and  colouring,  to  deceive  the  bird  in  whose  nest  the
egg  is  placed,  for,  on  all  occasions,  the  individuals  on  which  the  gift
have  been  bestowed,  receive  it  unwillingly,  and,  in  fact,  manifest  great
alarm  and  resentment.  On  the  contrary,  the  object  has  been  to  secure
the  development  of  the  embryo,  by  adapting  the  size  of  the  egg  to  the
capability  of  imparting  heat  to  it.  : ^

Should  the  Cow-Bird  deposit  its  egg  in  a nest  newly  finished,  and  as
yet  empty,  the  owners  of  the  nest  not  unfrequently  desert  it ; but,  when
they  have  already  deposited  one  or  more  eggs,  they  generally  continue
their  attachment  to  it.  There  is  reason  for  believing,  however,  that,  on
all  occasions,  they  are  aware  of  the  intrusion  that  has  been  effected.

The  Cow-Bird  never  deposits  more  than  one  egg  in  a nest,  although
it  is  probable  it  thus  leaves  several  in  different  nests,  especially  when  we
consider  the  vast  numbers  of  the  species  that  are  to  be  seen  on  their  re-
turn southward.  It  does  not  make  a forcible  entrance,  but  watches  its
opportunity,  and  when  it  finds  the  nest  deserted  by  its  guardians,  slips
to  it  like  one  bent  on  the  accomplishment  of  some  discreditable  project.


COW-PEN  BIRD.


497


When  the  female  returns,  and  finds  in  her  nest  an  egg  which  she  imme-
diately perceives  to  be  different  from  her  own,  she  leaves  the  nest,  and
perches  on  a branch  near  it,  returns  and  retires  several  times  in  succes-
sion, flies  off,  calling  loudly  for  her  mate,  who  soon  makes  his  appear-
ance, manifesting  great  anxiety  at  the  distress  of  his  spouse.  They  visit
the  nest  together,  retire  from  it,  and  continue  chattering  for  a consider-
able time.  Nevertheless,  the  obnoxious  egg  retains  its  position,  the  bird
continues  to  deposit  its  eggs,  and  incubation  takes  place  as  usual.  The
egg  of  the  Cow  Bird  is  of  a regular  oval  form,  pale  greyish-blue,  sprink-
led with  umber-brown  dots  and  short  streaks,  which  are  more  numerous
at  the  larger  end.

Incubation  has  been  continued  for  nearly  a fortnight,  and  the  young
Cow  Bird  bursts  the  shell.  Another  remarkable  occurrence  now  takes
place.  The  eggs  of  the  foster-bird  are  yet  unhatched,  and  soon  after
disappear.  In  every  case  the  Cow  Bird’s  egg  is  the  first  hatched,  and
herein  also  is  manifested  the  wisdom  of  Nature  ; for  the  parent-birds  find-
ing a helpless  object,  for  whose  subsistence  it  behoves  them  to  provide,
fly  off  to  procure  food  for  it.  The  other  eggs  are  thus  neglected,  and
the  chicks  which  they  contain  necessarily  perish.  Birds  have  probably
the  means  of  knowing  an  addle  egg,  for,  when  any  such  remain  after  the
hatching  of  the  others,  they  always  remove  them  from  the  nest ; and,  in
the  present  case,  the  remaining  eggs  are  soon  removed,  and  may  some-
times be  seen  strewn  about  in  the  vicinity  of  the  nest.  In  the  case  of
the  Cuckoo  matters  are  differently  managed,  for  the  young  bird  of  that
species  very  ungratefully  jostles  out  of  the  nest  all  his  foster-brothers  and
sisters,  that  he  may  have  room  enough  for  himself.  If  we  are  fond  of
admiring  the  wisdom  of  Nature,  we  ought  to  mingle  reason  with  our  ad-
miration ; and  here  we  might  be  tempted  to  suspect  her  not  so  wise  as
we  had  imagined,  for  why  should  the  poor  Y ellow-throat  have  been  put
to  the  trouble  of  laying  all  these  eggs,  if  they  are,  after  all,  to  produce
nothing  ? This  is  a mystery  to  me ; nevertheless,  my  belief  in  the  wis-
dom of  Nature  is  not  staggered  by  it.

As  the  young  Cow-Bird  grows  up,  its  foster-parents  provide  for  it
with  great  assiduity,  and  manifest  all  the  concern  and  uneasiness  at  the
intrusion  of  a stranger,  that  they  would  do  were  their  own  offspring
under  their  charge.  When  fully  fledged,  the  young  bird  is  of  a sooty-
brown  colour.  Long  after  it  has  left  the  nest,  it  continues  to  be  fed  by
its  affectionate  guardians,  until  it  is  at  length  able  to  provide  for  itself.


498


COW-PEN  BIRD.


Towards  the  end  of  September,  the  old  and  young  Cow  Birds  con-
gregate in  vast  numbers,  and  are  seen  wending  their  way  southward,
sometimes,  by  themselves,  more  frequently  intermingled  with  other  spe^
cies,  such  as  the  Purple  Grakles  and  the  Redwings,  which  they  join  in
their  plundering  expeditions.  They  are  to  be  seen  in  the  Middle  States
until  near  the  end  of  October,  although  unusually  severe  weather  some-
times forces  them  southward  at  an  earlier  period.

This  species  derives  its  name  from  the  circumstance  of  its  frequent-
ing cow-pens.  In  this  respect  it  greatly  resembles  the  European  Star-
ling. Like  that  bird  it  foUows^  the  cattle  in  the  fields,  often  alights  on
their  backs,  and  may  be  seen  diligently  searching  for  worms  and  larvae
among  their  dung.  In  spring,  the  cattle  in  many  parts  of  the  United
States  are  much  infested  with  intestinal  worms,  which  they  pass  in  great
quantities,  and  on  these  the  Cow-bird  frequently  makes  a delicious  repast.

It  has  no  song  properly  so  called,  but  utters  a low  muttering  sort  of
chuckle,  in  performing  which,  it  is  seen  to  swell  out  its  throat,  and  move
the  feathers  there  in  succession,  in  a manner  very  much  resembling  that
of  the  European  Starling.

Icterus  pecorts,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  53,

Sturnus  Junceti,  Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  326.  Male.

Fringilla  pecoris,  Gmel.  Syst.  vol.  i.  p.  910. — Lath.  Ind.  Ornith.  vol.  i.  p.  443.

Cow-Bunting,  Emberiza  pecoris,  Wils.  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.  ii.  p.  145.  PI.  18.  fig.  1,
Male,  fig.  2.  Female,  fig.  3.  Young.

Adult  Male.  Plate  XCIX.  Fig.  1.

Bill  conical,  robust,  very  acute,  compressed  towards  the  end ; upper
mandible  obtuse  above,  rounded  on  the  sides,  encroaching  a little  on  the
forehead  with  an  angle,  the  margins  acute  and  overlapping ; lower  man-
dible with  the  sides  inflected ; gap-line  much  deflected  at  the  base.  Nos-
trils basal,  lateral,  oval,  covered  above  by  a membrane.  Head  of  ordi-
nary size.  Neck  rather  short.  Body  rather  robust.  Feet  of  ordinary
length ; tarsus  compressed,  acute  behind,  anteriorly  covered  with  seven
longish  scutella ; toes  free,  scutellate,  lateral  ones  nearly  equal ; claws
arched,  compressed,  acute.

Plumage  blended,  glossy.  Wings  longish,  curved,  somewhat  round-
ed, the  second  quill  longest.  Tail  shortish,  rounded,  a little  emarginate,
of  twelve  straight,  rounded  feathers.


COW-PEN  BIRD.


499


Bill  and  feet  brownish-black.  Iris  dark  hazel.  Head  and  neck
sooty  brown,  the  general  colour  of  the  other  parts  is  brownish-black,  the
fore  part  of  the  breast  glossed  with  blue,  the  upper  parts  with  green  and
blue  reflections.

Length  7 inches,  extent  of  wings  11^;  bill  along  the  ridge  along
the  gap  f,  tarsus  1-j^,  middle  toe

Adult  Female.  Plate  XCIX.  Fig.  %

The  female  is  somewhat  less  than  the  male.  Bill,  eyes,  and  feet  of
the  same  colour  as  the  male.  The  general  colour  of  the  plumage  is
dusky  brown,  resembling  that  of  the  head  and  neck  of  the  male,  the
under  parts  somewhat  lighter,  as  are  the  tips  of  the  quills  and  larger
wing-coverts.


( 500  )


THE  MARSH  WREN.

Troglodytes  pjlustris,  Ch.  Bonap.

PLATE  C.  Male,  Female,  and  Nest.

The  haunts  of  this  interesting  little  bird  are,  in  the  Middle  Districts,
the  margins  of  rivers  at  their  confluence  with  the  sea,  and  the  adjoining
marshes  of  our  Atlantic  shores.  In  such  places,  the  Marsh  Wren  is
found  in  great  numbers,  from  the  beginning  of  April  to  the  middle  of
October,  when  it  retires  southward,  many  individuals  wintering  on  the
south-western  shores  of  the  Floridas,  and  along  the  mouths  of  the  Mis-
sissippi.

It  is  a homely  little  bird,  and  is  seldom  noticed,  unless  by  the  natu-
ralist, when  searching  for  other  species,  or  by  children,  who  in  all  coun-
tries are  fond  of  birds.  It  lives  entirely  amongst  the  sedges,  flags,  and
other  rank  plants  that  cover  the  margins  of  the  rivers,  and  the  inlets  of
the  sea.  Its  flight  is  very  low  and  short,  and  is  performed  by  a conti-
nued flirting  of  the  wings,  but  without  the  motions  of  the  tail  employed
by  the  Great  Carolina  Wren.  Its  song,  if  song  I can  call  it,  is  com-
posed of  several  quickly  repeated  notes,  resembling  the  grating  of  a rusty
hinge,  and  is  uttered  almost  continuously  during  the  fore  part  of  the  day,
the  performer  standing  perched  on  the  top  of  a tall  weed,  from  which,  on
the  appearance  of  an  intruder,  it  instantly  dives  into  the  thickest  part  of
the  herbage,  but  to  which  it  returns  the  moment  it  thinks  the  danger
over,  and  renews  its  merry  little  song.

The  males  are  extremely  pugnacious,  and  chase  each  other  with  great
animosity,  until  one  or  other  has  been  forced  to  give  way.  This  disposi-
tion is  the  more  remarkable,  as  these  birds  build  their  nests  quite  close  to
each  other.  I have  seen  several  dozens  of  these  nests  in  the  course  of  a
morning  ramble,  in  a piece  of  marsh  not  exceeding  forty  or  fifty  acres.

The  nest  is  nearly  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a cocoa-nut,  and  is  formed
of  dried  grasses,  entwined  in  a circular  manner,  so  as  to  include  in  its
mass  several  of  the  stems  and  leaves  of  the  sedges  or  other  plants,  among
which  it  is  placed.  A small  aperture,  just  large  enough  to  admit  the
birds, fs  left,  generally  on  the  south-west  side  of  the  nest.  The  interior


MARSH  WREN.


50  J

is  composed  of  small  dry  grasses,  and  is  nearly  of  the  depth  and  width
of  a common  bottle.  The  eggs,  which  are  from  six  to  eight,  are  of  a
regular  oval  form,  and  deep  chocolate  colour,  and,  from  their  sniall  size,
resemble  so  many  beads.  The  Marsh  Wren  raises  two  broods  in  the
season,  and  on  each  occasion  forms  a new  nest.  In  consequence  of  this
practice,  the  deserted  nests  of  the  year,  and  those  remaining  since  the
preceding  season,  may  be  seen  in  the  marshes  in  every  direction,  there
being  scarcely  a tuft  of  tall  'weeds  that  is  not  adorned  with  one  of  them.

The  food  of  the  Marsh  Wren  principally  consists  of  minute  aquatic
insects,*  and  equally  diminutive  mollusca,  which  it  procures  by  moving
along  the  blades  of  the  grasses,  or  the  twigs  of  other  plants,  which  it
does  with  great  activity.  Indeed,  so  rapid  are  its  movements  among  the
weeds,  that  one  might  easily  mistake  it  for  a mouse,  did  he  not  observe
its  tail  now  and  then  raised  over  its  back,  so  as  to  allow  the  white  under-
coverts of  the  former  to  become  conspicuous.

Although  I have  shot  and  examined  many  birds  of  this  species,  I
have  not  found  any  remarkable  differences  in  the  plumage  of  the  sexes.

The  young  birds  assume  their  full  colouring  so  soon  after  they  leave
their  nest,  that  by  the  time  the  species  departs  from  the  Middle  Districts
on  its  way  southward,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  distinguish  them  from
the  old  birds.

In  the  plate,  the  last  of  my  first  volume  of  the  Birds  of  America,
you  have,  hind  reader  (as  I hope  I may  now  with  confidence  call  you),
three  figures  of  this  little  inhabitant  of  our  marshy  shores,  together  with
the  representation  of  its  nest.


Troglodytes  palustris,  Ch.  Bonaparte,  Synops.  of  Birds  of  the  United  States,  p.  93.

M arsh  Wren,  Troglodytes  palustris,  Wils,  Amer.  Ornith.  vol.iii.  p.  58.  PI.  12.
fig,  4.

Adult  Male.  Plate  C.  Fig,  1.

Bill  longish,  slightly  arched,  slender,  acute,  subtrigonal  at  the  base,
compressed  towards  the  tip  ; upper  mandible  with  the  ridge  obtuse,  the
sides  convex  towards  the  end,  concave  at  the  base,  the  edges  acute  and
overlapping  ; under  mandible  with  the  sides  and  back  convex.  Nostrils
oblong,  direct,  basal,  with  a cartilaginous  lid  above,  open  and  bare.
Head  ovate,  eyes  rather  large,  neck  of  ordinary  length,  body  short  and
full.  Legs  of  ordinary  length;  tarsus  longer  than  the  middle  toe,  com-


502


MARSH  WREN.


pressed,  covered  anteriorly  with  six  scutella,  posteriorly  with  a long
plate,  forming  an  acute  edge ; toes  scutellate  above,  the  second  and
fourth  nearly  equal,  the  hind  toe  almost  equal  to  the  middle  one,  the
third  and  fourth  united  as  far  as  the  second  joint ; claws  rather  long,
slender,  acute,  arched,  much  compressed.

Plumage  soft,  tufty,  slightly  glossed.  No  bristly  feathers  about  the
bill.  Wings  short,  broad,  rounded : first  quill  half  the  length  of  the
second,  which  is  very  little  shorter  than  the  third  and  fourth.  Tail  of
ordinary  length,  much  rounded,  of  twelve  rounded  feathers.

Bill  dark  brown  above,  yellow  beneath.  Iris  hazel.  Feet  light  brown.
The  general  colour  of  the  upper  parts  is  dark  brown,  the  sides  of  the
head  deeper,  the  fore  part  of  the  back  brownish-black,  longitudinally
streaked  with  white,  the  quills  externall}?  margined  with  lighter  brown,
the  tail  barred  with  dark  brown.  A white  line  over  the  eye,  extending
down  the  neck ; the  sides  of  the  latter  mottled  with  light  brown  and
grey  ; the  under  parts  of  a silvery  greyish-white ; the  abdominal  feathers
and  under  tail-coverts  tipped  with  brown.

Length  5 inches,  extent  of  wings  ; bill  along  the  ridge  nearly
along  the  gap  f ; tarsus  |,  middle  toe  nearly

Adult  Female.  Plate  C.  Fig.  2,  3.

The  female  differs  very  little  in  external  appearance  from  the  male.
The  black  of  the  back  is  less  deep,  and  the  white  lines  are  less  conspicu-
ous ; the  under  parts,  also,  are  of  a duller  white.


( 503  )


COLONEL  BOON.

1)aniel  Boon,  or,  as  he  was  usually  called  in  the  Western  Country,
Colonel  Boon,  happened  to  spend  a night  with  me  under  the  same  roof,
more  than  twenty  years  ago.  We  had  returned  from  a shooting  excur-
sion, in  the  course  of  which  his  extraordinary  skill  in  the  management  of
the  rifle  had  been  fully  displayed.  On  retiring  to  the  room  appropria-
ted to  that  remarkable  individual  and  myself  for  the  night,  I felt  anxious
to  know  more  of  his  exploits  and  adventures  than  I did,  and  accordingly
took  the  liberty  of  proposing  numerous  questions  to  him.  The  stature
ainl  general  appearance  of  this  wanderer  of  the  western  forests  approach-
ed the  gigantic.  His  chest  was  broad  and  prominent;  his  muscular
powers  displayed  themselves  in  every  limb ; his  countenance  gave  indica-
tion of  his  great  courage,  enterprise,  and  perseverance  ; and  when  he
spoke,  the  very  motion  of  his  lips  brought  the  impression  that  whatever
he  uttered  could  not  be  otherwise  than  strictly  true.  I undressed,  whilst
he  merely  took  off  his  hunting  shirt,  and  arranged  a few  folds  of  blankets
on  the  floor,  choosing  rather  to  lie  there,  as  he  observed,  than  on  the  soft-
est bed.  When  we  had  both  disposed  of  ourselves,  each  after  his  own
fashion,  he  related  to  me  the  following  account  of  his  powers  of  memory,
which  I lay  before  you,  kind  reader,  in  his  own  words,  hoping  that  the
simplicity  of  his  style  may  prove  interesting  to  you.

“ I was  once,”  said  he,  ‘‘  on  a hunting  expedition  on  the  banks  of  the
Green  River,  when  the  lower  parts  of  this  State  (Kentucky)  were  still  in
the  hands  of  nature,  and  none  but  the  sons  of  the  soil  were  looked  upon
as  its  lawful  proprietors.  We  Virginians  had  for  some  time  been  waging
a war  of  intrusion  upon  them,  and  I,  amongst  the  rest,  rambled  through
the  woods  in  pursuit  of  their  race,  as  I now  would  follow  the  tracks  of
any  ravenous  animal.  The  Indians  outwitted  me  one  dark  night,  and  I
was  as  unexpectedly  as  suddenly  made  a prisoner  by  them.  The  trick
had  been  managed  with  great  skill ; for  no  sooner  had  I extinguished  the
fire  of  my  camp,  and  laid  me  down  to  rest,  in  full  security,  as  I thought,
than  1 felt  myself  seized  by  an  indistinguishable  number  of  hands,  and
was  immediately  pinioned,  as  if  about  to  be  led  to  the  scaffold  for  execu-
tion. To  have  attempted  to  be  refractory,  would  have  proved  useless  and
dangerous  to  my  life ; and  I suffered  myself  to  be  removed  from  my  camp


504


COLONEL  BOON.


to  theirs,  a few  miles  distant,  without  uttering  even  a word  of  complaint.
You  are  aware,  I dare  say,  that  to  act  in  this  manner  was  the  best  policy,
as  you  understand  that  by  so  doing,  I proved  to  the  Indians  at  once,
that  I was  born  and  bred  as  fearless  of  death  as  any  of  themselves.

“ When  we  reached  the  camp,  great  rejoicings  were  exhibited.  Two
squaws  and  a few  papooses  appeared  particularly  delighted  at  the  sight
of  me,  and  I was  assured,  by  very  unequivocal  gestures  and  words,  that,
on  the  morrow,  the  mortal  enemy  of  the  Red-skins  would  cease  to  live.
I never  opened  my  lips,  but  was  busy  contriving  some  scheme  which
might  enable  me  to  give  the  rascals  the  slip  before  dawn.  The  women
immediately  fell  a searching  about  my  hunting-shirt  for  whatever  they
might  think  valuable,  and,  fortunately  for  me,  soon  found  my  flask  filled
with  monongahda  (that  is,  reader,  strong  whisky).  A terrific  grin  was
exhibited  on  their  murderous  countenances,  while  my  heart  throbbed
with  joy  at  the  anticipation  of  their  intoxication.  The  crew  immediately
began  to  beat  their  bellies  and  sing,  as  they  passed  the  bottle  from  mouth
to  mouth.  How  often  did  I wish  the  flask  ten  times  its  size,  and  filled
with  aqua-fortis  ! I observed  that  the  squaws  drank  more  freely  than
the  warriors,  and  again  my  spirits  were  about  to  be  depressed,  when  the
report  of  a gun  was  heard  at  a distance.  The  Indians  all  jumped  on  their
feet.  The  singing  and  drinking  were  both  brought  to  a stand,  and  I saw,
with  inexpressible  joy,  the  men  walk  ofl*  to  some  distance  and  talk  to  the
squaws.  I knew  that  they  were  consulting  about  me,  and  I foresaw  that
ill  a few  moments  the  warriors  would  go  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  gun
having  been  fired  so  near  their  camp.  I expected  that  the  squaws  would
be  left  to  guard  me.  Well,  Sir,  it  was  just  so.  They  returned  ; the
men  took  up  their  guns,  and  walked  away.  The  sq  uaws  sat  down  again,
and  in  less  than  five  minutes  had  my  bottle  up  to  their  dirty  mouths,
gurgling  down  their  throats  the  remains  of  the  whisky.

“ With  what  pleasure  did  I see  them  becoming  more  and  more  drunk,
until  the  liquor  took  such  hold  of  them  that  it  was  quite  impossible  for
these  women  to  be  of  any  service.  They  tumbled  down,  rolled  about,
and  began  to  snore : when  I,  having  no  other  chance  of  freeing  myself
from  the  cords  that  fastened  me,  rolled  over  and  over  towards  the  fire,
and,  after  a short  time,  burned  them  asunder.  I rose  on  my  feet,  stretched
my  stiffened  sinews,  snatched  up  my  rifle,  and,  for  once  in  my  life,  spared
that  of  Indians.  I now  recollect  how  desirous  I once  or  twice  felt  to  lay
open  the  skulls  of  the  wretches  with  my  tomahaAvk ; but  when  I again


COLONEL  BOON.


503


thought  upon  killing  beings  unprepared  and  unable  to  defend  themselves,
it  looked  like  murder  without  need,  and  I gave  up  the  idea.

“ But,  Sir,  I felt  determined  to  mark  the  spot,  and  walking  to  a thrifty
ash  sapling,  I cut  out  of  it  three  large  chips,  and  ran  off.  I soon  reach-
ed the  river,  soon  crossed  it,  and  threw  myself  deep  into  the  cane-brakes,
imitating  the  tracks  of  an  Indian  with  my  feet,  so  that  no  chance  might
be  left  for  those  from  whom  I had  escaped  to  overtake  me.

“ It  is  now  nearly  twenty  years  since  this  happened,  and  more  than  five
since  I left  the  Whites’  settlements,  which  I might  probably  never  have
visited  again,  had  I not  been  called  on  as  a witness  in  a law-suit  that  was
pending  in  Kentucky,  and  which  I really  believe  would  never  have  been
settled,  had  I not  come  forward,  and  established  the  beginning  of  a cer-
tain boundary  line.  This  is  the  story.  Sir.

“ Mr  — ■ moved  from  Old  Virginia  into  Kentucky,  and  having

a large  tract  granted  to  him  in  the  new  State,  laid  claim  to  a certain
parcel  of  land  adjoining  Green  River,  and  as  chance  would  have  it,  took
for  one  of  his  corners  the  very  Ash  tree  on  which  I had  made  my  mark,
and'  finished  his  survey  of  some  thousands  of  acres,  beginning,  as  it  is  ex-
pressed in  the  deed,  ‘ at  an  Ash  marked  by  three  distinct  notches  of  the
tomahawk  of  a white  man.’

‘‘  The  tree  had  grown  much,  and  the  bark  had  covered  the  marks ;
but  somehow  or  other,  Mr  — — heard  from  some  one  all  that  I have  al-
ready said  to  you,  and  thinking  that  I might  remember  the  spot  alluded
to  in  the  deed,  but  which  was  no  longer  discoverable,  wrote  for  me  to
come  and  try  at  least  to  find  the  place  or  the  tree.  His  letter  mentioned
that  all  my  expenses  should  be  paid,  and  not  caring  much  about  once

more  about  going  back  to  Kentucky,  I started  and  met  Mr  .

After  some  conversation,  the  affair  with  the  Indians  came  to  my  recollec-
tion. I considered  for  a while,  and  began  to  think  that  after  all  I could
find  the  very  spot,  as  well  as  the  tree,  if  it  was  yet  standing.

«<Mr and  I mounted  our  horses,  and  off  we  went  to  the  Green

River  Bottoms.  After  some  difficulties,  for  you  must  be  aware.  Sir,  that
great  changes  have  taken  place  in  those  woods,  I found  at  last  the  spot
where  I had  crossed  the  river,  and  waiting  for  the  moon  to  rise,  made
for  the  course  in  which  I thought  the  Ash  tree  grew.  On  approaching
the  place,  I felt  as  if  the  Indians  were  there  still,  and  as  if  I was  still  a

prisoner  among  them.  Mr and  I camped  near  what  I conceived

the  spot,  and  waited  until  the  return  of  day.


506


COLONEL  BOON.


“ At  the  rising  of  the  sun,  I was  on  foot,  and  after  a good  deal  of
musing,  thought  that  an  Ash  tree  then  in  sight  must  be  the  very  one
on  which  I had  made  my  mark.  I felt  as  if  there  could  be  no  doubt  of

it,  and  mentioned  my  thought  to  Mr . Well,  Colonel  Boon,'’

said  he,  “ if  you  think  so,  I hope  it  may  prove  true,  but  we  must  have
some  witnesses  ; do  you  stay  here  about,  and  I will  go  and  bring  some

of  the  settlers  whom  I know.”  1 agreed.  Mr trotted  off,  and  I,

to  pass  the  time,  rambled  about  to  see  if  a deer  was  still  living  in  the
land.  But  ah ! Sir,  what  a wonderful  difference  thirty  years  makes  in  the
country  ! Why,  at  the  time  when  I was  caught  by  the  Indians,  you
would  not  have  walked  out  in  any  direction  for  more  than  a mile  without
shooting  a buck  or  a bear.  There  were  then  thousands  of  buffaloes  on
the  hills  in  Kentucky ; the  land  looked  as  if  it  never  would  become  poor ;
and  to  hunt  in  those  days  was  a pleasure  indeed.  But  when  I was  left
to  myself  on  the  banks  of  Green  River,  I dare  say  for  the  last  time  in  my
life,  a few  signs  only  of  deer  were  to  be  seen,  and,  as  to  a deer  itself,  I
saw  none.

‘‘  Mr  returned,  accompanied  by  three  gentlemen.  They  look-

ed upon  me  as  if  I had  been  Washington  himself,  and  walked  to  the
Ash  tree,  which  I now  called  my  own,  as  if  in  quest  of  a long  lost  trea-
sure. I took  an  axe  from  one  of  them,  and  cut  a few  chips  off  the  bark.
Still  no  signs  were  to  be  seen.  So  I cut  again  until  I thought  it  was
time  to  be  cautious,  and  I scraped  and  worked  away  with  my  butcher
knife,  until  I did  come  to  where  my  tomahawk  had  left  an  impression  in
the  wood.  We  now  went  regularly  to  work,  and  scraped  at  the  tree  with
care,  until  three  hacks  as  plain  as  any  three  notches  ever  were,  could  be

seen.  Mr  and  the  other  gentlemen  were  astonished,  and,  I must

allow,  I was  as  much  surprised  as  pleased  myself.  I made  affidavit  of

this  remarkable  occurrence  in  presence  of  these  gentlemen.  Mr

gained  his  cause.  I left  Green  River  for  ever,  and  came  to  where  we  now
are  ; and.  Sir,  I wish  you  a good  night.”

I trust,  kind  reader,  that  when  I again  make  my  appearance  with  an-
other volume  of  Ornithological  Biography,  I shall  not  have  to  search  in
vain  for  the  impression  which  I have  made,  but  shall  have  the  satisfaction
of  finding  its  traces  still  unobliterated.  I now  withdraw,  and,  in  the
words  of  the  noted  wanderer  of  the  western  wilds,  wish  you  a good

NIGHT.”


( 507  )


INDEX.


Page

Acer  rubrum, 287?  352

Adonis  autumnalisv* 48

iEsculus  Pavia, 402

Alcedo  Alcyon, 394

American  Bear, 479

— — Cane,... 149

Goldfinch, 172

' Hare, 272

■ — Pokeweed, 179

Redstart,  202

Anthus  pipiens, 408

■ Spinoletta, * 49

Autumnal  Warbler, 447

Azure  Warbler, 255

Baltimore  Oriole, 66

Barred  Owl, 242

Bay-breasted  W arbler, 358

Bay- winged  Bunting, 473

Bead-tree, 330

Bear,  Black, 479

Bear-berry,  257

Belted  Kingsfisher, 394

Betula  papyracea, 449

Bewick’s  Wren, 96

Bignonia  capreolata, 334

— radicans, 254

Birchy  Pap^,.. 449

Bird  of  W ashington, 58

Bitterwood, 123

Blackberry, 152

Black-billed  Cuckoo, 170

Black-and-white  Creeper, 452

I «■  ■ Warbler,.. 290

Black  Oak, 426

Black  Walnut,  433

Black  Warrior,  441

Blue-grey  Fly-catcher, 431

Blue  T angles, . .’ 129


Blue-winged  Y ellow  W arbler, ...  102


Page

Blue-green  Warbler, 258

Blue  Y ello w-backed  W arbler, ...  73

Bombycilla  carolinensis, 227

Bonaparte’s  Fly-catcher,  27

Boon,  Colonel, ;... 503

Broad-winged  Hawk, 461

Brown  Titlark, 49

Buck-eye,  Dwarf, 402

Bull-frog,  367

Bunting,  Henslow’s, 360

Towhe, 150

Cactus  opuntia, 475

Callicarpa  americana, 592

Cane,  American 149,  458

Cane-brake, 458

Caprimulgus  carolinensis, 273

■ — — vociferus, 422

Carolina  Parrot, 135

Carolina  Rose, 472

Carbonated  Warbler, 308

Castanea  pumila, 436

Cassia  occidentalis, 181

Cedar  Bird, 227

Cedar,  Red,  230

Certhia  varia,  452

Chestnut-sided  Warbler,  306

Chicasaw  Plum, 282

Children’s  W arbler, 180

Chinquapin,.. 436

Chuck- will’s- widow, 273

Cinereous  Eagle, 64

Cliff  Swallow, 353

Cnicus  lanceolatus, I76

Cockle-bur, 140

Coccyzus  americanus, 18

- erythrophthalmus, I7O

Columba  carolinensis, 91

migratoria, 319

Columbia  Jay, 483


508


INDEX.


Page


Cornus  florida,  45,  376

Corvus  Bullockii,  483

Corvus  floridanusj 444

Cotton,  Highland, 359

Cotton-wood, 407

Cotton-rose,  140

Cougar, 205

Cow-pen  Bird,  492

Common  Crow  Blackbird, 35

Creeper,  Black-and- White, 452

Crested  Titmouse, 199

Cuckoo,  Black-billed, 170

Yellow-billed, 18

Cuvier’s  Regulus, 288

Deer  Hunting,  335

Diosporos  virginiana, 446

Dogwood, 45,  376

Driving, 335

Earthquake, 239

Eagle,  White-headed,  160

Washington, 58

Emberiza  Henslowii, 360

— — erythrophthalma, 150

Falco  Albicilla, 64

borealis, 265

columbarius, 466

— - Haliaetos, 415

Harlani,  441

— hyemalis 364

furcatus, 368

— ~ leucocephalus, 160

lineatus, 296

pennsylvanicus, 461

— peregrinus, 85

Stanleii,. 186

—  temerarius, 381

Washingtonii,  38

Falls  of  Niagara, 362

Finch,  Painted, 279

Purple,  24

Sea-side, 470

Fire-light  Hunting, 337

Fish  Hawk, 415

Flood  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi,  156


Page

Flos  Adonis, 48

Florida  Jay, 444

- Jessamine, 114

Fly-catcher,  Bonaparte’s, 27

Blue-grey, 431

Selby’s, 46

Solitary,  147

Traill’s, 236

Tyrant, 403

White-eyed, 328

Fringilla  ciris, 279

cyanea, 377

erythrophthalma, 150

— graminea, 473

hyemalis, 72

maritima, 470

melodia, 126

palustris, 331

pennsylvanica, 42

purpurea, 24

tristis, 172

Frolic, 55

Garter  Snake, 371

Gleditschia  triacanthos, 226

Goldfinch,  American, 172

Golden- winged  Woodpecker, 191  '

Gossipium  herbaceum, 359

Grakle,  Purple, 35

Grass  Finch,  473

Great  Carolina  Wren,  399

Horned  Owl, 313

footed  Hawk, 85

Magnolia, 28

Pine  Swamp, 52

Grouse,  Ruffed, 211

Green  Briar, 302

Halesia  tetraptera, 123

Hare,  American, 272

Harlequin  Snake, 278

Hawk,  Broad-winged, 461

Great-footed, 85

Pigeon, 466

Red-shouldered, 296

Red-tailed,.... 265

Stanley,  186


INDEX.


509


Page

Hawk,  Swallow-tailed,  368

Winter, 364

Henslow’s  Bunting, 360

Hermit  Thrush, 303

Hibiscus  grandiflorus, 104

Hickory  Pig-nut, 465

Hirundo  bicolor, 490

— — — fulva, 353

- purpurea, 115

Honey  Locust, 226

Hornbeam,  Virginian^ 204

Hospitality, : 383

House  W'ren, 427

Huckleberry, 129

Humming  Bird,  248

Hurricane, 262

Icterus  agripennis, 233

Baltimore, 66

pecoris, 492

phoeniceus, 348

spurius, 221

Ilex  Dahoon, 257

Prinoides, 451

Indian  Corn, 41

Indigo  Bird, 377

Iris,  Coppery, 80

Iron-wood  Tree, 204

Ivory-billed  Woodpecker,. 341

Jay,  Florida, 444

Columbia, 483

Jersey  Pine, 489

Jessamine,  Florida, 114

Juglans  nigra, 433

■ — . porcina, 485

Juniperus  virginiana, 230

Kalmia  latifolia, ...... . 289


Page

Lehigh  River, 54

Le  Petit  Caporal, 381

Lepus  americana,. 278

Liquidambar  styraciflua, 232

Liriodendron  tulipifera, 71

Little  Screech  Owl, 485

Loggerhead  Shrike, 300

Louisiana  Flag, 80


— Water  Thrush, 99

Louisville  in  Kentucky, 437

Magnolia  auriculata, 198

grandiflora, 28,  171

Maize, 41

Maple,  Red, 287,  352

Marsh  Blackbird, 348

Wren, 500

Maryland  Y ellow-throat, 121

Martin,  Purple, 115

May-apple, 322

May-bush, 309

Meadville, 182

Melia  azedarach, 330

Meleagris  Gallopavo, 1^  33

Methodists,  camp-meeting  of,....  31

Miegia  macrosperma, 149

Mississippi,  Flood  of  the, 156

Improvements  in  the

navigation  of  the, ... . 130

Mocking  Bird, 108

Moth  mullein, 307

Mouse,  Field, 302

Mulberry,  Spanish, 259

Mullein,  moth, 307

Muscadine,  wild, 235

Muscicapa  Bonapartii, 27

: coerulea, 431

— -Ruticilla, 202

: Selbii, 46


Kentucky  Sports,

290

196

Traillii,

236

403

Nashville  Warbler ,

450

Larch,  Black,

454

Naturalist,  the  eccentric,

455

Larix  americana,

26

Navigation  of  the  Mississippi,....

130

Lanins  ludovicianus,

300

Niagara,

362

Laurel,....

289

Nyssa  tomentosa,

75

510


INDEX.


Page

Oak,  Black,

426

Swamp,

125

White,

Ohio,  description  of  the,

29

floods  of  the,

156

Olive,  Wild,

123

Orchard  Oriole,

221

Oriole,  Baltimore,

66

. . 221

Osprey,

415

Ostrya  virginiana,

204

Owl,  Barred,

....  242

Great  Horned,

313

Little  Screech,

Painted  Finch,

279

Painter,  the  original,

Papaw  tree,

Partridge,  Virginian,

388

Parus  bicolor,

199

Parrot,  Carolina,

135

Passenger  Pigeon,

319

Pens  for  catching  game,

12

Perdix  virginiana,

388

Persimon,

446

Phlox  aristata,

361

' "■■■  subulata,

409

Phytolacca  decandra,

179

Picus  auratus,

191

— erythrocephalus,

141

— . principalis,

381

Pig-nut  Hickory,

465

Pigeon  Hawk,

Pigeon,  Passenger,

319

Pine,  Jersey,

489

White,

.....  201

Pink  Root,

361

Pinus  inops,

454

201

Podophyllum  peltatum

332

Pokeweed,  American

Pole-cat,

Populus  candicans,

Porcelia  triloba,

21

Pot-pie,

39

Prairie,  the,

Prairie  Titlark,

Warbler,

Prickly  Pear,

Pride  of  China,

P rothonotary  W arbler,

Prunus  Chicasa,

Psittacus  carolinensis,.,

Purple  Finch,

Grakle,

■ • ' Martin,

Pyrus  Botryapium,


Page

408

76

475

330

22

282

135

24

35

115

309


Quercus  aquatica,. 125

— — — -Prinus, 261

Quiscalus  versicolor,  — 35

Quercitron, 426

Rana  taurina, 367

Rathbone  Warbler, 333

Red  Bird, 232

Red  Cedar, 230

Red  Larch,; 26

Red  Maple, 352,  287

Red-headed  Woodpecker, 141

shouldered  Hawk, 296

——tailed  Hawk, 265

— winged  Starling, 348

Redstart,  American, 202

Republican  Swallow, 353

Regulators, 105

Regulus  Cuvierii, 288

Rice  Bird, 283

Roscoe’s  Yellow-throat 124

Rosa  Carolina, 472

Rubus  villosus, 152

Ruby-throated  Humming-bird,..  248
Ruffed  Grouse, 211

Sarsaparilla,  Wild, 380

Sawyers  and  Planters,. 130

Sciurus  cinereus, 247

Screech  Owl, 485

Schisandra  coccinea, 380

Scipio  and  the  Bear, 479

Seaside  Finch, 470

Selby’s  Flycatcher,..’

Service, 309


INDEX.


511


Shrike,  Loggerhead, ......

Silver-bell  Tree,

Smilax  rotundifolia

Snow-bird,

Snow- drop  Tree

Solitary  Fly-catcher

Song  Sparrow

Spanish  Coffee

Sparrow,  Song

■ Swamp

— . — White-throated

Spider-wort

Spigelia  marilandica

Squirrel,  Grey....

Stanley  Hawk

Strix  Asio,

nebulosa

— — Virginiana

Still  Hunting,

Stuartia  malacodendron,..

Summer  Red  Bird,

Swallow,  Republican,

White-bellied,.

Swallow-tailed  Hawk,...

Swamp,  Great  Pine,

Swamp  Oak,

Sparrow,

Spice,

Sweet  Gum,

Sylvia  aestiva,

Americana,

autumnalis,

azurea,

— carbonata

— — castanea,

■ Childrenii,

■ - discolor,

' formosa,

■■  - icterocephala,

— - maculosa,

■ " ■ pensilis,

Protonotarius,

— - rara,

- rubricapilla

■ Rathbonia,

Roscoe,

■ Solitaria,


Page

Sylvia  Trichas, 12

vermivora, 177

Vigorsii, 153

Tanagra  aestiva, 232

Tetrao  Umbellus, 211

Thistle,  Common, 176

Thrush,  Hermit, 303

' — Louisiana  Water, 99

Wood, 372

Timber,  preparation  of,.... 54

Titlark,  Brown, 49

- * ■■  Prairie, 408

Towhe  Bunting, 150

Traill’s  flycatcher, 236

Traveller  and  Pole-cat, 310

Trochilus  colubris, 248

Troglodytes  aedon, 427

— — - Bewickii,  96

■■■-■  — ludoviciana, 399

palustris, 500

Titmouse,  Crested, 199

Tradescantia  virginica, 154

Trumpet-flower, 254

— _ Ramping, 334

Tulip-Tree, 71

Tupelo, 75

Turdus  ludovicianus, 99

— - minor, 303

mustelinus, 372

polyglottus, 108

Turkey, 1,  33

Turtle  Dove,  Carolina, 91

Tyrant  Fly-catcher, 403

Ursus  Americanus, 480

Vaccinium  frondosum, 129

Vireo  noveboracensis, 328

— — solitarius, 147

Virginian  Hornbeam, 204

■ ■ Partridge, 388

Vitis  rotundifolia, 235

Vigors’s  Warbler, 153

Viburnum  prunifolium, 123


Warbler,  Autumnal,


Page

300

12

302

7-2

123

147

126

181

126

331

42

. 154

361

247

186

485

242

313

335

95

232

353

. 490

. 368

. 52

. 125

. 331

. 451

. 238

476

. 78

. 447

. 255

. 308

. 358

. 180

. 76

. 196

. 306

. 260

. 434

. 22

. 258

. 450

. 333

..  124

. 102


447


512


INDEX.


Warbler,  Azure,

Bay-breasted,

Black-and-yellow,

Blue-green,

Blue  Yellow-backed,

— Blue-winged  Yellow,.,..

Carbonated,

■ " - ' Chestnut-sided,

Children's,

Kentucky,

— — — Nashville,

■ - — Prairie,

Prothonotary,

Rathbone, !.

Vigors’s,

Yellow-pole,

Yellow-breasted,

Yellow- throated,

Worm-eating,

Washington,  Bird  of,

Weak  Fish,

White-bellied  Swallow,

White-eyed  Fly-catcher,

White-headed  Eagle,

White-tailed  Eagle,

White  Oak,


Page

White  Pine,  201

White-throated  Sparrow, 42

Whip-poor-will, 422

Wild  Turkey, 1,  33

Wilson,  Mr  Alexander, 438

Winter  Hawk, 364

Woodpecker,  Ivory-billed, 341

Golden- winged, 191

Woodpecker,  Red-headed, 141

Wood  Thrush, 372

Worm-eating  Warbler, 177

Worm-grass, 361

Wren,  Great  Carolina, 399

Bewick’s, 96

House, 427

— Marsh, 500

Xanthium  Strumarium, 140

Y ellow-billed  Cuckoo, 18

Yellow-breasted  Warbler, 121

Yellow- throat,  Maryland, 121

Yellow- throat,  Roscoe’s, 124

Yellow- throated  Warbler, 434

Zea  Mays, 41


Page

, 255

358

260

258

78

102

308

306

180

196

450

76

22

333

153

476

121

434

177

58

421

490

328

160

64

261


NEILL  & CO.  PRINTERS,
Old  Fishmarket,  Edinburgh.


UNDER  THE  SPECIAL  PATRONAGE


OP


THE

BIRDS  OF  AMERICA,

ENGRAVED  FROM

DRAWINGS


MADE  IN

THE  UNITED  STATES  AND  THEIR  TERRITORIES,


BY  JOHN  JAMES  AUDUBON,

F.  R.  SS.  L & E.

FELLOW  OF  THE  LINNEAN  AND  ZOOLOGICAL  SOCIETIES  OF  LONDON  *,  MEMBER  OF  THE
LYCEUM  OF  NEW  YORK,  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  PARIS,  THE  WERNB*
RIAN  NATURAL  HISTORY  SOCIETY  OF  EDINBURGH;  HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE
SCOTTISH  ACADEMY  OP  PAINTING,  SCULPTURE  AND  ARCHITECTURE,  «SlC.


PUBLISHED  BY  THE  AUTHOR ;

AND  TO  BE' SEEN  AT

MR  R.  HAVELL’S  JUN.  THE  ENGRAVER,

77-  OXFORD  STREET,  LONDON.

MDCCCXXXr.


NEILL  & CO.  PRINTERS,
Old  Fishmarket^  Edinburpli.


PROSPECTUS.


To  those  who  have  not  seen  any  portion  of  the  Author’s  Collection
of  Original  Drawings,  it  may  he  proper  to  state,  that  their  superio-
rity consists  in  the  accuracy  as  to  proportion  and  outline,  and  the  va-
riety and  truth  of  the  attitudes  and  positions  of  the  figures,  resulting
from  peculiar  means  discovered  and  employed  by  the  Author,  and
his  attentive  examination  of  the  objects  portrayed,  during  a long
series  of  years.  The  Author  has  not  contented  himself,  as  others
have  done,  with  single  profile  views,  hut  in  very  many  instances  has
grouped  his  figures,  so  as  to  represent  the  originals  at  their  natural
avocations,  and  has  placed  them  on  branches  of  trees,  decorated  with
foliage,  blossoms  and  fruits,  or  amidst  plants  of  numerous  species.
Some  are  seen  pursuing  their  prey  through  the  air,  searching  for
food  amongst  the  leaves  and  herbage,  sitting  on  their  nests,  or  feed-
ing their  young ; whilst  others,  of  a different  nature,  swim,  wade,  or
glide  in  or  over  their  allotted  element.  The  Insects,  Reptiles  and
Fishes,  that  form  the  food  of  these  birds,  have  now  and  then  been  in-
troduced into  the  drawings.  In  every  instance  where  a difference  of
plumage  exists  between  the  sexes,  both  the  Male  and  the  Female
have  been  represented ; and  the  extraordinary  changes  which  some
species  undergo,  in  their  progress  from  youth  to  maturity,  have  been
depicted.  The  Plants  are  all  copied  from  Nature  ; and  as  many  of
the  originals  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty,  their  usefulness,  or  their
rarity,  the  Botanist  cannot  fail  to  look  upon  them  with  delight.

The  particulars  of  the  Plan  of  the  Work  may  be  reduced  to  the
following  heads  : —

1.  The  size  of  the  work  is  Double  Elephant  Folio,  the  paper  be-
ing of  the  finest  quality.

2.  The  engravings  are,  in  every  instance,  of  the  exact  dimensions
of  the  drawings,  which,  without  any  exception,  represent  the  birds
and  other  objects  of  their  natural  size.

3.  The  Plates  are  coloured  in  the  most  careful  manner,  from  the
original  drawings.


4


4.  The  work  appears  in  Numbers,  of  which  five  are  published  an-
nually, each  Number  consisting  of  five  Plates.

5.  The  price  of  each  number  is  Two  Guineas,  payable  on  delivery.

Persons  desirous  of  becoming  Subscribers,  are  requested  to  ap-
ply to

MR  AUDUBON,

Or  to  Mr  R.  Havell  junior.  Engraver  and  Publisher,  77*  Oxford  Street,  Lon-
don, with  whom  specimens  of  the  work  may  be  seen,  or  to  any  of  the  fol-
lowing agents : —

Messrs  Treuttel,  Wurtz  and  Co.  Soho  Square,  London.

Messrs  Robinson,  Liverpool.

Mr  T.  SowLER,  Manchester.

Mr  E.  Charnley,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Messrs  Poor  and  Booth,  Chester.

Messrs  Beilby,  Knott  and  Beilby,  Birmingham  ; and
Mr  Adam  Black,  North  Bridge,  Edinburgh.


The  First  Volume,  consisting  of  One  Hundred  Plates,  represent-
ing Ninety-nine  species  of  Birds,  of  many  of  which  there  are  several
Figures,  is  now  published.  It  is  expected  that  other  Three  Volumes,
of  equal  size,  will  complete  the  work.


5


CONTENTS

OP

VOL.  I.  OF  THE  BIRDS  OF  AMERICA.


1.  The  Wild  Turkey.

2.  Yellow-hilled  Cuckoo,

3.  Protlionotary  Warbler,

4.  Purple  Finch,

5.  Bonaparte’s  Fly-catcher,

6.  Wild  Turkey.  Female,

7.  Purple  Grakle,

8.  White-throated  Sparrow,

9.  Selby’s  Flycatcher,

10.  Brown  Titlark,

11.  Bird  of  Washington,

12.  Baltimore  Oriole,

13.  Snow  Bird,

14.  Prairie  Warbler,


19.  Louisiana  Water  Thrush,


23.  Maryland  Yellow-throat,

24.  Roscoe’s  Yellow-throat,

25.  Song  Sparrow,


Meleagris  Gallopavo.  Linn,
Coccyzus  americanus.  IBonap.
Sylvia  Protonotarius.  Lath.
Fringilla  purpurea.  Gmel.
Muscicapa  Bonapartii.  And.
Meleagris  Gallopavo.  Linn.
Quiscalus  versicolor.  Vieill.
Fringilla  pennsylvanica.  Lath.
Muscicapa  Selbii.  And.
Anthus  Spinoletta.  JBonap.
Falco  Washingtonii.  AiJid.
Icterus  Baltimore.  Davd.
Fringilla  liy emails.  Linn.
Sylvia  discolor.  Vieill.

Lath.

Falco  peregrinus.  Gmel.
Columba  carolinensis.  Linn.
Troglodytes  Bewickii.  And.
Turdus  ludovicianus.  Avd.

Wils.

Turdus  polyglottus.  Linn.
Hirundo  purpurea.  Linn.
Sylvia  Trichas.  Lath.

Sylvia  Roscoe.  And.

Fringilla  melodia.  Wils.


Plates  published  in  1827.
Male.


15.  Blue  Yellow-backed  Warbler,  Sylvia  americana.

16.  Great-footed  Hawk,

17.  Carolina  Turtle  Dove,

18.  Bewick’s  Wren,


20.  Blue-winged  Yellow  Warbler,  Sylvia  solitaria.

21.  Mocking  Bird,

22.  Purple  Martin,


6


1828.


26.  Carolina  Parrot,

27.  Red-headed  Woodpecker,

28.  Solitary  Fly-catcher,

29.  Towhe  Bunting,

30.  Vigors’s  Warbler,

31.  White-headed  Eagle,

32.  Black-billed  Cuckoo,

33.  American  Goldfinch,

34.  Worm-eating  Warbler,

35.  Children’s  Warbler,

36.  Stanley  Hawk,

37.  Golden-winged  Woodpecker

38.  Kentucky  Warbler,

39.  Crested  Titmouse,

40.  American  Redstart,

41.  Ruffed  Grouse,

42.  Orchard  Oriole,

43.  Cedar  Bird,

44.  Summer  Red  Bird,

45.  Traill’s  Flycatcher,

46.  Barred  Owl,

47.  Ruby-throated  Humming  Bii

48.  Azure  Warbler,

49.  Blue-green  Warbler,

50.  Black-and -yellow  Warbler,


Psittacus  carolinensis.  Linn.
Picus  erythrocephalus.  Linn.
Vireo  solitarius.  Vieill.

Fringilla  erythrophthalma.  TAnn.
Sylvia  Vigorsii.  And.

Falco  leucocephalus.  Linn.
Coccyzus  erythrophthalmus.  Bon.
Fringilla  tristis.  Linn.

Sylvia  vermivora.  Lath.

Sylvia  Childrenii.  And.

Falco  Stanleii.  And.

Picus  auratus.  Linn.

Sylvia  formosa.  Wils.

Parus  bicolor.  Linn.

Muscicapa  Ruticilla.  Lmn.
Tetrao  Umbellus.  Linn.

Icterus  spurius.  Bonap.
Bombycilla  carolinensis.  Briss.
Tanagra  sestiva.  Gmel.

Sylvia  Traillii.  And.

Strix  nebulosa.  Gmel.

Trochilus  colubris.  Linn,

Sylvia  azurea.  Steph.

Sylvia  rara.  Lath.

Sylvia  maculosa.  Lath.

1829.


51.  Red-tailed  Hawk,

52.  Chuckwill’s  Widow,

53.  Painted  Finch,

54.  Rice  Bird,

55.  Cuvier’s  Regulus,

56.  Red-shouldered  Hawk,

57.  Loggerhead  Shrike,

58.  Hermit  Thrush,

59.  Chestnut-sided  Warbler,

60.  Carbonated  Warbler,

61.  Great  Horned  Owl.

62.  Passenger  Pigeon,


Falco  borealis.  Gmel.
Caprimulgus  carolinensis.  Briss.
Fringilla  ciris.  Temm.

Icterus  agripennis.  Bonap.
Regulus  Cuvierii.  And.

Falco  lineatus.  Gmel.

Lanius  ludovicianus.  Lmn.
Turdus  minor.  Gmel.

Sylvia  icterocephala.  Lath.
Sylvia  carbonata.  And.

Strix  virginiana.  Gynel.

Columba  migratoria.  Linn.


7


63.  White-eyed  Flycatcher,

64.  Swamp  Sparrow,

66.  Rathhone  Warbler,

66.  Ivory -billed  Woodpecker,

67.  Red- winged  Starling,

68.  Republican  Swallow,

69.  Bay-breasted  Warbler,

70.  Henslow’s  Bunting,

71.  Winter  Hawk,

72.  Swallow-tailed  Hawk,

73.  Wood  Thrush,

74.  Indigo  Bird,

75.  Le  Petit  Caporal,


76.  Virginian  Partridgej

77.  Belted  Kingsfisher,

78.  Great  Carolina  Wren,

79.  Tyrant  Flycatcher,

80.  Prairie  Titlark,

81.  Fish  Hawk,

82.  Whip-poor-will,

83.  House  Wren,

84.  Blue-grey  Flycatcher,

85.  Yellow-throated  Warbler,

86.  Black  Warrior,

87.  Florida  Jay,

88.  Autumnal  Warbler,

89.  Nashville  Warbler,

90.  Black-and-white  Creeper,

91.  Broad-winged  Hawk,

92.  Pigeon  Hawk,

93.  Sea-side  Finch,

94.  Bay-winged  Bunting,

95.  Yellow-poll  Warbler,

96.  Columbian  Jay,

97.  Mottled  Owl,

98.  White-bellied  Swallow,

99.  Cow-pen  Bird,

100.  Marsh  Wren,


Vireo  noveboracensis.  Bonap.
Fringilla  palustris.  Wils.

Sylvia  Rathbonii.  Aud,

Picus  principalis.  Linn,

Icterus  phoeniceus.  Baud.
Hirundo  fulva.  Vieill.

Sylvia  castanea.  Wils.

Emberiza  Henslowii,  Aud.

Falco  hyemalis.  Gmel.

Falco  furcatus,  Linn.

Turdus  mustelinus.  Gmel.
Fringilla  cyanea.  Wils.

Falco  temerarius.  Aud.

1830.

Perdix  virginiana.  Lath.

Alcedo  Alcyon.  Linn.
Troglodytes  ludovicianus.  Bonap.
Muscicapa  Tyrannus.  Briss.
Anthus  pipiens.  Aud.

Falco  Haliaetos.  Linn.
Caprimulgiis  vociferus.  Wils.
Troglodytes  sedon.  Vieill.
Muscicapa  ccerulea.  Lath.

Sylvia  pensilis.  Lath.

Falco  Harlani.  Aud.

Corvus  floridanus.  Bart,

Sylvia  autumnalis.  Wils.

Sylvia  rubricapilla.  Wils.

Certhia  varia.  Aud.

Falco  pennsylvanicus.  Lath.
Falco  columbarius.  Linn.
Fringilla  maritima.  Wils.
Fringilla  graminea.  Gmel.

Sylvia  sestiva.  Lath.

Corvus  Bullockii.  Wag.

Strix  Asio.  Linn.

Hirundo  bicolor.  Vieill.

Icterus  pecoris.  Bonap.
Troglodytes  palustris.  Bonap.


8


EXTRACTS  FROM  REVIEWS.


Extract  from  a Report  made  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  of
Paris,  By  Baron  Cuvier.

L’ Academie  m’a  cliarge  de  lui  rendre  un  compte  verbal  de  I’ouvrage
qui  lui  a ete  communique  dans  une  de  ses  precedentes  seances  par  M.
Audubon,  et  qui  a pour  objet  les  oiseaux  de  TAmerique  Septentrio-
nale.  On  peut  le  caracteriser  en  peu  de  mots,  en  disant  que  c’est  le
monument  le  plus  magnifique  qui  ait  encore  ete  eleve  a Tornithologie.

L’auteur,  ne  a la  Louisiane,  et  qui  s’est  adonne  des  sa  jeunesse  a
la  peinture,  est  venu,  il  y a 25  ans,  se  perfectionner  dans  son  art  a
I’ecole  de  David.  Retourne  dans  son  pays,  il  n^a  cru  pouvoir  faire  de
son  talent  un  usage  plus  utile,  que  de  le  consacrer  a la  representation
des  productions  les  plus  brillantes  de  cet  hemisphere.  L’observation
scrupuleuse  necessaire  a des  images  telles  qu51  voulait  les  faire,  Ta
bientot  rendu  naturaliste.

C’est  en  sa  double  qualite  d’artiste  et  de  savant,  qu’il  a produit
I’ouvrage  qui  a ete  mis  sous  les  yeux  de  I’Academie.  Vous  avez  ete
frappes  d’un  format  egal  ou  superieur  a ce  qui  a ete  public  de  plus
grand  en  ce  genre,  et  qui  approche  des  doubles  planches  de  la  descrip-
tion de  I’Egypte.  Cette  dimension  extraordinaire  lui  a permis  de
rendre  des  especes  de  la  taille  de  I’aigle  et  du  tetras  dans  leur  gran-
deur naturelle,  et  de  multiplier  celles  qui  sent  moins  volumineuses  de
maniere  a les  representer  dans  toutes  les  attitudes.

Il  a pu  aussi  representer  sur  les  memes  planches,  et  de  grandeur
naturelle,  les  vegetaux  sur  lesquels  ces  oiseaux  se  tiennent  le  plus
habituellement,  et  donner  dans  le  plus  grand  detail  leurs  nids  et  leurs
cents.

L’execution  de  ces  planches,  si  remarquables  par  leur  grandeur,
nous  parait  avoir  egalement  bien  reussi,  sous  le  rapport  du  dessin,  de
la  gravure  et  du  coloris,  et  quoiqu’il  soit  difficile  a I’enluminure  de
rendre  les  reliefs  avec  autant  d’effet,  qu’a  la  peinture  proprement  dite,
ce  n’est  pas  un  inconvenient  pour  des  ouvrages  d’histoire  naturelle ;
les  naturalistes  preferent  la  couleur  propre  des  objects,  a ces  teintes
accidentelles,  resultat  des  di verses  inflexions  de  la  lumiere,  necessaires


9


pour  completer  la  verite  pittoresque,  mais  etrangeres  et  imisible  meme
a la  verite  scientifique.

M.  Audubon  a deja  prepare  quatre  cents  dessins  qui  contiennent
a-peu  pres  deux  mille  figures^,  et  il  se  propose  de  les  publier  succes-
sivement,  s’il  est  encourage  par  les  amateurs.  Un  ouvrage  conqu  et
execute  d’apr^s  un  plan  si  vaste,  n’a  qu’un  defaut,  et  sans  doute  que
sur  celui-la  mes  auditeurs  m’ont  deja  prevenu,  c’est  que  sa  cberte  le
rend  presq’  inaccessible  a la  plupart  de  ceux  auxquels  il  serait  le  plus
necessaire.  Toutefois  on  ne  pent  pas  dire  que  le  prix  en  soit  exorbi-
tant. Une  livraison  de  cinq  planches  se  paie  deux  guinees  ; cliaque
planche  revient  done  a 10  on  11  fr.,  et  comme  il  n’en  paraitra  que
cinq  livraisons  par  an,  la  depense  annuelle  de  son  acquisition  ne  serait
pas  enorme.  Il  est  a desirer  du  moins,  dans  I’interet  de  I’art  autant
que  dans  celui  de  la  science,  que  les  grands  depots  publics,  et  les
pfoprietaires  qui  aiment  a enriclier  leurs  bibliotheques  d’ouvrages  de
luxe,  veuillent  se  le  procurer.

Autrefois  e’etaient  les  naturalistes  Europeens  qui  etaient  obliges
de  faire  connaitre  a I’Amerique  les  richesses  qu’elle  possedait  ; main-
tenant  les  Mitchill,  les  Harlan,  les  Wilson,  les  Charles  Bonaparte,
rendent  avec  usure  a I’Europe  ce  que  I’Amerique  en  a requ.  L’liis-
toire  des  oiseaux  des  Etats-Unis  de  Wilson  egalait  deja  en  Elegance
nos  plus  beaux  ouvrages  d’ornithologie.  Si  celui  de  M.  Audubon  se
termine,  il  faudra  convenir  que  ce  sera  I’Amerique  qui,  pour  la  mag-
nificence de  I’execution,  aura  surpasse  I’Ancien  Monde.


Extract  from  a Review  hy  W.  S WAIN  SON,  Esq,  F,  R,  S.  F,  L,  S.

§*c.5  'published  in  the  Natural  History  Magazine,  for  May  18:28.

M.  Audubon,  if  I have  been  rightly  informed,  is  a citizen  of  Ame-
rica, descended  from  French  parents.  Bevotedly  attached  to  the
study  of  nature,  no  less  than  to  painting,  he  seems  to  have  pursued
both  with  a genius  and  an  ardour,  of  which,  in  their  united  effects,
there  is  no  parallel.  His  two  ornithological  narratives,  printed  in  one
of  the  Scotch  journals,  are  as  valuable  to  the  scientific  world,  as  they
are  delightful  to  the  general  reader.  They  give  us  a rich  foretaste  of
what  we  may  hope  and  expect  from  such  a man.  There  is  a fresh-
ness and  an  originality  about  these  essays,  which  can  only  be  compar-
ed to  the  animated  biogrj^hies  of  Wilson.  Both  these  men  contem-


10


plated  Nature  as  she  really  is,  not  as  she  is  represented  in  books  ; they
sought  her  in  her  sanctuaries.  The  shore,  the  mountain,  and  the
forest  were  alternately  their  study,  and  there  they  drank  the  pure
stream  of  knowledge  at  its  fountain-head.  The  observations  of  such
men,  are  the  corner-stones  of  every  attempt  to  discover  the  system  of
nature.  Their  writings  will  be  consulted  when  our  favourite  theories
shall  have  passed  into  oblivion.  Ardently,  therefore,  do  I hope,  that
M.  Audubon  will  alternately  become  the  historian  and  the  painter  of
his  favourite  objects,  that  he  will  never  be  made  a convert  to  any  sys-
tem, but  instruct  and  delight  us  as  a true  and  unprejudiced  biographer
of  nature.

I am  now  to  speak  of  M.  Audubon  more  particularly  as  a painter.

1 shall,  therefore,  view  the  work  before  me  as  a specimen  of  the  fine
arts,  and  judge  of  it  by  those  rules  which  constitute  pictorial  criticism.
The  size  of  the  plates  exceeds  any  thing  of  the  kind  I have  ever  seen
or  heard  of ; they  are  no  less  than  3 feet  3 inches  long  by  2 feet

2 inches  broad.  On  this  vast  surface  every  bird  is  represented  in  its
full  dimensions.  Large  as  is  the  paper,  it  is  sometimes  (as  in  the  Male
Wild  Turkey,  pi.  I.)  barely  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  In  other  cases,
it  enables  the  painter  to  group  his  figures,  in  the  most  beautiful  and
varied  attitudes,  on  the  trees  or  plants  they  frequent.  Some  are
feeding,  others  darting,  pursuing,  or  capturing  their  prey ; all  have
life  and  animation.  The  plants,  fruits  and  flowers  which  enrich  the
scene  are  alone  still.  These  latter,  from  their  critical  accuracy,  are
as  valuable  to  the  botanist  as  the  birds  are  to  the  ornithologist.

Such  is  the  general  character  of  the  work,  but  it  is  of  a nature  to
demand  a more  particular  notice.  What  I have  said  might,  in  a ge-
neral way,  be  repeated  of  others.  This,  as  I shall  presently  shew,  is
perfectly  unique,  both  in  its  conception  and  execution.  To  explain
this,  I shall  call  the  reader’s  attention  to  the  following  plates,  or
rather  pictures.

Turtle-Doves  of  Carolina,  (Plate  17.)  It  is  quite  impossible  to
treat  this  subject  with  greater  truth  or  delicacy  of  conception,  than  it
has  here  received.  In  a thicket  of  the  beautiful  Stuartia  Malacoden-
droUy  (whose  white  blossoms  are  emblematic,  like  the  dove,  of  chaste-
ness and  purity),  a pair  of  turtles  have  built  their  nest.  The  fe-
male is  sitting,  and,  their  union  being  consummated,  she  is  receiving
the  caresses  of  the  male.  Above  is  another  pair  ♦,  their  love  is  in  its
infancy.  The  male,  seated  on  the  same  branch  with  his  intended
partner,  is  eagerly  pressing  forwards  to  reach  a “ stolen  kiss,”  but  the


11


head  of  the  female  is  coyly  turned.  Her  secret  satisfaction  is,  how-
ever, expressed  by  the  agitation  of  her  wings  and  tail.  If  the  artist
had  never  painted  any  picture  but  this,  it  would  secure  him  the  high-
est meed  of  praise,  as  long  as  truth  and  nature  continued  the  same.

Mocking  Birds  defending  their  nest  from  a Rattlesnake,  (Plate  21.)
The  same  poetic  sentiment  and  masterly  execution  characterizes  this
picture.  The  formidable  reptile  has  driven  the  female  bird  from  her
eggs,  which  he  intends  to  suck.  Unable  to  defend  them  while  sitting,
she  clings  to  the  side,  and,  “ with  outstretched  wings  and  forward
breast,”  seems  prepared  to  strike  her  bill  into  the  very  jaws  of  her
enemy.  Her  cries  have  brought  two  others  of  her  race  to  the  spot ;
but  these,  not  feeling  a parent’s  solicitude,  “ come  not  boldly”  to  the
attack.  On  the  courage  of  the  male  bird  the  fate  of  the  conflict  seems
to  depend.  He  is  close  to  the  serpent,  aiming  a‘  deadly  stroke  at  its
eye,  while  his  own  is  lighted  up  with  a determination  and  courage,
which  seem  to  bespeak  anticipated  victory.  Every  part  of  the  story
is  told  with  exquisite  feeling,  the  artist  has  thrown  his  greatest  skill
in  the  figure  of  the  female  bird,  and  it  is  uncommonly  fine.

It  will  depend  on  the  powerful  and  the  wealthy,  whether  Britain
shall  have  the  honour  of  fostering  such  a magnificent  undertaking.
It  will  be  a lasting  monument,  not  only  to  the  memory  of  its  author,
but  to  those  who  employ  their  wealth  in  patronizing  genius,  and  in
supporting  the  national  credit.  If  any  publication  deserves  such  a
distinction,  it  is  surely  this,  inasmuch  as  it  exhibits  a perfection  in
the  higher  attributes  of  zoological  painting,  never  before  attempted.
To  represent  the  passions  and  the  feelings  of  birds,  might,  until  now,
have  been  well  deemed  chimerical.  Rarely,  indeed,  do  we  see  their
outward  forms  represented  with  any  thing  like  nature.  In  my  es-
timation, not  more  than  three  painters  ever  lived  who  could  draw  a
bird.  Of  these  the  lamented  Barrabaud,  of  whom  France  may  be
justly  proud,  was  the  chief.  He  has  long  passed  away;  but  his  mantle
has,  at  length,  been  recovered  in  the  forests  of  America.


12


NAMES  OF  SUBSCRIBERS.


HER  MOST  EXCELLENT  MAJESTY,  QCEEN  ADELAIDE.

(HIS  MOST  GRACIOUS  MAJESTY,  GEORGE  IV.)

(HIS  MOST  CHRISTIAN  MAJESTY,  CHARLES  X.)

HIS  MAJESTY  PHILIPPE  I.  KING  OF  THE  FRENCH.

Her  Royal  Highness  Mademoiselle  d’Orleans.

Prince  Massena,  Paris.

Charles  L.  Bonaparte,  Prince  of  Musignano.

His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Rutland.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Marquis  of  Londonderry.

Baron  G.  Cuvier,  Paris.

E.  Everett,  Esq.  for  the  Library  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  of
America.

The  Boston  Atheneum.  By  the  Honourable  T.  H.  Perkins.

Baron  Krudener,  Envoy  Extraordinary  from  Russia.

Robert  Gilmor,  Esq.  Baltimore,  North  America.

Nat.  Potter,  M.  D.,  Professor  of  Medicine,  Baltimore.

John  B.  Morris,  M.  D.,  Baltimore.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Countess  of  Hertford.

The  Honourable  W.  C.  Wentworth  Fitzwilliam,  Grosvenor  Place,  London.
The  Right  Honourable  the  Countess  of  Ravensworth,  Ravensworth  Castle.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Countess  of  Morton,  Dalmahoy.

The  University  of  Edinburgh.

The  Wernerian  Natural  History  Society  of  Edinburgh.

The  Society  of  Writers  to  his  Majesty’s  Signet,  Edinburgh.

P.  J.  Selby,  Esq.  of  Twizel,  Northumberland.

Sir  W.  Jardine,  Bart,  of  Jardine  Hall.

James  Wilson,  Esq.  Edinburgh.

Reverend  John  Thomson,  Duddingston.

Stuart,  Esq.  of  Alderston.

Henry  Witham,  Esq.  of  Lartington,  Durham.

Lieutenant-General  Graham,  Stirling  Castle.

Miss  Harriet  Douglass,  New  York.

Mrs  Hamilton  Nisbit  Ferguson,  Edinburgh.

Mrs  John  Foster,  Liverpool.

John  Rutter,  M.  D.,  Liverpool.

Dr  Bickersteth,  Liverpool.

Matthew  Burrell,  Esq.  Broom  Park,  Alnwick.

Thomas  Forster,  Esq.  Adderscone  House,  Belford,  Northumberland.

Rev.  A.  Sharp,  Bamburgh,  Belford,  Northumberland.

John  Bulman,  Esq.  Percy  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

John  Walker,  Esq.  Ben  well  House,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.


13


James  Graham  Clarke,  Esq.  Fenham  Hall,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Mansfeldt  de  C.  Lawson,  Esq.  Cromlington,  Newcastle.

John  Broadley,  Esq.  South  Ella,  near  Hull,  Yorkshire.

Thomas  Crawhall,  Esq.  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Armorer  Donkin,  Esq.  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Major  NorclifFe,  York.

Colonel  Cholmley,  Hawshaw,  York.

M.  Foulis,  Esq.  Heslerton  Malton,  Yorkshire.

The  Yorkshire  Philosophical  Society,  York.

Mrs  Wilson,  Ledston  Hall,  near  Ferrybridge,  Yorkshire.

John  Clough,  Esq.  Oxton  Hall,  Tadcaster,  Yorkshire.

N.  E.  Yarburgh,  Esq.  Heslington  Hall,  near  York.

Capt.  Windowe,  York.

Mrs  Foulis,  York.

Jos.  S.  Crompton  jun.  Esq.  Esholt  Hall,  Bradford^  Yorkshire.

Thomas  Walker,  Esq.  Killinbeck,  near  Leeds.

Leeds  Philosophical  and  Literary  Society.

John  Marshall  jun.  Esq.  Headingley,  Leeds.

John  Gott,  Esq.  Leeds.

George  Banks,  Esq.  Leeds.

Robert  Hindley,  Esq.  Manchester.

G.  W.  Sergeant,  Esq.  Manchester.

W.  Birch,  Esq.  St  John’s  Street,  Manchester.

Thomas  Hardman,  Esq.  Manchester.

Thomas  Ridgway,  Esq.  Wallsuchess,  Bolton.

Robert  Gee,  Esq.  Hollywood,  near  Stockport.

Samuel  Greg,  Esq.  Quarry  Bank,  near  Manchester.

S.  H.  Haslam,  Esq.  Green  Bank,  near  Bury,  Lancashire.

John  Barton,  Esq.  Swixton,  Manchester.

Edwd.  Lloyd,  Esq.  Greenhill,  near  Manchester.

The  Manchester  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Natural  History.

The  Reverend  Peter  Hordern,  M.  A.  for  the  Cheetham  Library.

S.  R.  Brooks,  Esq.  Deputy-Consul  of  the  United  States,  Manchester.

G.  W.  Wood,  Esq.  Manchester.

Thomas  Hoyle,  Esq.  Manchester.

Joseph  Winter,  Esq.  Stand,  near  Manchester.

B.  A.  Heywood,  Esq.  Claremont,  near  Manchester
John  Clayton,  Esq.  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Patterson  Ellames,  Esq.  Allerston  Hall,  near  Liverpool.

Mrs  Rathbone,  Greenbaiik,  LiverpooL
Mrs  P.  Ainsworth,  Hall,  near  Bolton.

J.  G.  Children,  Esq.  British  Museum.

Major-General  Hardwicke,  London.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Caernarvon,  Grosvenor  Square,  London.
The  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Darnley.

The  Reverend  Mr  Dunbar,  Applegarth.

The  Reverend  Mr  Gibson,  Lochmaben.


14


S.  P.  Atkins,  Esq.  Walbrook.

The  Ilight  Honourable  Lord  Stanley.

AVm.  Brodrick,  Esq.  Gower  Street,  London.

Sir  John  Swinburne,  Cupheaton,  near  Newcastle.

Charles  Elley,  Esq.  Hampstead,  near  London.

Mrs  Case,  Liverpool.

The  Reverend  J.  Clowes,  Manchester.

George  Hibbert,  Esq.  Portland  Place,  London.

The  Honourable  William  S.  Ponsonby,  St  James’  Square,  London.
The  Right  Honourable  Earl  Spencer,  St  James’  Place,  London.
John  Heathcote,  Esq.  Berkeley  Square,  London.

Charles  Peers,  Esq.  Chislihampton  Lodge,  Oxfordshire.
Lieut.-Colonel  Charlewood,  York  Terrace,  Regent’s  Park,  London.
Tho.  Ponton,  Esq.  Hill  Street,  Berkeley  Square,  London.

Robert  Barclay,  Esq.  Bury  Hill,  Dorking,  Surrey.

Philip  John  Miles,  Esq.  Bristol.

W.  Ogilvie,  Esq.  Glasgow.

James  Burton,  Esq.  Regent’s  Park,  London
Miss  Maria  Woodroof  Smith,  Clapham.

Eras.  Chas.  Parry,  Esq.  Onslow  Terrace,  Brompton.

William  Cririe,  Esq.  Manchester.

Sir  Wathen  Waller,  Bart.  K.  C.  H.,  Pope’s  Villa,  near  Pickenham.
Joseph  John  Gurney,  Esq.  Earlham  Hall,  Norfolk.

Joseph  Gurney,  Esq.  Lackenham  Grove,  Norwich.

Thomas  Heywood,  Esq.  Manchester.

Edward  Holme,  M.  D.,  Manchester.

D.  Grant,  Esq.  Mosley  Street,  Manchester.

James  Darby  shire.  Esq.  Manchester.

John  Black  wall.  Esq.  Manchester.

Robert  Garnett,  Esq.  Oakhill,  near  Manchester.

Lawrence  Fort,  Esq.  Birch  Hill,  near  Manchester.

Thomas  Joseph  Trafford,  Esq.  Trafford  Park.

Thomas  Haigh,  Esq.  Cheetham  Hill,  near  Manchester.

Matthew  Culley,  Esq.  Coupland  Castle,  Northumberland.

A.  J.  Cresswell  Baker,  Esq.  of  Brown  Park.

The  Reverend  Edward  Craig,  Great  King  Street,  Edinburgh.
Joseph  Ridgway,  Esq.  Ridgemont,  near  Manchester.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Kinnoul.

The  College  of  Glasgow,  as  Trustees  of  the  Hunterian  Museum.
John  Buddie,  Esq.  Wallsend,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

J.  Blackhouse,  Esq.  Darlington,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

The  York  Subscription  Library.

Joseph  Harris,  Esq.  Liverpool.

George  Smith,  Esq.  Liverpool.

W.  Roscoe,  Esq.  Toxteth  Park,  near  Liverpool.

Cuthbert  Rippon,  Esq.  Stanhope  Castle,  Durham
Kirk  Patrick,  Esq.  London.


15


Dr  Stephenson,  Newcastle-upfon-Tyne.

T.  B.  L.  L.  Baker,  Esq.  Christ  Church,  O xford.

R.  H.  Hay,  Esq.  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street.

Dr  Lodge  for  the  University  Library,  Cambridge.

George  Thackeray,  D.  D.,  Provost  of  King’s  College,  Cambridge.
The  Cambridge  Philosophical  Society.

The  Fitzwilliam  Museum,  by  M.  Davy,,  Vice-Chancellor.

W.  Gambler,  Esq.  Sacombe  Park,  near  Ware.

Dr  Kidd  for  the  Anatomical  School,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Dr  Williams  for  the  Radcliffe  Library,  Oxford.

David  Lyon,  Esq.  New  Norfolk  Street.

James  Pickering  Ord,  Esq.  Edge  Hill,  near  Derby.

N.  A.  Vigors,  Esq.  Bruton  Street,  London.

The  Honourable  and  Reverend  J.  G.  Grenville,  Cambridge.

The  Right  Honourable  Viscount  Milton,  Grosvenor  Place,  London.
The  Reverend  Henry  Pearson,  Norton  Vicarage,  near  Derby.

M.  Feuillet,  for  the  Library  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  France.
Viconte  Simeon  for  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  G Copies.

M.  Pitois,  Paris.

M.  J.  P.  Redout  e,  Paris.

Mrs  Warden,  London.

Mr  Hearne,  Bookseller,  Strand,  London.

James  Knight,  Esq.  Rhual,  Flintshire.

Henry  Ellison,  Esq.  Beverley,  Yorkshire.

Joseph  Elgin,  Esq.  Coltingham,  Yorkshire.

John  Sharpe,  Esq.  North  wick  Terrace,  Edgeware  Road.

Benjamin  Smith,  Esq.  London.

Miss  Rhodes,  Park  Place,  Leeds,  Yorkshire.

The  Right  Honourable  Viscount  Kingsborough,  London.

Messrs  Treuttel  and  Wurtz,  Booksellers,  London.

The  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Bradford,  Pall  Mall,  London.
George  Humphreys,  Esq.  Oxford  Road,  Manchester.

Thomas  Frost,  Esq.  Gorton  Hall,  near  Manchester.

John  Potts,  Esq.  New  Mills,  near  Manchester.

John  G.  Reeves,  Esq.  Birmingham.

P.  Hussey,  Esq.  Wyeslely  Grove,  near  Walsall,  Staffordshire.
The  Birmingham  Old  Library,  by  Beilby,  Knott,  and  Beilby.
Thomas  Barker,  Esq.  Oldham,  Manchester.

Joseph  C.  Dyer,  Esq.  Manchester.

John  Kennedy,  Esq.  Manchester.

Benjamin  Gott,  Esq.  Armley  House,  Leeds.

Messrs  Longman  & Company,  Booksellers,  London.

Mr  Alexander  Barclay,  Bookseller,  York.

Thomas  Walker,  Esq.  Ravenfield,  near  Doncaster.

George  Lamb  Fox,  Esq.  Yorkshire.

George  H.  Head,  Esq.  Banker,  Carlisle.
